             The Mediating Role of Coherence in Curriculum Implementation

                    William Penuel, SRI International, 333 Ravenswood Avenue, Menlo Park, CA 94025-3493,
                                                          william.penuel@sri.com
          Barry J. Fishman, University of Michigan, 1301 Beal Ave, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-2122, fishman@umich.edu
                                  Lawrence P. Gallagher, Christine Korbak, Bladimir Lopez-Prado
                             SRI International, 333 Ravenswood Avenue, Menlo Park, CA 94025-3493,
                 Email: lawrence.gallagher@sri.com, christine.korbak@sri.com, bladimir.lopez-prado@sri.com

                   Abstract:  Implementation      of inquiry-based     curriculum   materials has  been    a challenge   in
                   science  education.  Recent   research   points  to   the importance  of  coherence   in  professional
                   development    as a  means    to  improving   implementation.     Policy   researchers    have  defined
                   coherence in terms of alignment of standards, curriculum, and assessment is key to supporting
                   implementation, while teacher learning researchers have analyzed coherence as an aspect of
                   teachers' perception   influenced    by  features of  their professional   development.    This   paper
                   presents an expanded model of coherence that focuses on teachers' perception of alignment of
                   curriculum   materials  that are  the  focus  of  professional   development   and  on    the fit of the
                   materials to  their  local school    context. Using    empirical  data from   a   state-wide   systemic
                   inquiry science reform effort targeting students from kindergarten to eighth grade, we describe
                   how  these   two  factors  influenced   teachers'   global  perceptions   of  the coherence    of   their
                   professional development activities and subsequent implementation of curriculum materials.

                   The science education community has long promoted the use and development of curriculum materials
         that emphasize student inquiry. Over the decades, there has also been another, problematic, consistency across
         these curricula: difficulties in implementation. This paper focuses on the topic of curriculum implementation,
         using empirical data from a state-wide systemic science reform effort targeting students from kindergarten to
         eighth grade. In particular, we examine the construct of coherence and how teachers' understanding of their
         local school context and of the particular curricular innovation within their local context influences curriculum
         implementation by individual teachers.
                   The idea that curriculum innovations must fit within their local context has been a central concept in
         two areas of research that have received significant attention in the past decade. A number of scholars who have
         examined the failures of implementation in past reforms in science education have pointed to the need for better
         alignment   among   national  and  state policies, standards,    curriculum,   and  assessments   (e.g., Smith   &   O'Day,
         1991). Without good alignment, teachers face a conflicting configuration of demands on their practice that is
         difficult for them to interpret and act upon (Fuhrman, 1993a). Other researchers have focused on the need for
         quality professional   development     that is coherent    with their own  goals   and  their school's   goals  for student
         learning (Garet, Porter, Desimone, Birman, & Yoon, 2001).
                   An alternative  perspective   is  that failures  of coherence    and implementation     can   arise  from teacher
         autonomy and local school capacity. When teachers have autonomy in choosing from an array of curriculum
         materials to teach a particular set of standards, they may not use guidance professional developers provide them
         about what   activities  align to  particular  standards.   In  addition,  when  perceived    and   observed   demands   of
         curricula  exceed   schools'   capacity  to  support   implementation,     teachers  may  not  judge    their  professional
         development experiences to be coherent. In contrast to earlier policy and teacher learning models of coherence,
         our model   of what    contributes  to teachers'   perceptions   of  the coherence   of their professional     development
         activities related  to a specific   curriculum    and   to higher   levels of  curriculum   implementation      emphasizes
         problems of agency inherent in reform activities (Rowan & Miller, 2007) and the fit of an innovation to the
         capacity and constraints of a local school (Blumenfeld et al., 2000).
                   We illustrate our model empirically by focusing on professional development activities related to an
         inquiry science   program   being   promoted    by a  state department     of education. In   the context   for this study,
         reformers "did everything right" with respect to aligning policies, standards, and curricula and with respect to
         providing high-quality professional development to teachers, but rates of curriculum implementation were low.
         In a multi-level analysis of 225 teachers who participated in workshops in summer 2006, we found that what
         predicted teachers' implementation rates were teachers' own interpretations of what standards could be taught
         using the curriculum materials. These interpretations, as well as teachers' perceptions of school-level barriers
         and resources predicted teachers' judgments of coherence of the innovation within their local teaching context.

2-0
Background and Theoretical Framework
The Construct of Coherence in Educational Policy Research
          Policy researchers have often attributed the failure of policies to impact classroom practice on a lack of
coherence across the educational system. Part of the incoherence stems from the fact that education is a complex
system in which decision-makers at different scales of the system do not always share common goals (Fuhrman,
1993a) or facilitate the flow of knowledge about policies throughout the system (O'Day, 2002). Many policies
address only one aspect of the system (e.g., testing but not curriculum) and thus fail to take into account the
different levels of the system and timescales of educational change (Knapp, 1997). As a result, teachers face a
configuration of demands that often contradict one another and thus do not provide clear guidance for action
(Fuhrman, 1993b).
          This type of coherence might be called policy alignment, since scholars pointing to the need for greater
coherence within the system have argued that improving coherence requires better alignment among national
and state policies, standards, curriculum, and assessments (Herman & Webb, 2007; Knapp, 1997). In fact, a
defining feature of standards-based reform in education is that it does not just seek to define standards but also
seeks  to create  and implement    assessments   and accountability  structures  that  are aligned  to those   standards
(Herman   &   Webb,   2007).   A core assumption    behind   efforts to improve   alignment   is that  it will result in
guidance to teachers that they can follow, leading to impacts on teacher cognition and practice.

The Construct of Coherence in Teacher Learning Research
          In research on teacher learning from professional development, a different definition of "coherence"
has been defined and measured largely from the teacher's point of view. For example, Garet and colleagues
(2001)   define  coherence  in terms of teachers'   interpretations  of their professional development     experiences.
Their six-item scale for coherence includes questions about teachers' perceptions of how well aligned activities
are to their  own  goals  for  and  trajectories of professional  development,   reform    ideas in their  school,  and
frameworks for curriculum, instruction, and assessment at the district and state level. As such, their measure of
what we would call global perceptions of coherence encompasses the two definitions of coherence from policy
research but foregrounds teachers' interpretations of alignment and program coherence at the school level.
          In their study of   what  constitutes  effective professional  development,   Garet and   colleagues   (2001)
found  global   perceptions of  coherence   to  be related  to self-reported  changes  in  knowledge   and  practice  in
mathematics and science instruction. In addition, three features of professional development were related to
perceptions of coherence in their model: time span, total hours, and collective participation. The longer the time
span  over   which activities  were spread, the  more  hours   teachers  participated, and  the  greater  degree of co-
participation in activities with other teachers from their school or district, the more likely teachers were to see
professional development activities as coherent.

An Integrated Model of the Coherence of Professional Development
          The perspective we explore in the current study seeks to unpack or explain coherence in a way that
includes  elements   of the policy  and teacher    learning research definitions and   models,   as well  as two  other
factors: teacher agency and the fit of innovations within their local context. Just as teacher learning research
examines context from the point of view of teachers, we take teachers' perspectives on the innovation as our
starting  point. But  we also  hypothesize  that   policy  alignment has  an  important   contributing role  to  play in
fostering perceptions of coherence. Third, we consider that the array of materials teachers have available to
teach particular standards can act as a potential constraint on coherence and implementation. Finally, we include
in our model of what contributes to coherence measures of how the fit of the innovation within the constraints
and capacities of schools, such as accountability pressures and structured time for implementation planning, can
contribute to coherence (see Figure 1).

                                         Figure 1. Integrated Model of Coherence.

                                                                                                                            2-
                 Our reason to begin with teachers' perspectives on coherence derives both for our appreciation of the
         mediating   role of  teachers'  interpretation    of   reforms  on   implementation     described   above   and  from  our
         acknowledgment     that  teachers  in   science  education     today  still have    considerable  autonomy    in selecting
         curriculum   materials.  Even   if    there is good    alignment   among     instruction,  curriculum,   assessment,   and
         professional development and the professional development that teachers receive is aligned with research on
         best practice, teachers may still choose not to implement a particular program or curriculum.
                 Because teachers may not share the same goals as those interested in reform, reformers face what can
         be called a problem of agency (Rowan & Miller, 2007). In contexts where there are agency problems, so called
         "principals" (in this case, reformers) must develop means to persuade or coerce "agents" (in this case, teachers)
         to carry out their goals. Where teachers have a choice in the materials they use, either because they draw on
         textbooks  purchased    through   their   school districts, on  worksheets    and   materials   obtained from   competing
         materials, or even on activities they design themselves, it may be particularly challenging for any particular
         reform organization (including a state or district) to convince a teacher to adopt a particular program.
                 Policy   alignment    and  professional  development     can  be    related to one  another in  such  a way  as to
         enhance or reinforce messages to teachers about the legitimacy of implementing a particular innovation. An
         example would be when a state or district, in adopting a particular instructional reform, supports implementation
         with extensive professional development paid for and sanctioned by the state or district. In this particular paper,
         we focus on such an example at the state level, and since all teachers received professional development with
         the features Garet et al. (2001) identified as contributing to coherence, we focus principally on elements of
         professional development designed specifically to influence teachers to believe the particular innovation we are
         studying is aligned to state standards. These elements include documents and artifacts that demonstrate linkages
         between standards and particular activities. We also recognize other resources (e.g., materials, equipment) that
         professional development providers can offer teachers may be essential features that contribute to coherence,
         insofar as the allocation of adequate resources to a curriculum signals its legitimacy and value.
                 Beyond    agency,  the    fit of  an innovation   within   the constraints     and capacity of   schools to  adopt
         particular instructional practices and curricula are likely to influence global perceptions of coherence in our
         model  (Blumenfeld    et al., 2000).   One   such  constraint  may    be  accountability   systems,   which  influence the
         pressures on schools to adopt particular curricular remedies for low achievement. Another constraint may be
         requirements and demands of new instructional practices themselves. Sometimes the nature of those demands
         conflicts with the organization of the school. Inquiry curricula in science often require extensive planning and
         preparation, something    that  is often    lacking.   Innovations   that   make extensive    use  of technology   require
         sufficient access to  technology      and capacity to   support  that  technology.   Therefore,   teachers' judgments   of
         coherence are likely to be influenced by the interaction between the demands placed on them by curricula and
         the resources they have available to them.

       The Current Study
                 The current study focuses on the sources of teachers' implementation and judgments of coherence of
         the GLOBE Program, an international program in Earth science and Earth science education. GLOBE provides
         curricular materials for use in classrooms, as well as an online database that is directed at supporting the work of
         scientists investigating aspects of the global environment. At the beginning of GLOBE, scientists funded as
         GLOBE Principal Investigators by the National Science Foundation developed a set of protocols for students to
         use in four  distinct investigation    areas   related to earth  systems:   Atmosphere,     Hydrology,   Soils,  and Land
         Cover/Biology.   GLOBE     schools    collect  the data   according   to  the protocols.   GLOBE      expects teachers  to
         implement   the  protocols for  the   program.   To    collect data,  students   are   expected to  use  GLOBE-certified
         equipment set up in a way specified by scientists in the program. In addition to collecting data, GLOBE expects
         teachers to report data to the GLOBE Web site. Reporting data benefits scientists by making student-collected
         data available for their own investigations. Past studies have shown a positive relationship between gathering,
         posting, and discussing data and student learning outcomes (Penuel et al., 2002).
                 One of the places where GLOBE has been implemented with a great deal of attention is in the state of
         Alabama, where the program is implemented as part of the Alabama, Mathematics, Science, and Technology
         Initiative (AMSTI). AMSTI is a state-wide program funded by the Alabama Department of Education that was
         designed by a blue-ribbon panel to improve mathematics and science instruction across the state. The focus of
         AMSTI is on science in grades kindergarten through eighth grade. Besides GLOBE materials, other curriculum
         materials that are included as part of AMSTI training are science kits from the Full Options Science System
         (FOSS) program and from the Science and Technology Concepts (STC) program. FOSS and STC curriculum
         materials receive greater emphasis than do GLOBE materials in AMSTI, but officials stress that the GLOBE
         materials address key standards not addressed through the FOSS and STC kits. In addition, GLOBE protocols
         provide more direct encounters with the work of scientists than do the inquiry kits, in that scientists are expected
         to use GLOBE data from students in their own investigations.

2-2
           The  AMSTI    initiative is  an ideal   context    for studying  the coherence    of  GLOBE     as   a curricular
innovation in that several important elements typically believed to be integral to promoting implementation are
part of the initiative. First, AMSTI attempts to build district-level and school-level buy-in to its activities by
selecting  schools,  rather than  individual  teachers,    to be  a part of AMSTI     through   a competitive   application
process, (see, e.g., Cooper, Slavin, & Madden, 1998). As part of the application, schools must demonstrate that
80% of the mathematics and science faculty want to take part; if selected, all teachers from the school become
participants in the initiative at no cost to the school. A second way that AMSTI promotes implementation is by
providing teachers with clear instructional guidance (Rowan & Miller, 2007). The initiative not only provides
teachers   with specific   GLOBE     activities to  implement     in their  classroom, but   it also provides     them  with
guidance on how and when to incorporate them into their instruction. Standards linkage documents show how
specific GLOBE activities meet specific standards in each grade level. Third, AMSTI's activities to prepare
teachers to implement GLOBE has characteristics associated with effective PD (Garet et al., 2001; Authors et
al., in press). AMSTI PD includes a two-week summer institute (during which teachers participate in 2 days
related to GLOBE), equipment and materials, and follow-up support through specialists who are associated with
regional science centers across the state. Finally, AMSTI has built in evaluation and feedback mechanisms for
accountability purposes and for ongoing program improvement, which are essential features of contemporary
standards-based reform models. The program has published results from external evaluations on its web site,
which document how student achievement in mathematics and science among AMSTI schools compare with
achievement in non-AMSTI schools.
           Despite the strength of the policy and PD supports for GLOBE implementation established through its
integration into AMSTI, the data we present in this study show that the vast majority of teachers who took part
in the   initiative in the  past year  did  not   implement    GLOBE     protocols  with  students   in   their classrooms.
Furthermore, although most teachers perceived the program as consistent with their own goals for PD and with
district and   state expectations   for   student  learning   in  science,  nearly one-fifth    (17.7%)   of teachers   who
responded to our questionnaire rated GLOBE materials as "not sufficiently" consistent with these goals. Both
these results  trouble  AMSTI    officials at   the state  level, both because   they  limit the  potential  impact  of the
initiative on  achievement   and    because  they   call into  question  the efficacy  of their   efforts to  create strong
alignment of GLOBE to state standards and curriculum frameworks. As our statistical models below suggest,
however,   much     of what appears    to be  driving    teachers'  implementation    and perceptions   of   coherence  are
perceptions at the individual level of materials alignment and of the local school context.

Research Methods
Sample
           The sample for the study was comprised of 423 teachers who attended AMSTI PD in summer 2006.
All teachers   who   participated in  PD   completed     a background    questionnaire, in   which   we   collected  contact
information from participants for later follow-up. A total of 225 teachers from 51 different schools completed
our full questionnaire, a response rate of 53%. Teachers in the study came from schools that were representative
of Alabama schools. A total of 29 schools in the sample or 57% had met criteria for Adequate Yearly Progress
(AYP) according to federal No Child Left Behind guidelines. That compares with 53% of schools statewide that
met AYP. The student body was 34.4% minority (primarily African American) and 55.9% of students were
from low-income families. Statewide, 40.8% of students were minorities, and 43.0% were low-income. Roughly
half of the teachers in the sample had a MA degree or higher, but only about one fifth had teaching certificates
in science.  This   is explained  by the   sample   composition,    which   consisted primarily   of teachers   who  taught
science at the elementary level. On average, teachers had 11.5 years experience in the classroom (SD = 8.8
years) and 9.2 years experience teaching science (SD = 7.7 years).

Sources of Data
Dependent Variables
           Teacher Questionnaire: Global Perceptions of Coherence. We incorporated into our questionnaire a
six-item factor (    = .93) that measures how well PD matched the teacher's goals, the existing reform ideas
within the school, and whether the PD was followed up with activities that built upon what was already learned.
           Teacher   Questionnaire:  GLOBE      Protocol   Implementation.   Use   of  GLOBE      protocols  with   students
were used as a measure of program implementation. Teachers indicated for each protocol whether they had
implemented, planned to implement, or had not implemented the protocol and did not plan to do so. Using their
responses to the questionnaire, we created an index that a weighted sum of their intentions and actions across
GLOBE's different investigation areas.

Teacher Level Independent Variables
           Perceptions  of  Alignment   of GLOBE     with     Alabama  Course   of Study  Science    Content    Topics. We
focused our questions about teachers' perceived alignment of GLOBE with state content standards. We tailored

                                                                                                                                2-
         items for each K-8 cluster of grade levels for which the standards are written: K-2, 3-5, and 6-8, and asked
         teachers to rate whether they covered the standard using GLOBE or some other set of materials. We created an
         index of the sum of the number of standards teachers said they could meet using GLOBE materials.
                 Use  of Alignment   Tools   and  Artifacts  from Partner. The     GLOBE    in   Alabama  partnership   has
         developed an alignment tool that is posted on its Web site (http://www.globe.uah.edu/linking.htm). We asked
         teachers about their familiarity with this tool and also how/whether they had used it in making decisions about
         whether or how to implement GLOBE.
                 Barriers to Implementation. We asked teachers to identify whether each of seven types of barriers
         derived from earlier evaluation studies of the GLOBE program (Authors et al., in press). These barriers were:
         difficulty finding time to prepare for implementing GLOBE, lack of technology access, lack of technical support
         for using computers and software, lack of GLOBE equipment, unsupportive school building administrators, and
         unsupportive district administrators. Teachers indicated whether each potential barrier to implementation was a
         major barrier, minor barrier, or not a barrier. For purposes of analysis, we analyzed barriers in three separate
         clusters. The first item, difficulty finding time to plan for implementation, was analyzed as a single categorical
         variable, recoding "major barriers" as 1 and "minor barrier" and "no barrier" as 0. The next three barriers related
         to equipment and technology had good reliability as a scale (  = 0.73), so we analyzed them together. The last
         two items related to school and district support also had reliability adequate for constructing a scale (  = 0.89),
         so we analyzed those items as a single scale.
                 Support for Equipment Use. Because we found that partner support for equipment use were significant
         predictors in our earlier PD study of GLOBE implementation (Authors et al., in press), we included items used
         in our original study as dummy variables in the analysis. Equipment use support is a single survey item which
         asked teachers if the GLOBE partner provided assistance on technical setup and equipment use. This is a binary
         variable where 0=no and 1=yes.
                 Teacher Characteristics. We included items asking teachers about their certifications, education, and
         years experience teaching, gender, and ethnicity as control variables in the analysis.

        School-Level Independent Variables
                 State Assessment Data: Achievement Levels of Schools. We categorized schools in our sample on the
         basis of whether the school met "Adequate Yearly Progress" in both reading and mathematics for all grades and
         subgroups. AYP status was measured as a dichotomous variable in our analysis. We anticipated that AYP status
         could affect implementation levels either by diverting attention away from science (since AYP status is based
         on mathematics and reading scores, not science scores) or that teachers in schools meeting AYP status might
         feel less pressure to adopt state-approved science curriculum materials.
                 Number of GLOBE Teachers in the School. We included the total number of GLOBE teachers in the
         school as a school-level variable. Since the policy was that teachers were expected to participate as part of a
         school team, we reasoned that the number of GLOBE teachers in the school might have a positive effect on
         perceptions of coherence and GLOBE implementation.

        Data Analysis
                 We analyzed our data at two levels: teacher and school. Because of the nested structure of the data set,
         we used hierarchical linear modeling (HLM) to examine the relationship between effects of individual teachers'
         perceptions of alignment  and use  of alignment  tools,  interpretations of barriers,  and experiences of  support
         (Level 1) and the effects of school AYP status and number of GLOBE teachers in the school (Level 2) on
         teachers' global perceptions of the coherence of GLOBE and implementation. For each of our two outcome
         variables, the extent of the influence of the initiative on teachers' practice, we first conducted an unconditional
         model to determine the variance structure at each level. We then constructed a model for each outcome variable
         that analyzed the hypothesized links between knowledge transfer processes and reform implementation.

       Results
        Descriptive Statistics
        Coherence and Protocol Implementation
                 On average, teachers' judged the coherence of GLOBE with their own and their district's goals for
         student learning to be "sufficient," but implementation levels were low. On a scale from 0 to 3, with 0 being
         "not at all aligned" and 3 being "very well aligned," teachers in the sample rated the coherence of GLOBE as M
         = 1.9 (SD = 0.57, n = 221). With respect to implementation, roughly one-quarter of the teachers reported that
         they had implemented     protocols that were   part of the Atmosphere    protocol, and   14%   reported   they had
         implemented GPS protocols. For the other investigation areas, less than 10% of teachers reported implementing
         any of these. On average, teachers scores on the index we constructed to measure protocol implementation were
         2.6 (SD = 2.2, n = 221).

2-
Coverage of Standards Using GLOBE and Use of Linking Documents
        On average, teachers reported that they used GLOBE to cover 5.0 (SD = 6.2, n = 221) different content
areas in the Alabama Course of Study, the state's content standards. Only a about a quarter (26% or 56 of 213)
of teachers, however, reported they used the linking documents provided by AMSTI to help guide their thinking
about alignment to standards. Only 8.5% used these documents to make decisions about how to use GLOBE to
replace existing materials in their curriculum.
        A closer examination of teachers' reports of how they used GLOBE by standard reveals that teachers'
decisions about what topics to use GLOBE materials to cover standards to map well onto the AMSTI program's
guidance. In many instances, only a small percentage of teachers used GLOBE to teach particular standards the
program believed GLOBE could help teach. In other cases, teachers reported GLOBE could help them meet
standards the program     did not identify                          as     linked   to  that   standard.           In grades     K-2, for          example, just 20%  of
kindergarten teachers used GLOBE to teach about the basic needs of living things, even though the AMSTI
program   identified that as  a standard                         that     could     be  met    by      using GLOBE             materials.         By contrast, 61.9%  of
second grade teachers said they used GLOBE materials to teach students how to identify evidence of erosion
and weathering of rocks, even though the program did not show a linkage between GLOBE and this standard .
        In the upper elementary grades, there were differences between the AMSTI perspective on standards
linkage and teachers' perspectives. More than 30% of third grade teachers said they used GLOBE materials to
teach students about how energy from the sun is used, but there was no official linkage to this standard. By
contrast, just 38.5% said they used GLOBE materials to cover the standard related to identifying cloud types
associated with specific weather, which GLOBE materials address, according to AMSTI. At the middle grades,
the agreement between teachers' perceptions of alignment and AMSTI linkage documents is stronger in sixth
grade than in  grades  seven    and eight.                           Still,     in  all three       grades,  as       with     the elementary          grades, there are
significant differences between teachers' perceptions of content alignment and the program's official guidance.

Barriers and Supports to Implementation
        The most significant barriers to implementation reported by teachers were inadequate time to prepare
and plan for implementation and limited technology access and support (see Figure 2). Limited principal and
district support were barriers to only a small percentage of teachers. For the one support variable in our models,
help with setting up GLOBE equipment, 36% (n = 80) reported they received this type of support.

                                             Lack of Prep Time                                                        43.6%24.9%

                                          Limited Tech Access                 10.2%           23.6%

                                          Lack of Tech Support               9.3%             24.0%
                                                                                                                                   Major Barrier
                                                                                                                                   Minor Barrier
                                            Lack of Equipment                          17.8%7.6%

                                              Limited Principal    0.4%
                                                  Support            2.2%

                                                Limited District   0.4%
                                                   Support            3.1%

                                                                 0%        10%         20%         30%         40%         50%

                                                                                    Percent Reporting

                                                           Figure 2. Barriers to implementation.

School-Level Variables: AYP Status and Number of GLOBE Teachers in School
        A total of 29 schools (57%) in the sample had met Adequate Yearly Progress according to federal No
Child Left Behind guidelines. There was a mean of 2.1 GLOBE teachers in the schools in the sample (SD = 6.2).

HLM Results
        For the model testing the effects of the teacher- and school-level variables on teachers' perceptions of
coherence, the significant predictors were teachers' use of GLOBE materials to cover content standards, lack of
time to prepare to implement GLOBE, and school AYP status (see Table 1). The more standards that teachers
reported that used GLOBE materials to cover, the higher their perceptions of coherence of the innovation with
local goals for student learning. Conversely, when teachers lacked time to prepare, they reported less coherence.
Teachers in schools that met AYP were less likely to view GLOBE as coherent with their local goals. None of
the teacher background variables used as controls in the model was significant; therefore, we eliminated them
from the models. Just one of the predictors included in our models predicted implementation levels of protocols.

                                                                                                                                                                            2-
         Teachers    that   reported they  used  GLOBE     to  cover more   standards were   more   likely  to implement   more
         protocols. This result is hardly surprising, since these two items are closely related. Teachers' use of linking
         documents was a significant predictor of implementation, but only at the p = 0.12 level.

         Table 1. HLM Results

                                                         Coherence                             Protocol Implementation
          Level/Variable                     Coefficient          Standard Error           Coefficient          Standard Error
          Teacher Level
          Use of GLOBE to CoverStandards        0.02*                  0.01                 0.10***                   0.03
          Use of Standards LinkingDocuments     0.07                   0.07                   0.44                    0.27
          Lack of Time to Plan andPrepare       -0.12*                 0.05                  -0.05                    0.23
          Difficulties with
          Equipment and                         -0.05                  0.04                   0.09                    0.17
          Technology Access
          Lack of principal anddistrict support 0.01                   0.04                  -0.17                    0.15
          School Level
          School AYP Status                     -0.18*                 0.09                  -0.26                    0.35
          Number of GLOBETeachers in School     0.00                   0.00                  -0.01                    0.01
          Intercept                             2.07                   0.12                   2.25                    0.50
          *p < .05, **p < .01, ***p < .001

       Discussion and Conclusion
                    The results of this study suggest that there are at least some instances where alignment of curriculum
         materials with policies at the state level is not sufficient to promote a strong sense among teachers that particular
         curricular innovations are coherent. The AMSTI initiative was a carefully crafted state-level science reform
         initiative, of which GLOBE was an integral part. Efforts to persuade teachers of the coherence of GLOBE by
         providing them with specific instructional guidance about how GLOBE's curriculum materials aligned to state
         standards were largely unsuccessful, with teachers' judgments about the suitability of materials for teaching
         standards diverging widely from those of policy makers and professional developers in the program. Further,
         despite    efforts to promote   a comprehensive   approach   to  science reform  in schools   by  inviting school-wide
         participation, the number of teachers participating appeared to have little impact on teachers' perceptions of
         coherence or on their use of the GLOBE materials.
                    Similarly, AMSTI PD, despite its strong design, had little impact on coherence or implementation.
         Teachers'   initial   workshops   included many   opportunities  for  hands-on  practice  with protocols;  a  system  of
         mentors was also accessible for classroom-based support. Teachers also received all the equipment they would
         need to implement their GLOBE protocols as part of the PD, a factor we have found in past research (Authors et
         al., in  press)   can influence implementation   of   GLOBE.  Still,  teachers' ratings of the coherence   of PD   were
         modest, given these strengths, and their implementation levels were disappointingly (to program leaders) low.
                    A frequent conclusion from research on implementation is that "more PD is needed," but our study
         suggests this recommendation is incomplete. The factors that contributed to teachers' judgments of coherence
         were    at the  local  level, not easily influenced   by  policy makers   or PD   providers.   For example,   teachers'
         perceptions of alignment of materials to standards are likely a function both of their knowledge of curriculum
         and curricular purposes and of their subject matter knowledge. Teachers may possess erroneous conceptions of
         the  meaning      of  standards (Smith   &   Southerland, 2007),   in which  case   representations   of alignment   by
         developers are unlikely to be helpful. Their judgments may also be affected by the sheer number of curricular
         resources from which they have to choose; their authority in being able to choose these materials means that PD
         providers   promoting    a  particular curriculum   face significant  competition for   teachers' attention. Variety  in
         conjunction with poor understanding of the meaning of standards may combine to lead teachers to interpret
         thoughtfully designed and coherent curricula into sequences of activities that can be broken up and combined
         with  other   district-provided   materials,  leading to incomplete   or incoherent   implementations    of  curriculum
         materials (Blumenfeld et al., 2006; Author et al., 2006). The lack of planning time is similarly a problem at the
         local level; more PD would not address this problem, if the teachers still do not have time to set up GLOBE
         equipment, plan for data collection, and select learning activities to use in conjunction with GLOBE protocols.
                    Our findings do not imply that nothing can be done to improve teachers' judgments of coherence of
         curricular programs. For one, the lack of an effect of policy-level alignment (which would likely have been
         evident if lack of administrator support had been a big barrier to implementation) does not imply that alignment

2-
is insignificant. We conducted our study in one state context, where alignment was not something that varied by
teacher. More   significantly, we   identified at   least one  component    of an  implementation  model that   may  be
important to specify for inquiry science curricula like GLOBE. The need for adequate planning time was critical
for helping teachers understand the coherence of GLOBE with their goals for teaching and learning. Programs
like GLOBE might do well to require or at least inquire about teachers' available planning time and to consider
when, where, and how teachers will be able to plan for enactment.
         The role of accountability pressure was significant as well, but its effect cannot easily be interpreted
with the data available to us in our study. When schools failed to meet AYP, teachers in those schools were
more likely to perceive GLOBE as coherent with their goals. The reason could be that those schools were under
pressure to follow state guidance such as is provided by AMSTI and that following such guidance improves
local confidence in those schools. Schools meeting AYP simply have had more discretion about how to use
materials than schools not meeting AYP. Whatever the reason, accountability pressure is yet another significant
factor at the local (school) level that influences judgments of coherence and that has little to do with the nature
and amount of PD teachers receive.
         An important limitation of this study is that it is a test of our own interactive perspective on coherence
in a single  state context. Our    sample, though    representative   of  those teachers  and  schools participating in
GLOBE in one state, is not necessarily representative of teachers in the program elsewhere. Different contexts,
therefore,  might  yield different  estimates  of   the   predictors of  coherence.  This  study does  suggest  that an
exclusive focus on alignment at the state level or on teacher PD models that do not take into account school-
level constraints on teacher cognition and action can result in poor curriculum implementation. This finding is
likely to be sobering to the Learning Science community in its efforts to scale up reform using standards-based
curriculum materials. Further, it is one more reminder of how the complexity of the educational system makes it
difficult to effect broad changes in instructional practice.

References
Blumenfeld, P., Fishman, B. J., Krajcik, J., Marx, R. W., & Soloway, E. (2000). Creating usable innovations in
         systemic   reform:     Scaling    up  technology-embedded        project-based   science  in  urban    schools.
         Educational Psychologist, 35(3), 149-164.
Fuhrman, S. H. (1993a). Designing coherent educational policy: Improving the system. San Francisco, CA:
         Jossey-Bass.
Fuhrman, S. H. (1993b). The politics of coherence. In S. H. Fuhrman (Ed.), Designing coherent educational
         policy: Improving the system (pp. 1-34). San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Garet, M. S., Porter, A. C., Desimone, L. M., Birman, B. F., & Yoon, K. S. (2001). What makes professional
         development effective? Results from a national sample of teachers. American Educational Research
         Journal, 38(4), 915-945.
Herman, J. L., & Webb, N. M. (2007). Alignment methodologies. Applied Measurement in Education, 20, 1-5.
Knapp, M. S. (1997). Between systemic reforms and the mathematics and science classroom: The dynamics of
         innovation, implementation, and professional learning. Review of Educational Research, 76(2), 227-266.
Loucks-Horsley, S., & Stiles, K. E. (2001). Professional development designed to change teaching and learning.
         In  J. Rhoton   &  P.    Bowers   (Eds.),   Professional    development   planning  and  design (pp.   13-24).
         Arlington, VA: NSTA Press.
O'Day, J. A. (2002). Complexity, accountability, and school improvement. Harvard Educational Review, 72(3),
         293-329.
Penuel,  W.   R.,  Fishman,    B.  J., Yamaguchi,     R.,  &   Gallagher,   L.  P. (2007).  What  makes   professional
         development     effective?    Strategies that  foster curriculum    implementation.   American   Educational
         Research Journal, 44(4), 921-958.
Penuel, W. R., Korbak, C., Lewis, A., Shear, L., Toyama, Y., & Yarnall, L. (2002). GLOBE Year 7 evaluation:
         Exploring student research and inquiry in GLOBE. Menlo Park, CA: SRI International.
Porter,  A. C., Smithson,   J. L.,  Blank, R.,    &  Zeidner,  T. (2007).   Alignment  as  a teacher  variable. Applied
         Measurement in Education, 20(1), 27-51.
Rowan, B., & Miller, R. J. (2007). Organizational strategies for promoting instructional change: Implementation
         dynamics   in schools    working  with   comprehensive      school reform  providers. American   Educational
         Research Journal, 44(2), 252-297.
Smith, M., & O'Day, J. A. (1991). Systemic school reform. In S. H. Fuhrman & B. Malen (Eds.), The politics of
         curriculum and testing (pp. 233-268). Bristol, PA: Falmer.

Acknowledgments
This work is supported in part by National Science Foundation grant #0223068. Any opinions, findings, and
conclusions  or  recommendations       expressed  in this material   are those  of the authors and do  not necessarily
reflect the views of the GLOBE program, the NSF, or authors' employers.

                                                                                                                            2-
