                      Inter- and intra-subjective planes of e-argumentation:
        Motivation, self-perception, expectations, and actual interlocutory
                                                              behavior
                                               Baruch B. Schwarz, Christa S. C. Asterhan
                                 School of Education, Hebrew University of Jerusalem 91905, Israel,
                                  Email: msschwar@mscc.huji.ac.il, christa.asterhan@mail.huji.ac.il

                   Abstract:   Research    on  learning   and argumentation     traditionally   focuses  on  the   (socio-
                   )cognitive dimensions and benefits of argumentative dialogue. The papers which are part of
                   this symposium, however, present recent research on intra-personal, non-cognitive variables
                   and how    they  affect or  are affected   by electronic    collective argumentation. The     data  are
                   obtained   from  both  e-discussants   as  well  as e-moderators    and  pertain  to  factors such    as
                   motivation, self-perception, role definitions and expectations. The three contributions provide
                   information on these factors before, during and after e-discussions and help delving in the
                   dynamics of (moderated) e-argumentation.

                   Theories of collaborative learning and of communicative interaction are often used interchangeably to
         trace learning   in and  from   dialogue. The    kinds  of interactional   phenomena    evoked   by general     theories of
         learning, such as "cooperation", "explanation", or "negotiation" are often diffuse and difficult to identify in real
         interactions. However, the planes of collaborative learning and communicative interaction are different. One
         should discern between dialogue analyses that reveal an inexorable intersubjectivity (e.g., Baker, 2003; Barth &
         Krabbe, 1982) to make communication possible and psychological processes that occur at the intra-subjective,
         individual level (such as arguments, values, opinions, motivations or beliefs). Terms such as "shared cognition"
         or "shared understanding" should be understood as pertaining to the plane of communicative interaction, as a
         state of inter-subjective  rationality  that enables exchange     of  ideas and  joint elaboration  of  new   ideas.  Intra-
         subjective rationality pertains to the psychological plane, a plane which is necessary to apprehend collaborative
         learning.
                   This symposium focuses on the role of non-cognitive, intra-subjective constructs in e-argumentation.
         We    observe   participants in  e-argumentation    (students  and    moderators)  and   try to  detect   their individual
         motivations, expectations, or beliefs in and from interaction. We show that what feeds the formation of inter-
         subjectivity  at the communication      level is far from   being  uniform,   shared   by  all: Intrinsic motivation    can
         fluctuate and diverge among discussants, some may seek help from a moderator, moderators may use elusive
         tactics that make them appear as regular discussants, etceteras. The recognition of the interplay between these
         two planes is especially salient with environments that enable some of the participants (mainly moderators) to
         participate actively or as supervisors.
                   The authors of the first presentation examine the commonly held assumption that collaborative learners
         becoming more similar over time, whereas this pertains to the views held by the different participants or their
         motivation   to  learn. In their case,  they  compared    the extent  of convergence    among    actual   collaborators  on
         different measures of motivation with that of nominal collaborators. Contrary to commonly held beliefs, their
         findings indicate that the motivation of learners in small ad-hoc online groups becomes less similar as a result of
         the interaction.
                   The second presentation focuses on students' expectations of on-line moderators of argumentative e-
         discussions  and  the   perspectives. Based   on data   gathered  from   samples  of   secondary  school   and  university
         students, the role of a teacher/tutor moderator of such discussion is not easily defined and at times even seems
         contradictory. In addition, the authors analyzed three moderated e-discussions in which moderators operated
         directly  in the  discussion  space.    They  then  related   the nature   of moderator    interventions  with   students'
         responsiveness during and their evaluation of the moderator following the discussion. These qualitative analyses
         reveal that generic interventions were not appreciated by discussants and neither were they effective in eliciting
         responses. In contrast, effective moderators disguised their moderation by using content-specific interventions
         that seemed to actively contribute to the discussion.
                   The final presentation also focuses on moderation of e-argumentation, but from a different angle and
         by using  different  software.   The  authors  present  first results from    research with  an  innovative   system    that
         supports moderators and their moderation practices. The particular design of this system supports a supervising
         style of  moderation    as opposed   to more  participative   styles. Their   results show that  in spite  of   this, actual
         moderation of teachers was characterized by a participative style. Comparisons of measures of self-reported
         moderation    styles and   actual  moderation    furthermore   reveal    a  discrepancy   between   how    teachers    view
         themselves as moderators and how they behave in real-time moderation.

3-
Motivational dynamics in online argumentation: Is there mutual influence of
learning partners on their motivation over the course of a discussion?

                             Armin Weinberger, Karsten Stegmann, Frank Fischer,
           Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität (LMU) München, Department of Psychology, Germany,
       Email: armin.weinberger@psy.lmu.de, karsten.stegmann@psy.lmu.de, frank.fischer@psy.lmu.de

         Approaches to online argumentation and learning are often based on the assumption that learners are
motivated or can be motivated to mutually support each other's learning processes (cf. Cohen, 1994; Slavin,
1996). Moreover,   collaborative    learning  is believed   to generally    have  positive effects on   emotional   and
motivational aspects of knowledge building (e.g., Johnson & Johnson, 2002). Still, there are clear indications of
specific motivational problems that cannot be regarded as individual, but as group phenomena, such as sucker
effects or social loafing (Latané, Williams, & Harkins, 1979; Robbins, 1995), and thus may lead to learners
diverging regarding motivation and individual knowledge gains. Moreover, learners seem to have difficulties to
engage in specific learning activities, such as constructing and exchanging arguments in online environments
and often require some sort of scaffolding, such as collaboration scripts, which specify, sequence, and distribute
roles and activities to learners with the goal of enabling them to participate in online argumentation (cf. Fischer,
Kollar, Mandl, & Haake, 2007; O'Donnell, 1999). Scripts may be introduced by a teacher or represented within
an online learning environment, e.g., through prompts. By rotating roles, scripts facilitate more and more equal
participation in collaborative learning activities compared to unscripted collaborative learning (e.g., Palincsar &
Brown,   1984). However,    scripts have   been   argued   to have   potentially detrimental effects   on motivational
aspects, such as intrinsic motivation, self-efficacy, and self-determination - especially when script prescriptions
interfere with learners' own strategies (Cohen, 1994; Kollar, Fischer, & Slotta, 2007).
         Therefore we   investigate  first (RQ1),    to what   extent   do  collaboration  scripts influence  learners'
motivation and  participation and   the  convergence    /  divergence   of  learners' motivation   and participation in
online discussions? Furthermore, collaborative learning has been ascribed potential to facilitate homogeneous
participation in learning processes (Cohen & Lotan, 1995). It could be argued that collaborative learners could
thus benefit more  equally   and  become   more   similar  with  respect    to motivational outcomes    and  individual
knowledge gains than individual learners. This could be particularly true for learners in online discussions, who
could be supported by additional resources (Scardamalia & Bereiter, 1996) and for whom status effects could be
equalled out (Dubrovsky, Kiesler, & Sethna, 1991). There is some empirical evidence from classroom research,
however,  pointing   towards  the   fact that learners  within  classes    are becoming    more  and   more  dissimilar
regarding  knowledge    and  motivation   (Merton's   Matthew-effect,      1968; Marsh's    big-fish-little-pond effect,
1987). So far, there is little research on how learners in ad-hoc online groups influence each other and converge
or diverge regarding their motivation. We therefore also focus on the question (RQ2), to what extent (scripted
and unscripted) learners in online discussions influence each other in terms of convergence or divergence of
motivation and participation?

Method
         We have conducted several studies focussing on different kinds of script aiming to support different
aspects of online argumentation and learning showing that different scripts have specific effects on processes
and outcomes of online learning (see Weinberger, Stegmann, Fischer, & Mandl, 2007). For instance, we include
scripts that foster epistemic activities of how to apply theoretical concepts to complex problem cases, formal
argumentative   aspects such  as  warranting  a  claim,   and  specific social  modes  of  learners, such as  critically
comment on each others' analyses. We re-analyze this data with respect to motivational aspects. In total, 107
groups of three (N = 321 students) enter this re-analysis. Their learning task was to analyze and discuss problem
cases in 80 minutes using concepts of Weiner's attribution theory (1985) via a learning environment based on
asynchronous    discussion  boards. To    investigate  the  influence   of  scripts on  motivation,  we   compare    the
motivation measures of scripted vs. unscripted learners. To investigate the mutual influence of learning partners
within small groups, we compare real groups of learners who have actually interacted with each other with
nominal  groups  (as used  by Fischer    & Mandl,    2005  and  Jeong   &   Chi, 2006)   randomly  built  post-hoc,  i.e.
learners being  randomly   selected from   different  real groups    having participated in the  same  online learning
experience, but not having interacted with each other. We assessed four different aspects of motivation related
to the online learning experience in a post-test, namely intrinsic motivation, extrinsic motivation, self-efficacy,
and  self-determination by  questionnaire    (see Prenzel,    Eitel, Holzbach,   Schoenhein, &   Schweiberer,    1993).
Moreover, we have assessed participation of the learners in the collaborative learning processes by word count
in the online discussions. We have assessed convergence / divergence of these measures by distances between
the learning partners within real and nominal groups regarding the respective measures (see Weinberger et al.,
2007).

                                                                                                                            3-3
        Results and Discussion
                  Results regarding RQ1 show that when taking different types of scripts together, scripts neither have an
         effect on motivation or participation of the individual learners, nor an effect on motivation and participation
         convergence / divergence within the small groups of learners. Against assumptions (see Cohen, 1994), the re-
         analysis of several script studies does not show negative effects of scripts on motivation. Possibly, the scripts
         under investigation were well designed and adapted to the skill levels of the respective learners and thus, not
         detrimental for learners' motivation.
                  Regarding RQ2, results show that learners in real groups are significantly more divergent than nominal
        groups with respect to intrinsic motivation (F(2; 105) = 9.06; p < .01; K2 = .08). The results show that learners
         do not become more similar in the course of interaction. Instead, the results point towards divergence effects on
         motivation   of learners   in small ad-hoc    online   groups similar  to prior empirical  evidence     of divergence   of
         learners in classrooms. Possibly, motivational group level phenomena that have been observed in classrooms
         over longer periods of time also show in a relatively short time span in ad hoc online groups. Collaborative
         learners may adjust their motivation momentarily based on the interaction with their learning partners. Possibly
         according to observations of the efforts learning partners invest, learners may gain motivational levels different
         from learning partners.

       On-line moderation of collective argumentation: Student perspectives and the
       effectiveness of moderator interventions

                                              Christa S. C. Asterhan, Baruch B. Schwarz
                                 School of Education, Hebrew University of Jerusalem 91905, Israel,
                                 Email: christa.asterhan@mail.huji.ac.il, msschwar@mscc.huji.ac.il

                  Research on (on­ and off-line) collaborative learning is deeply rooted in constructivism and focuses on
         the role of peer collaboration in learning and development. Whereas important insights have been obtained on
         collaboration mechanisms and the role of task design, the role of the teacher has not been considered with the
         same   intensity, especially  not in  computer-mediated       environments   (Lund,   2004). Whereas     the  prescriptive
         literature on human   e-moderation      is abundant  (e.g.,  Salmon,  2000),  empirical   research   is sparse  and it has
         mainly   focused  on  the  facilitation of    e-courses and  moderation   of  a-synchronous   discussion   formats   (e.g.,
         Anderson, Garrison, Rourke & Archer, 2001), but not on moderation of synchronous discussion environments.
                  In a review and commentary of the literature on human support in CSCL, Lund (2004) proposes a
         taxonomy of human supportive roles in CSCL and distinguishes between the following types of moderation:
         Pedagogical support aims at the students' learning, whether in terms of content or thinking skills, by providing
         factual  information,  scaffolding  reasoning    and    knowledge   construction,  controlling   the focus   of  attention,
         providing explanations, and so on. Social support focuses on the social relations between the discussants and on
         maintaining   a  pleasant  atmosphere.     Interaction  support, on  the  other hand,  aims   at ensuring   that students
         participate, are  responsive  to each   other  and   do  not overlap  each others'  contributions.   Finally,  managerial
         support focuses on task design, completion and monitoring and technical support aims at detecting operational
         and technical difficulties with the software and providing help accordingly.
                  As mentioned by Lund (2004), different characteristics of CSCL software impose different constraints
         on the human support it affords, which in turn may affect effectiveness and desirability of certain of types of
         moderation. Therefore, what is considered effective moderation in synchronous discussion environments may be
         different from moderation of, for example, e-courses. In this presentation we will present findings from two
         studies: The  first  study focuses  on  students'   perspectives  on  what   constitutes effective   e-moderation   in the
         particular case of collective argumentation in a graphical, synchronous discussion environment. In the second
         study,  we   draw relations   between   characteristics  of  moderator   interventions during  on-line   discussions   and
         moderation    effectiveness   in terms     of discussants'   evaluations  following   and their  responses     during  the
         interaction.
                  The    type of  discussions    we    focus on  in  our  investigations  concern   synchronous     argumentative
         discussions  with   graphical  representations.  All e-discussions   were  conducted   within  the   Digalo  environment
         (http://zeno8.ais.fraunhofer.de/digalo/index.html) which enables synchronous, textual talk through mediation of
         geometrical   shapes  that represent  different  dialogical  moves.  A   user has  to  choose  a particular   contribution
         shape from a fixed set of options (e.g., argument, claim, question, explanation), write his/her contribution to the
         discussion in the shape and link it to one or several contributions in the discussion map. The context in which
         we collected the data on e-moderation was one in which the moderator and the discussants shared the same
         channel of communication, but the moderator's contributions were identified by a distinguished color. In other
         words, their communications could be seen by all discussants and were an integrative part of the discussion
         map.

3-
Study 1. Students' perspectives of good moderation
          A sample of 9th graders from three parallel classroom in the same school (N=74) and a sample of
graduate students that participated in a course on Educational technology in the classroom (N=16) participated
in this study. Participants in both samples had previously participated in moderated as well as un-moderated
argumentative    discussions, conducted     in the  Digalo   environment     in  a co-located    setting. Following   the
moderated discussions, students were administered a short open question format questionnaire in which they
were asked to describe effective Digalo moderation.
          Content analyses of their responses revealed the following findings: First of all, it is striking that some
aspects of moderation were not mentioned often. Interaction support was hardly alluded to in either sample. In
contrast with face-to-face classroom discussions, synchronous on-line communication allows for simultaneous
posting of messages and there is no need for supervising turn-taking. In contrast with a-synchronous learning
environments, on the other hand, participants are on-line at the same moment and are dedicated to interaction for
a certain pre-defined time interval. Moreover, our students did not only share a digital, but also a physical space
(co-location). Furthermore, in contrast to e-courses (Packham, et al, 2006), managerial/organizational aspects of
moderation were not considered critical. Even though synchronous discussions are part of a learning sequence,
in which the organizational role of the teacher is extremely important, our data support the interpretation that
this is not the case during the discussion session itself.
          In both the higher and secondary education setting students expect a good moderator to scaffold their
reasoning and their knowledge construction and to keep the discussion focused. Other aspects of pedagogical
support, however, such as providing expert advise and feedback (Lund, 2004; Packham, et al., 2006) were not
mentioned (higher education sample) or explicitly called undesirable (secondary education sample). Among the
9th graders, more than half of the boys, but only 6% of the girls, either clearly indicated that they did not want
teacher moderation or gave reasons both in favor and against it. The majority of the reasons mentioned for this
resistance alluded to student autonomy: they should be able to freely express their own opinions and to work
and collaborate independently, without teacher interference.
          Students also  mentioned   aspects   of social support,    such as the importance    of a   good  moderator  to
maintain  a  supportive  relation with  the  discussants,   be  objective  and  create  a pleasant    atmosphere.  These
findings, combined     with the reasons that   the (mainly   male)   ninth graders  mentioned     for their resistance to
teacher moderation, seem to emphasize the importance of teacher/tutor impartiality and objectivity. According
to them, moderators of argumentative discussions should scaffold reasoning, without revealing or imposing any
personal  opinions on   the discussion. The    undergraduate    sample    particularly emphasized   the   need for active
involvement and speed to timely intervene and react to discussants.

Study 2. Effectiveness of moderator interventions: Generic scaffolding and content-
specific prompts
          In a  previous    study we   identified  five  different   moderation    profiles   of on-line   argumentative
discussions (Gil, Schwarz & Asterhan, 2007). In the present study we further elaborate on these findings by
attempting   to relate between  certain qualities  of  moderator   interventions   and  their effectiveness  in terms  of
discussants' evaluations and responsiveness. For this purpose we analyzed three moderated Digalo discussions.
We  adopted   an exploratory,   qualitative approach   that  led us  to examine    the difference  between   generic and
content-specific types of moderator interventions. Generic scaffolding prompts that are meant to elicit explicit
articulation of  individual  understanding,    explanations  and  elaborations   have   been   found  to  be particularly
effective for learning process, both in the tutoring literature (e.g., Chi, Siler, Jeong, Yamauchi & Hausmann,
2001) as well as teacher scaffolding of individual student and classroom reasoning (e.g., Yackel, 2002).
          However, our results show that the use of generic scaffolding prompts in this synchronous environment
were not appreciated by discussants and did often not elicit the expected responses from discussants. Content-
specific prompts, on the other hand, in which the moderator for example paraphrases the former contribution
and builds on it, were more effective in this respect. The two discussions in which moderators received high
student ratings and in which student responsiveness to moderators' interventions was high had to "disguise" their
moderation strategies, so that they appeared as regular participants that actively contributed to the dialogue and
not only limited their moderation to generic scaffolding or orchestrating prompts.        In light of these findings, we
revisited earlier data of five different e-discussions (Gil, et al, 2007) and found a similar pattern.
          We  propose   the following  two  explanations    for  the difference  between  our    findings and  the above
mentioned literature: First of all, it is likely that the lack of non-verbal cues, in combination with the scattered
and non-chronological    nature   of a  discussion  in  this type   of  synchronous    on-line   communication   formats
significantly diminishes the extent of overall inter-subjectivity between discussants. Moreover, the lack of a
linear order of postings in a discussion map (whether by discussion thread or by time line) may in addition
burden the cognitive load of participants.   As a result, a (moderator) communication has to be more explicit and
specific, both in order to be noticed as well as to be properly understood.

                                                                                                                             3-
                   Another reason for the preference for a more involved and content-specific style of moderation may be
         found in the specific design of the environment: In our settings, the moderator's contributions are and remain
         part of the discussion map which, in contrast to regular face-to-face communication, is visualized on-screen.
         The discussants' evaluations of moderation practices revealed that generic prompting annoyed the participants
         since  it was  interpreted    to  testify of  detachment     and   a lack   of  interest.  Visually, his/her  postings   are  an
         integrative part of the discussion map and may therefore be regarded as part of the common product that is
         constructed by all participants, for which all share a common responsibility, and to which all should contribute.
         By not actively participating in the discussion, the moderator is not perceived as contributing to the discussion.
         If this is true, then different moderator-discussant interaction designs should yield different results: For example,
         it is possible that if the moderator comments will be communicated through a separate channel, instead of being
         posted  within  the   discussion   map    itself, generic  scaffolding     prompts   and   orchestrating  types of   moderator
         interventions may prove to be more effective and/or appreciated. In this presentation we will present preliminary
         findings  from   ongoing      research  that  compares     direct  moderation     within   the discussion  environment      with
         moderation through a new system developed within the ARGUNAUT project (IST-2005027728), which will be
         described in the next contribution.

       The E-Moderation Challenge: Teachers' Styles and Strategies during
       E-Discussions using Argumentation Maps

          Astrid Wichmann, Andreas Harrer, H. Ulrich Hoppe, Department of Computer Science and Applied Cognitive
                        Science, University of Duisburg-Essen, Forsthausweg 2, 47057 Duisburg, Germany,
                               Email: Wichmann@collide.info, Harrer@collide.info, Hoppe@collide.info

        Introduction
                   Most studies on e-discussions and scientific argumentation in real and virtual classrooms have focused
         on  supporting   learners     by providing   adequate   collaborative      tools, representations    and  interfaces  (cf., e.g.,
         Andriessen, Baker, Suthers, 2003). The role of teachers in these e-discussions is often not clearly defined. The
         technology    itself, by    supporting  interaction   and   collaboration     on  a peer-to-peer   level, invites teachers    to
         participate  and   act   as equal  status  discussants.    In a   pioneering    study,  Gil   and  colleagues (Gil,   Schwarz,
         Asterhan,    2007)   have   identified  moderation    styles  that teachers    adopt in   synchronous     e-discussions. These
         moderation styles differ in terms of interaction and active involvement in the discussion. In spite of these first
         indications,  little  is known    about   teachers' perceptions    of   their role  during    discussions and about   relations
         between these perceptions and their actual moderation behavior (Gall and Gall, 1993).
                   From the point of view of giving learners opportunities for self-directed, autonomous learning neither
         the involved   nor    the authoritative   style of  teacher  participation    may   really be  desirable. Rather,  it could   be
         preferable to have teachers acting in a more subtle and indirect way by limiting their interventions to keeping
         the discussion on track and ensuring basic rules of social behavior and mutual respect. This perspective and
         orientation is not adequately supported by current (synchronous) collaboration tools and calls for a new type of
         technology, namely e-moderation technology.

        Project Context and Research Questions
                   Even for only one ongoing discussion at a time, e-moderation is a complex task: Moderators have to
         decipher   a discussion     that develops  non-linearly    in order     to perceive  difficulties, misunderstandings,    social
         processes patterns as well as individual participation. Based on this perception, the e-moderator must intervene
         in order to maintain or improve the quality and flow of the on-going discussion. The complexity of fulfilling
         these requirements is so high that teachers tend to leave students alone during the discussion and reflect on these
         only in aftermath. The goal of the EC-funded ARGUNAUT project (IST-2005027728) is to provide moderators
         of educational e-discussions with tools to support productive e-discussions through better moderation (De Groot
         et al., 2007). Support is provided in two ways: First, moderators are provided with awareness tools that display
         characteristics of the ongoing discussions. This feedback to the moderator is based on situational indicators,
         which are either pre-coded or automatically derived from classified examples. In addition, support is provided
         through remote interventions in the discussion space. ARGUNAUT's moderator's interface does not allow for
         direct peer-to-peer      type of interactions   with  the  discussion      environments    but conveys    functions  of  remote
         control   to issue   specific  types of   feedback    into one  of   the   (potentially multiple)  e-discussion   spaces.   The
         functions    provided    by the  intervention   panel are, among     others,  sending   text  messages,   highlighting  student
         contributions  and    pop-up     boxes. The   moderator's     interface    also  allows   for  replaying  previously  recorded
         discussions. In replay mode, the intervention and classification functions can be used for annotating discussions.
                   The  central    research  question    of this study   is   to investigate  how    teachers perceive   their  roles  as
         moderators and which strategies they use to moderate discussions in their classrooms. The second focus is to

3-
look at teachers' actual use of functions of the ARGUNAUT intervention panel while moderating computer-
mediated   discussion   maps.  We    are  also interested   in potential  discrepancies   between   declared   moderation
strategies  and actual  behavior    using the  panel.  The   study  is conducted     in the larger  context of  providing
recommendations for designing the ARGUNAUT facilities.

Method
          Twenty    experienced     teachers   participated  in  a  workshop    in    which    they were    introduced  to
argumentation, e-argumentation and moderation of discussions. The discussion topics were selected according
to the teachers' subject areas. Two questionnaires were administered, one assessing the participants' general
moderation    style and one   assessing  their specific moderation     strategies. The   moderation   style questionnaire
assessed whether they saw themselves as active participants in classroom discussions (participative style) or
rather accompanying discussions, as outside observers (supervision style). The second questionnaire aimed at
identifying particular moderation strategies. During the moderation activity, pairs of teachers moderated an e-
discussion either with the ARGUNAUT moderator's interface (with the remote control intervention panel) in
replay mode, or while watching a video of the same discussion as they wrote down interventions in a paper-and-
pencil  mode.   In  both cases,     the same   pre-recorded    discussion   on issues    of "migration"   was   used.  All
interventions were analyzed according to a category system broadly differentiating between participative and
supervision   style of moderation.   Teachers'   statements    were categorized    as participative  behavior  when   they
showed   active involvement    in   the discussion as   equal  participants on  a  content  level.  Statements  indicating
"supervision style" would not directly elaborate arguments or contribute on a content level but rather aim at
supporting the flow of the discussion and basic rules of interaction. This can either result in interventions in
forms  of  feedback  requests  for   specific  information,  or encouragement,     similarly   to Chi's  categorization of
tutor's tactics (Chi, et al, 2001).

Results
          Results from the questionnaire on moderation style and strategies indicated a clear tendency towards a
supervision style:   Teachers rated significantly higher on the supervision scale (M=3.55, SD=.67) than on the
participation scale (M=2.69, SD=.83). Results also indicated that most teachers would intervene in situations of
violation  of ground    rules and    social  aspects of   discussion   situations. When     the focus   was on   students'
construction of arguments (cognitive dimension) teachers indicated that they would moderate much less. Also,
teachers   expressed   their preference   for  actively moderating     situations  in   which   students showed    passive
behavior (non-participation).
          Since the two simulated moderation conditions (video with paper & pencil vs. ARGUNAUT replay
with moderator's interface) were not systematically varied in this study, we have not distinguished these in our
first summary analysis.  Overall, 41 interventions were specified. Most interventions were found when a ground
rule was violated and these interventions corresponded to supervision style. The situation was different in cases
of cognitive   challenges    and  of active   knowledge     construction. In   these    cases, teachers  adopted   a more
participative moderation style. A comparison between teachers' responses to the questionnaires and their actual
moderation of argumentation maps indicated a certain discrepancy:           For situations of ground rule violations or
for social challenges, they moderated in a way consistent with what they had expressed in their questionnaires
(i.e., adopting supervision style). However, in situations with cognitive issues or challenges in the discussions
(i.e., during segments of e-discussions in which discussants were engaged in reasoning) teachers had opted for a
supervision style in the questionnaire. In contrast, the analysis of the actual moderation of similar e-discussion
situations revealed that several pairs of teachers in fact moderated such segments. Most of these moderations
consisted of participative thoughts and feedback (social validation) but rarely formulated requests for knowledge
elaboration or other cognitive challenges.

Perspectives
          From the perspective of designing moderation support tools for teachers in classroom or for remote
moderators it is important to know if        teachers are willing and able to stick to supervision style moderation
instead  of   the more   involved    participation style. The   ARGUNAUT        approach     provides   subtle monitoring
functions without direct control of e-discussions. In this sense, it is geared towards supporting supervision style.
We expect that this condition would even allow for one moderator to supervise several discussions at a time, a
situation in which involved participation is hardly possible. On the other hand, we saw that teachers tended to
get involved in the discussions by acting as equal participants when cognitive challenges came up.
          In the final discussion of the workshop, teachers raised skepticism regarding the possibility of using
moderation    tools in  classroom    discussions,  but  they   did see such    tools  as potentially  helpful  for remote
discussion scenarios. This questioning of using moderation tools in face-to-face classroom situations might also
have to do with the intention to maintain the central control of classroom on the part of the teacher. As yet, we
do not have clear empirical evidence for this assumption.

                                                                                                                              3-
                  The discrepancies we found between the beliefs teachers expressed when filling in questionnaires and
         the styles and strategies they adopted in moderating e-discussions suggests that the complexity of the dynamics
         of synchronous     e-discussions  leads  teachers to    behave  in an  ad hoc  fashion.  The  awareness  tools  and   the
         possibilities for  interventions provided   by  ARGUNAUT         will  probably   open  new opportunities for   different
         moderation strategies and styles. There is hope that the further development and evaluation of the ARGUNAUT
         environment will lead to more insight into teachers' roles and intentions as moderators of e-discussions.

       References
         Anderson, T., Rourke, L., Garrison, D. R., & Archer, W. (2001). Assessing teaching presence in a computer
                  conference context. Journal of Asynchronous Learning Networks, 5(2), 1-17.
         Andriessen,   J., Baker,   M., &   Suthers,  D.  (2003).  Argumentation,    Computer    Support,  and the   Educational
                  Context    of confronting   cognitions.  In Andriessen,   J., Baker,  M.,   &  Suthers, D. (Eds.), Arguing    to
                  Learn: Confronting Cognitions in Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning environments (pp. 1-
                  25). Dordrecht: Kluwer.
         Baker, M. (2003). Computer-mediated argumentative interactions for the co-elaboration of scientific notions. In
                  J. Andriessen, M. Baker & D. Suthers (Eds.), Arguing to learn: confronting cognitions in computer-
                  supported collaborative learning environments (Vol. 1, pp. 1-25). Dordrecht: Kluwer.
         Barth,  E.   M,  &  Krabbe,  E.  C.  W.  (1982).  From    axiom    to dialogue:   A philosophical  study of    logics and
                  argumentation. Berlin: Walter de Gruyter.
         Chi, M. T. H., Siler, S. A., Jeong, H., Yamauchi, T., & Hausmann, R. G. (2001). Learning from human tutoring.
                  Cognitive Science, 25(4), 471-533.
         Cohen,   E.   G.  (1994).   Restructuring   the classroom:   Conditions    for  productive   small  groups.    Review  of
                  Educational Research, 64(1), 1-35.
         Cohen,   E.  G.,  &  Lotan,  R.  A.  (1995). Producing    equal-status   interaction in the  heterogeneous     classroom.
                  American Educational Research Journal, 32, 99-120.
         De Groot, R., Drachman, R., Hever, R., Schwarz, B., Hoppe, U., Harrer, A., De Laat, M., Wegerif, R., McLaren,
                  B.   M.,  &  Baurens,  B.  (2007). Computer     Supported    Moderation  of E-discussions:  the ARGUNAUT
                  Approach.     In   C. A.  Chinn,   G.  Erkens,  &  S.  Puntambekar     (Eds.), Proceedings   of the   Computer
                  Supported Collaborative Learning Conference 2007: International Society of the Learning Sciences.
                  Mahwah (NJ): Lawrence Erlbaum.
         Dubrovsky, V. J., Kiesler, S., & Sethna, B. N. (1991). The equalization phenomenon: status effects in computer-
                  mediated and face-to-face decision-making groups. Human-Computer-Interaction, 6, 119-146.
         Fischer, F.,  Kollar,  I., Mandl,   H., &   Haake,   J. (Eds.). (2007).   Scripting  computer-supported   collaborative
                  learning. New York: Springer.
         Fischer, F., & Mandl, H. (2005). Knowledge convergence in computer-supported collaborative learning: The
                  role of external representation tools. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 14(3), 405-441.
         Gall, M. D., and Gall, J. P. (1993). Teacher and student roles in different types of classroom discussions. Paper
                  presented at the annual meeting of the American Educational Research Association, Atlanta.
         Gil, J., Schwarz, B. B., & Asterhan C. S. C. (2007). Intuitive moderation styles and beliefs of teachers in CSCL-
                  based argumentation. In: C. A. Chinn, G. Erkens, & S. Puntambekar (Eds), The Computer Supported
                  Collaborative Learning (CSCL) Conference, Vol. 8 (219-229).
         Jeong, H. & Chi, M.T.H. (2007). Knowledge convergence during collaborative learning. Instructional Science,
                  35, 287-315.
         Johnson, D. W., & Johnson, R. T. (2002). Social interdependence theory and university instruction - Theory into
                  practice. Swiss Journal of Psychology, 61(3), 119-129.
         Kollar,  I., Fischer,  F., & Slotta, J. (2007).  Internal and   external  scripts in computer-supported   collaborative
                  inquiry learning. Learning and Instruction, 17(6), 708-721.
         Latané, B., Williams, K., & Harkins, S. (1979). Social Loafing. Psychology Today, 110, 104-106.
         Lund, K. (2004). Human support in CSCL: what, for whom and by whom? In J-W. Strijbos, P.A. Kirshner, R.
                  L.   Martens,  &   P. Dillenbourg   (Eds),  What   we   know   about  CSCL     and implementing    it in higher
                  education, CSCL Vol. 3 (167-198). Norwell, MA: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
         Marsh,   H.   W.   (1987).  The  big-fish-little-pond   effect  on  academic    self-concept. Journal  of   Educational
                  Psychology, 79, 280-295.
         Merton, R.K. (1968). The Matthew effect in science. Science, 159, 56-63.
         O'Donnell, A. M. (1999). Structuring dyadic interaction through scripted cooperation. In A. M. O'Donnell & A.
                  King (Eds.), Cognitive perspectives on peer learning (pp. 179-196). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
         Packham, G., Jones, P., Thomas, B., & Miller, C. (2006). Student and tutor perspectives of on-line moderation.
                  Education & Training, 48(4), 241-251.
         Palincsar, A. S., & Brown, A. L. (1984). Reciprocal teaching of comprehension-fostering and comprehension-
                  monitoring activities. Cognition and Instruction, 1, 117-175.

3-
Prenzel, M., Eitel,   F., Holzbach,    R., Schoenhein,   R.-J., &   Schweiberer,  L.   (1993). Lernmotivation   im
         studentischen Unterricht   in der  Chirurgie   [Motivation  to learn  in student  instruction in surgery].
         Zeitschrift für Pädagogische Psychologie, 7, 125-137.
Robbins, T. L. (1995). Social loafing on cognitive tasks: An examination of the "sucker effect". Journal of
         Business and Psychology, 9(3), 337-342.
Scardamalia, M.,   &   Bereiter, C.  (1996).  Computer    support   for knowledge-building     communities.  In T.
         Koschmann (Ed.), CSCL: Theory and practice of an emerging paradigm (pp. 249-268). Mahwah, NJ:
         Erlbaum.
Slavin, R. (1996). Research for the future. Research on cooperative learning and achievement: What we know,
         what we need to know. Contemporary Educational Psychology, 21, 43-69.
Weinberger,  A.,  Stegmann,   K.,  &   Fischer,  F. (2007). Knowledge     convergence   in collaborative  learning:
         Concepts and assessment. Learning & Instruction, 17(4), 416-426.
Weinberger,  A.,  Stegmann,    K.,  Fischer,  F.,   & Mandl,    H.  (2007).  Scripting  argumentative   knowledge
         construction in  computer-supported    learning environments.   In F. Fischer, H.  Mandl,  J. Haake  &  I.
         Kollar (Eds.), Scripting computer-supported communication of knowledge - cognitive, computational
         and educational perspectives (pp. 191-211). New York: Springer.
Weiner, B. (1985). An attributional theory of achievement motivation and emotion. Psychological Review, 92,
         548-573.
Yackel, E. (2002). What we can learn from analyzing the teacher's role in collective argumentation. Journal of
         Mathematical Behavior, 21, 423-440.

Acknowledgements
The research presented    by Weinberger    et al  was funded    by Deutsche  Forschungsgemeinschaft     (DFG).The
research presented  by    Asterhan and  Schwartz    and by  Wichmann,    et al was  supported   by the  EC-funded
ARGUNAUT project (IST-2005-027728).

                                                                                                                      3-
