                               New Literacies and the Learning Sciences:
             A Framework for Understanding Youths' Media Arts Practices

                 Kylie A. Peppler, Indiana University, 201 N Rose Ave, Wright 4024, Bloomington, IN 47405,
                                                       kpeppler@indiana.edu
         Yasmin B. Kafai, UCLA Graduate School of Education and Information Studies, 2128 Moore Hall, Box 951521
                                    Los Angeles, California 90095-6293, kafai@gseis.ucla.edu

                 Abstract:   This   paper  turns   our attention  to  the  arts  and  New    Literacy Studies     as an
                 understudied   area  in  the learning sciences.  Our    study  documents,   describes,   and analyzes
                 urban  youths'   Media   Arts  Practices  within a   Computer   Clubhouse,      drawing  on  the   New
                 Literacy   Studies movement     and   work on  authentic  practices.  Results    indicated that  youth
                 engaged in at least eight literate practices aligned with professional communities in the arts,
                 media,  and   new  technologies.  We   organize  these  practices into  the  technical,  creative,  and
                 critical practices of Media Arts production and offer a new conceptual framework for this
                 emergent field. Media Arts are particularly relevant to the learning sciences because of the
                 shared focus on new technologies and computation. The new field of Media Arts is not well
                 understood    in the research  literature but  has  the potential to  teach  us  about   learning   and
                 literacy in the age of multimedia.

       Introduction
                 As technologies for communication, design, and entertainment become more ubiquitous, our notions of
         literacy expand. Educators and researchers in the field of new literacies are diversifying traditional notions of
         literacy to include decoding, evaluating, and producing electronic media, particularly by studying the out-of-
         school and informal literacy practices of youth (see for example Moje, 2000). Our work is situated within the
         New   Media   Studies movement,   and    focuses  on urban   youth as   authors  of these  new   media   texts,  such  as
         videogames, interactive art, and animations. While many researchers acknowledge the role of authoring new
         media  in meeting  technology    fluency, media   literacy, and  visual literacy   goals (National  Research    Council,
         1999; Greenaway, 2001; Kress & van Leeuwen, 1996), very few within the field have empirically examined this
         topic, particularly in which ways youths' media culture and practices can be used to support an expanded view
         of literacy and learning. The need for this type of work also overlaps with the emergent efforts of learning
         scientists to examine the impact of new technologies on learning and literacy today. As Palincsar and Ladewski
         (2006) point  out, new   literacies, despite  being  an  understudied   area,  share    many parallels   and    points of
         intersection with the learning sciences, which suggests that much could be gained from the cross-fertilization of
         these two fields. In fact, the two fields have a great deal in common, including an understanding of literacy and
         technology as being intertwined (Reinking et al., 1997); a core focus on modeling learning in authentic contexts
         (Kolodner, 1991;   Scribner  &   Cole, 1981);  and   recognition  that  literacies are  multiple and  situated   (Nixon,
         2003).
                 The purpose of this paper is to present a framework to document, describe, and analyze urban youths'
         Media Arts Practices within the context of a design studio in a Computer Clubhouse. "Media Art" is used here
         to encompass the creative, technical and critical practices involving or referring to all forms of art that makes
         use of electronic equipment, computation, and new communication technologies (Paul, 2003). We define Media
         Arts Practices (MAP) as literate events in which one engages in Media Arts and the reasons and motivations for
         doing so, building on prior research on the literacy practices of adolescents in out-of-school settings (Moje,
         2000). We were especially interested in authentic practices that are developmentally appropriate versions of
         expert practices in the field of media, new technologies, and the arts. We have chosen to limit our analyses to
         those  events that involved   media   or  Media   Arts texts, particularly   those  that  involved   the use    of visual
         programming software called "Scratch" (Resnick, Kafai, & Maeda, 2003). This enabled us to study how urban
         youth choose to combine oral, aural, visual, and written practices of the arts, new media, and technology and
         interconnect these modes of language as literate practices. We utilize a mixed-methods design that analyzed data
         from participants' observations and Media Arts projects archives.

       Conceptual Framework for Defining Media Arts Practices
                 Today, literacy can be broadly defined as including any type of communicative interaction involving
         speaking, reading, listening, and writing with text in print and non-print forms (Hagood, Stevens, & Reinking,
         2002), which largely characterizes the field of New Literacy Studies (see for example Barton & Hamilton, 2000;
         Moje,  2000). Commonly,     this group   of scholars posits  that literacies are   best  understood  as  a  set of social
         practices, which can be inferred from events and mediated by written, visual, and other types of texts (Barton &

2-
Hamilton, 2000). Hence, the basic unit of a social theory of literacy is that of literacy practices, defined as the
general cultural ways of utilizing language (Barton & Hamilton, 2000). Researchers from a variety of fields
have demonstrated that a text is no longer a sequence of alphabetic characters on a piece of paper; rather social
arrangements, tagging, type of dress, singing, drawing, and dancing can all be viewed as texts. While previous
studies have focused on literate practices of youth in context of science (Barton & Rivet, 2004) and other out-of-
school settings (Moje, 2000), we have chosen to focus on the literacy practices of youth engaged in Media Arts
production, which we refer to as MAP. The texts that will be the focus of this study will be Media Arts texts--
written texts, software programs, media images, oral discussion about media or media artwork, or the Media Art
objects, themselves. These Media Arts texts and events (i.e., youths' Media Arts Practices) will be explored as
the basis of this inquiry. By introducing MAP, we are trying to broaden our view of literacy practices to describe
the ways in which individuals use literacy and learn to be literate within the specific context of new media.
         To investigate MAP, we're drawing upon situated learning theory, which places importance on social
interaction as being fundamental to learning. Central to this theory is the notion of "communities of practice,"
which serves to reinforce the values and behaviors to be learned (Lave and Wenger, 1991).                 Starting at the
periphery of the community, learners begin as novices and move toward fuller forms of participation, as they
become more knowledgeable participants. We have focused on a subset of youths' MAP that could be described
as "authentic practices" because they parallel what experts do in three key disciplines: Arts, Media, and New
Technologies.  Authentic   practices  have   been  defined within  the  Learning Sciences    as  engaging      students in
"developmentally appropriate versions of the situated and meaningful practices of experts" (Sawyer, 2006, p. 5).
In this study, we expand on this understanding to include what authentic practices might look like within the
context of Media Art. However, since the Media Arts are an emergent field with a short history (Paul, 2003) that
draws on several established disciplines, we have focused on the intersection of professional practices from the
arts, media, and new technologies as the basis for our understanding of the situated and meaningful MAP of
experts (see Figure 1). In Figure 1, the three inner circles represent the fields that provide a foundation for our
conceptualization of Media Art. Any overlap of two or more circles creates an area that we describe as MAP.
This conceptualization is grounded in our earlier reflections (Peppler & Kafai, 2007) as well as from interviews
with professional Media Artists (Peppler, 2007).

Figure 1. Situating Media Arts Practices as an interdisciplinary field, heavily drawing on our understanding of
 the arts, media, and new technologies. The overlaying pie chart situates the three main coding categories that
    were of interest to this study: the Technical, Creative, and Critical practices of Media Art production.

         This framework represents a mixture of emic (insider) and etic (outsider) perspectives on the local
culture  (Erickson, 1979).  The   question   of authentic  participation we  are assessing    is the   following:   What
constitutes  participation or  learning   in each of these   individual  disciplines (i.e., the  arts, media,   and  new
technologies)? Professionals assess knowledge in each of these domains differently. The outer circle of Figure 1
is segmented into three parts to reflect this distinction: the creative, critical, and technical practices of Media
Arts. For example, creative practices are rooted in an artistic tradition, while critical practices are rooted in a
media education tradition, and technical practices are rooted in the work on new technologies and technology
fluency. Although   practices   that would   be recognized   by  experts in each field  are  distinct,    they also share
similarities with the other fields. This is reflected in the figure by lines stemming from the outer circle, dividing
the circle in thirds, but not entirely on the boundaries of each field. For example, creative practices are not
entirely the domain  of    the arts; they can  be a  part of the practices  of those  working    with   new    media and
technologies. Professionals working on these margins might be web designers and animators. The same applies
for critical and technical practices of production­we argue that discussing participation as a synthesis of all three
disciplines  more   accurately  describes    Media  Arts  learning and   the   multiple literacies     of the  Computer

                                                                                                                              2-
         Clubhouse. In the upcoming passages, we take a closer look at each segment of the outer circle in Figure 1 and
         point to how this informs our framework for this study.

        Technical Practices
                  Those in the field of new technologies would be interested in the ways in which youth engage in a wide
         variety of technology fluency goals, including intellectual capabilities, information technology concepts, and
         information   technology     skills  (e.g.,   sustained   reasoning,   managing     problems     and    finding    solutions,
         programming, and using graphics and/or artwork packages to create illustrations, slides, or other image-based
         expressions   of ideas). We   use   the term  "technology    fluency"  here  as being   distinct  from   computer   literacy
         because the latter term is often reduced to basic functions such as word processing and web surfing (National
         Research   Council,  1999).  Technology     fluency  includes higher-level   skills and    concepts   such   as algorithmic
         thinking  and programming,      for example.    While   traditional programming     projects    have  tended    to focus  on
         mathematical   and   science content    (Papert &  Resnick,  1993),   here we   emphasized      graphic,  music    and video
         applications-- media that have been found to be at the core of technology interests for youth. Overlapping with
         these  goals, Media     Art  projects   often use  programming      as  a  means   to   understand    the production     and
         manipulation of familiar media (Maeda, 2004; Reas, 2006). Programming within the context of Media Art is
         particularly important because it allows individuals to manipulate the computer as a medium of expression. In
         this context, we emphasize the programming or software design of media applications as a pathway toward
         technology fluency. In an effort to introduce the essentials of software design to young software designers, we
         argue that learning to code is an important building block for originality and expression in digital media. We
         have  chosen  to  focus  on  some   technical   practices of the youths'   MAP     that coincide  with   these  technology
         fluency goals including Programming, Debugging, and Repurposing events (see Table 1).

        Creative Practices
                  For those in the arts, participation involves expanding beyond some of these technical dimensions of
         production toward creative or artistic ends. Many of the goals that artists have overlap with visual literacy goals,
         such as the importance of being able to interpret and express original ideas in a variety of modalities (such as
         through music, dance, sculpture, or dramatization), and are frequently able to make meaningful connections
         between two or more of these modalities (Kress & van Leeuwen, 1996). In our analyses, we have highlighted
         these  two  literacy events   as  either "making   artistic  choices,"  which   is the  practice  of  learning   about   and
         appreciating artistic principles within any particular modality, or "connecting multimodal sign systems," which
         is the practice of crossing between two modalities (e.g., visual and sound, visual and movement or gesture, and
         sound and movement) to convey an artistic idea (see Table 1). For example, choosing an image of a forest and
         then finding colors to augment the idea that the forest is scary versus making it a friendly space is considered
         "making artistic choices." Importing an audio file of "Take Me Out to the Ballgame" into an illustration of a
         baseball  diamond    in order to  make   the  scene  appear  "real"  is an  example     of "connecting    multimodal    sign
         systems" (in this case, visual and sound). While the first practice creates the opportunity for learning traditional
         skills in any one discipline (e.g., perspective, movement, melody), the latter practice demonstrates the youths'
         ability to depict objects and ideas as a combination of stimuli, and is an important aspect of meaning-making
         and learning how to convey certain ideas in the Clubhouse space.

        Critical Practices
                  For those in the field of media education, participation involves critically viewing media and using this
         understanding when creating original work. As youth begin to take advantage of living in a digital world by
         capitalizing on the wealth of images, sounds, and videos accessible as "materials" to reuse in their own work,
         media educators are particularly concerned about the ways in which youth are either reinscribing or questioning
         existing dominant    norms   (Buckingham,     2003). Critical practices   of production    that  are  of interest  to  media
         educators (and arguably are of interest to those in other fields as well) include being able to critically reflect on
         and evaluate media texts, understanding references made in popular texts, and deconstructing and interpreting
         the meaning behind such texts (Buckingham, 2003). These overlap with the coding categories that we have
         derived for the critical practices of Media Arts production (see Table 1). We should note that, in this work, we
         are primarily interested in youths' ability to author these texts and we are not necessarily interested in their
         ability to read such texts (although arguably reading and writing overlap a great deal). This decision was made,
         in part, to call attention  the  understudied   area of   creative  production  within   the field   of  media  literacy, as
         previous studies have already focused on reading and critical reflection (Buckingham, 2003; Peppler & Kafai,
         2007). By observing the critical practices of Clubhouse youth in this way, we gain an understanding of the
         extent to  which  young     designers   understand  and   question  the popular    texts   that they  incorporate   in  their
         portfolios, apart from what they learn about software programming and the arts.
                  Accumulatively, these technical, creative and critical practices of Media Arts production paint a more
         detailed picture  of  the   types of  learning  that occur   in  our  study. The    participants   in   this study  become

2-0
transitional members of all of these communities because part of their work connects in very specific ways to
each  of  these disciplines.    However,     we want    to note   that this perspective  may   also at times   undermine     the
uniqueness   of   the discipline   of Media     Arts.  In  short, Media   Arts are   more  than  the  sum   of each   of  these
disciplines; there are unique skills and concepts needed to participate in Media Arts that are not found elsewhere
(Reas, 2006), which we explore in this paper and in our other work (Peppler, 2007).

Portrait of a Design Studio: Contexts, Participants, & Tools
          Since 2004, we have engaged as mentors and researchers at the design studio in South Central Los
Angeles,  California,    seeking   to better   understand   youths'    MAP.    The  Clubhouse   is  situated   at a storefront
location in one of the city's poorest areas and annually serves over 1000 high-poverty African American and
Hispanic youth, mostly between the ages of 10 and 16. The Computer Clubhouse is not a stand-alone center;
Not only is it part of a local community organization, it's also a part of world-wide network of over 100 design
centers funded by the Intel® Corporation, designed to embody constructionist principles that acknowledge that
youth learn best when they are actively engaged in design activities (Resnick, Rusk, & Cooke, 1998). Although
each center shares some similarities with others in the network, they are uniquely adapted to the local context
through the help of the partnering community organization and Clubhouse coordinators.
          At this particular design studio, there is a rich assortment of creative software and various other artistic
materials, such as digital cameras, microphones, and musical instruments, that are utilized by the Clubhouse
members in an integrated fashion, oftentimes building on work created or recorded in one environment and
altered in another. Youth have access to an impressive variety of software, including the Microsoft Office suite,
Bryce 5, Painter 7, RPG Maker, and video, photography, and sound editing software. Of particular interest is
one   media-rich   programming       environment,      Scratch,   which   was  specifically  designed   for  the    Clubhouse
environment    to facilitate   media  manipulation      (Resnick,   Kafai,  &  Maeda,   2003).  Scratch  differs   from   other
visual programming environments by using a familiar building block command structure, eliminating thorny
debugging    process  of   syntax    errors. Programming     objects   can  be any   imported  graphic  web    image,    can be
uniquely created or drawn, or chosen from a personal archive of work created with other software programs
including Painter7 and Bryce5. Additionally, designers can create or incorporate existing sound files, video, and
other input/output devices, such as with homemade input/output devices, making design projects truly media-
rich.

Research Approach
          We   used   a concurrent    mixed   methods      approach    (Creswell, 2003)  involving   participant   field notes,
video capture, and a Media Art archive because it was appropriate for recording the interplay between MAP and
Media  Arts    learning    at the  various   levels of  activity  within  the  Clubhouse.  A   mixed   methods     design also
supported  triangulation      among   distinct    data sources    and  allowed  us  to  examine  different,    yet  sometimes
overlapping, multilevel facets of the research site.        This represents a novel approach to research in the field of
new   literacy  studies.   Prior  methods    that have    been  used   in informal  settings have   included   ethnographies
(Thorne, 1993), case studies (Barton & Rivet, 2004; Moje 2000), and surveys (Gallagher, 2006). This study
integrates multiple types of data sources, including the use of archival data stored on a central server and the
weekly collection of Media Arts projects in order to document individual and community involvement in MAP
over a three-year period of time. We analyzed the data based on the following research question: What are the
multiple literacy practices, specifically those related to visual, media, and technology literacies, of the members
participating in Media Arts events at the Computer Clubhouse? We examined how MAP served as sites for
multiple literacies. Thus we coded events that involved repurposing, programming, debugging, making artistic
choices,  connecting    multimodal     sign   systems,  observing,     deconstructing, evaluating,   reflecting,  referencing,
reworking, and remixing Media Arts texts (see Table 1).
          Several undergraduate and graduate student field researchers took extensive participant field notes over
a period of three years. During this time, other artifacts were gathered that were important to understanding and
documenting     the   local   Clubhouse   culture   and   were   used  to   amplify the  field notes,  including    occasional
videotapes, information posted on the Computer Clubhouse Network website (www.computerclubhouse.org),
and other types of artifacts generated at the local Clubhouse. Since literacy practices are general cultural ways of
utilizing language,     it  was   important   that  our    analyses   extended  beyond   the   particularities of   individual
experiences    to examine     MAP,    as  they    were  instantiated   over  time and   across a variety    of members     and
mentoring relationships. For that purpose, we randomly pulled 20 percent of the field notes (n = 58) from the
larger field note   archive    (n  = 284)  to use   for further   analyses.  Our  analysis indicates   that this  was a  fairly
representative    sample   of  the range   of literacy  events   that  took place at the Clubhouse     during  this time.  For
example,  the   number     of  field notes   that contained  Scratch    events constituted   59.5%   of the  total  field note
archive (n = 169) and constituted 58.6% of the random sample (n = 34). Data was coded primarily by the first
author and an outside coder and discussed at weekly research meetings. If disagreement existed on the meaning
or application of codes, we debated differences until consensus was reached on 100% of the data coded.

                                                                                                                                   2-
         Table 1. Table of Media Arts Practices by Event Type.

              MEDIA                                                                                                       Percent of   Number
              ARTS                                                                SAMPLE EXCERPT FROM                     Docs         of
              PRACTICES       EVENT TYPE        DEFINITION                        THE FIELD NOTES                                      Events
              Technical       Programming      Practice of computer               Chandelle... finally found the          28% (16)     28
              Practices of                     programming (e.g., use of          "glide" command and got really
              Production                       loops, conditional statements,     exited explaining to me what it was.
                                               user-interface design, etc.)       (02/09/06)
                              Debugging        Practice of persisting when        She got an error message...  I came     22% (13)     25
                                               confronted with technical          over to her and explained that she
                                               problems either prior to or        needed to first open the
                                               during production.                 application... She looked for the
                                                                                  Scratch shortcut on the desktop, but
                                                                                  couldn't find it. (01/19/06)
                              Repurposing      Practice of reusing earlier        Kaylee asked me, "Do you know           14% (8)      13
                                               ideas or chunks of materials to    how to copy scripts to another
                                               build upon in a single or in       Sprite by dragging them there?"...
                                               multiple works.                    She then demonstrated this a
                                                                                  couple times. (05/22/05)

              Creative        Making           Practice of learning about,        Darlene said..."Look cousin! I am       21% (12)     21
              Practices of    Artistic         appreciating, and applying         going to draw a house, a red
              Production      Choices          artistic principles within a       house." (02/01/05)
                                               single modality, including
                                               choosing objects' color, size,
                                               and movement.

                              Connecting       Practice of learning about,        [Alejandra] had an image of             22% (13)     28
                              Multimodal       appreciating, and designing        Scooby Doo and was working on
                              Sign Systems     interrelations within and          making it change colors and say
                                               across multiple modalities         "Happy early birthday"... she had
                                               (images, word, and action).        added a long message... and made
                                                                                  the whole image change colors
                                                                                  gradually with the "change color
                                                                                  by effect" command. (02/01/05)
              Critical        Observing and    Careful observation by youth       I asked [Jorge] how he made the         10% (6)      9
              Practices of    Deconstructing   looking more closely at            sketches for the animations (he had
              Production      Media            everyday objects and               approximately 3 sheets full of
                                               deconstructing texts.              drawings depicting how the
                                                                                  characters should look in each
                                                                                  frame of animation).  He said, "I
                                                                                  play the game, and draw it based
                                                                                  on that." (02/05)
                              Evaluating &     Practice of peers deciding         The other mentors and                   21% (12)     21
                              Reflecting       what constitutes a good            members...made comments like
                              (AKA             product.                           "whoa that knight just did a sneak
                              Critique)                                           attack" or "dang that's awesome!"
                                                                                  [when they were viewing the
                                                                                  Ashley's dragon project].
                                                                                  (05/16/06)

                              Referencing,     The practices of creating          I asked him what he wanted to           21% (12)     19
                              Reworking &      original works that make           make and he told me that he liked
                              Remixing         knowing reference to previous      that popular radio hip-hop/pop
                                               works. Wholly original work        song, "Lonely" by Akon.
                                               produced as art fall into the      (06/02/05)
                                               category of playable art and
                                               are excluded from this
                                               category.

       The Multiple Literacies of Media Arts Practices
                       For members of the Clubhouse community, Media Arts are enacted as a set of interconnected literacy
         practices     that are a mix    of established  literacies,   ranging   from traditional,      to  visual,    to media    literacies and
         technology fluencies. Although it's somewhat artificial to separate and dissect their practices and map them onto
         traditional understandings, much can be learned from this undertaking, such as observing how the entire ecology
         of MAP fits together and how youth not only engage in technical and creative practices but these practices can
         also intertwine in interesting ways with critical practices. The collection of practices presented in this section of
         the paper is a starting point to give the reader a feel for the complexity and range of MAP that have developed at

2-2
this particular Clubhouse over the past three years. It's important to note that not all designers partake in all of
these practices,  and   even  central  participants  engage   in  these     practices  unevenly.   In the following  summary
table, the number of field notes from the random sample containing at least one node with each of the practices
examined in this study is recorded below (see Table 1).
          Overall, youth seem to most frequently engage in the technical practices of production. We envision
that some of these technical practices of production form a foundation for legitimate participation in the Media
Arts  activities (i.e., opening   and  exploring   Scratch   and   then   saving   a  project file are fundamental   to  being
counted and included in our boundaries for constituting participation in this community). Creative and critical
practices seemed to stay relatively constant with no discernible trends over the course of the study. However,
there is some indication that these practices became more culturally engraved over time and we would like to
point out  three  longitudinal    trends  that will be  highlighted      in the corresponding    discussion  on  the multiple
literacies of MAP.   First, both debugging events and technical practices seemed to decrease over time. The trend
for the meta-category, technical practices of production, seems to be driven primarily by debugging events as
programming      events  actually  demonstrated     an upward     trend   in the   field, indicating  that programming      was
becoming a more frequent activity.

Discussion
          The complex array of illustrations, findings, and analyses that were presented here were a first effort to
articulate what MAP are within the context of a particular setting. We found that youth were engaged in wide
range of literacy practices--across what we might conventionally categorize as visual literacy, media literacy
and  technology   fluencies--that     youth  interwove    in interesting    ways   as  they produced   Media   Art.  Technical
practices were   perhaps     the  most  frequently  documented        and   ranged   from   repurposing,   programming,     and
debugging   events.     When   youth   were   engaged   in   these technical     practices,   they were   learning  about   and
demonstrating a range of technology fluencies. Secondly, creative practices were important to youth as they
learned to communicate through multimodal forms of text and engage in personally meaningful and expressive
work. These practices overlapped and extended what we know about youths' engagement in visual literacy to
include a broader array of semiotic texts in their Media Arts projects. Lastly, youth also engaged in critical
practices that would resonate with multiple fields, but especially with the goals of media education. The MAP
framework presented earlier (Figure 1) provided a comprehensive way to describe and better understand the
multiple  literacies    that youth    are already   engaging   in     at the    Computer    Clubhouse.    Youth  learn   about
programming, debugging computer problems, how to talk about and critique their work and the work of others,
how to reference and remix popular culture texts, and how to use technology towards creative and expressive
ends.
          Given that this study aimed to build our conceptual understanding of the new field of Media Arts, it's
worth pausing to reflect on the limitations of the study and, largely, of creative production in an informal site. In
particular, what types of events or general practices were noticeably absent from this local community? The
notion of developmentally appropriate practices (Sawyer, 2006) is significant as we think about the range of
practices to encourage in this setting. For example, the differences that exist between professional Media Artists
and youth on the valuing of popular culture are an important distinction. Although the findings from this study
suggest that drawing on popular culture texts is key to entrance and persistence in MAP, this may get lost in
future curriculum designs. After all, youth are not vying to become professionals, per se ­ which is also true for
youth engaging in a broader range of practices, like science ­ they are vying to become recognized members of
their local community. However, striving for recognition is common to both context of youth and professionals,
while what  is   valued  in  each   community     clearly varies.  In    addition, there  are  some   practices that could  be
further stimulated or encouraged in formal or informal contexts. For example, systematic reflection, thinking
about and explaining the creative process was not a common practice rooted in the Clubhouse community. This
would be the equivalent to the critique process in the arts classroom. When asked, youth are able to discuss their
work  and  the   work    of  others   but this practice   wasn't   a  formal    part  of  the Clubhouse    community.    As  a
consequence,     youth   are  learning    the  language    of Scratch       but not    perhaps  the   language  of   computer
programming, the arts or media that would be used in more formal or expert/novice discussions of the work. For
example,  youth   commonly        use words   like Sprite,   scripts, and    background     because   they are  labeled  in the
software but don't adopt other terms like perspective, warm and cool colors, loops, conditionals, etc. from the
fields that are very much in line with their work. We have to wonder what impact this might have as we expect
these types of skills to transfer outside of the Clubhouse community.
          Literacy practices as a theoretical framework, in particularly the MAP framework presented here, have
utility for revealing the limitations of current research in new literacy studies. Prior research often focuses in
certain types  of literacies   in  isolation  from  others   (for example,      visual literacy as  isolated from   traditional
literacy, media literacy, technology fluency, etc.), while youth--especially those in this study--operate without
recognition of these distinctions. The shortcomings of this perspective are that we miss out on the opportunity to
cultivate relationships      with other   subject  areas  across   the   schooling     curriculum.    By  contrast,  the MAP

                                                                                                                                   2-
        f framework is the first effort to think about how youth engage in multiple literacies rooted in different disciplines
         during the process of media arts production. On a more practical level, this study suggests that several aspects of
         informal learning environments may be important as we think of bridging youths' after-school literacy practices
         into school   settings. Important     design considerations   include   the role  of  individual choice  of project   in the
         curriculum; the role of having ready access to mentors ­ at least on an occasional basis; the role of creating a
         school culture  that   allows  for  liberal  offerings of  peer assistance;   and  the role  of  working  across   software
         applications as schools generally focus on advocating a single software (at least it encourages serial exploration)
         instead of allowing youth to move across different types of software to explore which tools can be combined or
         are  best given   a certain    objective.   Furthermore,   schools  are still preparing   youth   to read and    write   only
         traditional types of text, while MAP values learning to author multimodal texts. With regard to the specific
         implications for Media Literacy Studies, the MAP framework discussed in this paper provides a wide array of
         teaching  and  learning     opportunities    for educators  to  capitalize    on  in  the classroom.  Depending       on the
         educational goals and pedagogical framework, Media Arts production provides a context for learning about new
         technologies and for questioning popular media. More specifically, Media Arts production can be used as a
         springboard   for  critical engagement      and  reflection on  reading    and   writing  multimodal  texts in    the media
         education classroom.
                   We see Media Arts as an emerging discipline that can expand research and practice in the fields of the
         Learning Sciences, Literacy Studies and Arts Education. The Learning Sciences, since its initial conception,
         have  been  an  interdisciplinary     field dedicated  to  discussing issues   that  impact  learning  or are affected    by
         learning in order to affect educational outcomes (Kolodner, 1991). Over the last 16 years, an impressive body of
         research has been built up, describing learning and teaching processes in science and mathematics classrooms.
         This research  has  documented      learning  in   real-world situations;  proposed   alternative  teaching strategies   and
         alternative educational environments based on what we know about learning; reported on experimental work in
         the field; provided new conceptual or theoretical models of learning; and posed new methodologies, among a
         host of other research contributions (Sawyer, 2006). While impressive progress has been made, there are still
         noticeable  absences    (Goetz,   2007).    For  example,   studies on  new    technologies    and   particularly computer
         programming have a long history within the learning sciences, whereas media studies and the arts have been
         virtually absent. Our work seeks to fill these gaps in the learning sciences research literature in at least three key
         ways. First, this study is one of the initial investigations into new literacies from a learning science perspective.
         Second,   the focus  here   is on  the arts  as  a subject matter   rather  than  investigating  new  literacies  within the
         context of science and math, which have a longer history in the field of learning sciences. Media arts have had a
         longstanding relationship with the sciences, enabling researchers to envision and model complex ideas to shape
         the field and theoretical understandings in significant ways. And third, this study has investigated MAP in the
         context of what urban youth are already doing in informal learning settings, which responds to the call for more
         research on marginalized youth.

       References
         Barton, A. C., & Rivet, A. (2004). Urban Girls' Science Practices. Teachers College, Columbia University:
                   National Science Foundation.
         Barton, D., & Hamilton, M. (2000). Literacy Practices. In D. Barton, M. Hamilton & R. Ivanic (Eds.), Situated
                   Literacies: Reading and Writing in Context (pp. 7-15). London: Routledge.
         Buckingham,    D.   (2003).    Media   Education:   Literacy,  learning   and  contemporary     culture. Cambridge,      UK:
                   Polity Press.
         Creswell, J. W. (2003). Research Design: Qualitative, Quantitative, and Mixed Methods. Thousand Oaks, CA:
                   Sage Publications, Inc.
         Erickson, F. (1979). Talking down: Some cultural sources of miscommunication in interracial interviews. In A.
                   Wolfgang (Ed.), Nonverbal behavior: Applications and cultural implications, Academic Press, New
                   York, NY, 99-126.
         Gallagher, L. (2006). Assessing Youth Impact of the Computer Clubhouse Network: 2005 Year-End Report.
                   Menlo Park, CA: SRI International.
         Goetz, E.T. (2007). The Sciences of Learning: The Foundations for the School of Tomorrow? PsycCRITIQUES,
                   52(3), Article 15.
         Greenaway, P. (2001). Media and Arts Education: A Global View from Australia. In R. Kubey (Ed.), Media
                   Literacy  in  the Information     Age:   Current  Perspectives    (vol. 6), New   Brunswick,    NJ: Transaction
                   Publishers, 187-198.
         Hagood,   M.  C.,  Stevens,    L. P., & Reinking,    D. (2002).  What   do    THEY    Have  to  Teach US?   Talkin'   'Cross
                   Generations! In D. E. Alvermann (Ed.), Adolescents and Literacies in a Digital World. New York:
                   Peter Lang Publishing.
         Kafai, Y., Peppler, K. & Chiu, G. (2007). High Tech Programmers in Low-Income Communities: Creating a
                   Computer Culture in a Community Technology Center. In C. Steinfeld, B. Pentland, M. Ackermann &

2-
         N.  Contractor (Eds.), Communities   and Technologies    2007: Proceedings  of the Third   International
         Conference on Communities and Technologies Conference. New York: Springer.
Kelleher, C.  &  Pausch,   R. (2005).  Lowering   the barriers to  programming: a   taxonomy  of  programming
         environments and languages for novice programmers. ACM Computing Surveys, 37(2), 88-137.
Kolodner, J. (1991). Editorial: "The Journal of the Learning Sciences": Effecting Changes in Education. The
         Journal of the Learning Sciences 1(1), 1-6.
Kress, G. & van Leeuwen, T. (1996). Reading Images: The grammar of visual design, London: Routledge.
Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge, England:
         Cambridge University Press.
Maeda, J. (2004). Creative Code. New York: Thames & Hudson Inc.
Moje, E. B. (2000). "To Be Part of the Story": The Literacy Practices of Gangsta Adolescents. Teachers College
         Record, 102(3), 651-690.
Nixon, H. (2003). New research literacies for contemporary research into literacy and new media? Reading
         Research Quarterly, 38(3), 407-413.
National  Research Council    (1999). Being   Fluent with Information   Technology. Washington,   DC:  National
         Academy Press.
Palincsar, A. S. & Ladewski, B. G. (2006). Literacy and the Learning Sciences. In R. K. Sawyer (Ed.), The
         Cambridge Handbook of the Learning Sciences (pp. 299-314NRC). New York: Cambridge University
         Press.
Papert, S., & Resnick, M. (1993). Technological Fluency and the Representation of Knowledge, Proposal to the
         National Science Foundation: MIT Media Laboratory.
Paul, C. (2003). Digital Art. London: Thames & Hudson.
Peppler,  K. (2007). Creative   Bytes: Literacy and   Learning  in the  Media  Arts Practices of Urban  Youth.
         Unpublished dissertation. UCLA: Los Angeles.
Peppler, K., & Kafai, Y. (2007). From SuperGoo to Scratch: exploring creative digital media production in
         informal learning. Learning, Media, and Technology, 32(2), 149-166.
Reas, C. (2006). Media Literacy: twenty-first century arts education. AI & Society, 20(4), 444­445.
Reinking, D., Labbo, L., & McKenna, M. (1997). Navigating the Changing Landscape of Literacy: Current
         Theory and Research in Computer-Based Reading and Writing. In J. Flood, S. B. Heath & D. Lapp
         (Eds.), Research on Teaching Literacy through the Communicative and Visual Arts (pp. 77-89). New
         York: International Reading Association.
Resnick, M., Kafai, Y., & Maeda, J. (2003). ITR: A Networked, Media-Rich Programming Environment to
         Enhance   Technological      Fluency  at    After-School  Centers  in  Economically     Disadvantaged
         Communities: Proposal submitted to National Science Foundation.
Resnick, M., Rusk, N., & Cooke, S. (1998). The Computer Clubhouse: Technological Fluency in the Inner City.
         In  D. Schon,  B. Sanyal  &   W. Mitchell   (Eds.), High  Technology  and  Low-Income    Communities.
         Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Sawyer, R. K. (2006). Introduction: The New Science of Learning. In R. K. Sawyer (Ed.), The Cambridge
         Handbook of the Learning Sciences (pp. 1-16). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Scribner, S., & Cole, M. (1981). The Psychology of Literacy. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Thorne, B. (1993). Gender Play: Girls and Boys in School. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press.

Acknowledgments
This study draws on observation and Media Artifact data collected as part of a larger research project funded by
the National Science Foundation (NSF-0325828), involving the development and implementation of a media-
rich programming environment in the Computer Clubhouse network (Resnick, Kafai, & Maeda, 2003; Kafai,
Peppler, & Chiu, 2007). This work was supported by a dissertation year fellowship from the Spencer Foundation
to Kylie Peppler as well as a grant from the National Science Foundation (NSF-0325828: Resnick, Kafai &
Maeda) to Yasmin Kafai and was conducted in collaboration with Mitchel Resnick's research group at the MIT
Media Lab.

                                                                                                                    2-
