                           Students' Analysis of Multiple Sources
                             for Agreements and Disagreements
         Flori H. Manning, Susan R. Goldman, Yasuhiro Ozuru, Kimberly A. Lawless, Kimberley Gomez,
            Jason Braasch, University of Illinois at Chicago, 1007 W. Harrison St., Chicago, IL 60607
     Email: fhung2@uic.edu, sgoldman@uic.edu, yasozuru@uic.edu, klawless@uic.edu, kimwillg@uic.edu,
                                                  jbraasch@uic.edu

          Abstract:  Students     analyzed  the similarities (agreements)      and differences  (disagreements)
          between a set of two sources regarding why the authors thought Chicago had become a big
          city. The  data   we    discuss provide descriptive   information    on   three aspects   of students'
          responses: (1) the response strategies they used, (2) how they would characterize agreement
          and disagreement across two sources, and (3) the rhetorical form of their written responses.
          Students' responses for Agree were more consistent than those to Disagree and, as expected,
          were related to the specific sources they compared.

Introduction & Theoretical Background
          Several trends indicate the need to better understand how people make sense of information that occurs
in multiple sources. The demands of the global knowledge society in which we live coupled with the             abundance
of information available in digital media imply that successful functioning on a personal as well as professional
level involves   being able  to   analyze and   synthesize across sources    (Goldman,    2004;  Goldman    et al., 2007).
Likewise, the increased emphasis on including developmentally appropriate forms of disciplinary practices in
formal educational contexts leads to greater emphasis on understanding how students think across sources of
information  (e.g,   National  Research    Council,  2005).  There    is a  body   of research   on  the  multiple  source
comprehension skills of adults (e.g., Perfetti, Britt, & Georgi, 1995), but far less is known about the multiple
source comprehension skills of children. The research presented takes an initial step into understanding multiple
source comprehension and its development by exploring one component of multiple source comprehension ­
analysis and synthesis ­ in the domain of history at the middle school level. We asked students to compare pairs
of documents, a task that involves analysis of content within and across documents. This descriptive study is
part  of a  larger project   that is developing   and researching   an   evidence-centered-design      assessment   system
(Mislevy,   Steinberg, &     Almond,    2003) for multiple   source   comprehension       in science   as well as   history
(Goldman et al., 2007).

Multiple Source Comprehension
          Though few in number, existing studies of adolescents' comprehension of multiple sources indicate that
competency in this area is fledgling at best for youngsters 10 to 15 years of age. In one study, Golder and Rouet
(2000, reported in Rouet, 2006) examined the difference between 6th and 8th graders' understanding of texts that
provided conflicting accounts of a controversial event. Students' descriptions of this event indicated that sixth graders
had a particularly difficult time with this task: Only 17% of the students mentioned either both sides of the argument
or the parties holding the conflicting points of view in their response. Sixth graders either provided only one argument
(33%) or did not provide a response at all (33%). In contrast, 56.7% of 8th grade students provided both sides of the
argument. These results suggest developmental differences in multiple source comprehension skills between students
at the 6th and 8th grade levels, and are consistent with work by Golder and Coirier (1994), that showed that adolescents
have difficulty using counterarguments. However, we do not have information on the learning experiences that might
contribute to these differences between the 6th and 8th graders' performances. Generally, students in the United States
have limited opportunities to engage with multiple sources.
          There have been several studies that have created opportunities for 10 to 15 year olds to engage with
multiple sources that relate historical events (e.g., Goldman, 2004; Goldman & Bloom, 2004; Bain, 2005; Lee,
2005;  Levstick    & Barton,   1997;  VanSledright,   2002b,   2004).    This  research  is  informative  with respect  to
adolescents'    orientations to   sense making   when  working    with     the different  kinds  of  sources with   which
historians deal. In one study (Wolfe & Goldman, 2005), 6th graders read two accounts of the Fall of Rome that
were attributed to two historians. They analyzed the similarities and differences in the accounts, and then were
asked  to  provide   their own    explanation for why  Rome     fell. The   results indicated   that those  students  who
generated causal self-explanations of the second text as they read--using prior knowledge, information from
earlier points in the text, and information provided in the first text--provided more complex accounts in their
own   explanations.  This   work   provides  support  for  the idea   that adolescents   are capable   of processing  and
reasoning about the relationship of information across multiple sources and demonstrates that having students
engage   in multiple   source   comprehension    may  foster   deeper    understanding    of the historical  event. Other

                                                                                                                              2-
       investigators have created learning environments for fifth graders (10 year olds) up through 15 year olds in
       which the techniques of historical investigation are scaffolded through templates that ask students to indicate the
       type of source, the author, possible biases of the author, the main claim of the source, and the evidence for the
       claim (VanSledright,  2002a;   Lee,  2005;  Levstick   &  Barton,    1997). These   templates act as   scaffolds in the
       context of whole group and small group instruction regarding the reading and interpretation of documents of
       different types and considerations of sourcing.

       The Present Investigation
               The   present investigation   seeks to gain   a  better  understanding  of  how  10   to 12 year-old  children
       comprehend multiple sources of information. The evidence-centered-design approach we are following requires:
       the detailed specification of    the knowledge    and   skills that  constitute the  phenomenon     in question;  what
       performances    would provide    evidence of  it; and   what   tasks would   elicit such performances.     As we  have
       specified it, components of multiple source comprehension include the analysis and synthesis of more than one
       text, and the comparison of at least two texts. In a study of college students, Wiley and Voss (1999) found that a
       two-text presentation format supported greater sense making than presenting the same information as one long
       text. The two-text format may be viewed as a form of contrasting cases, the presentation of which has been
       shown to help college students generate the type of relational thinking that enables them to understand content
       information  at a deeper level   (Schwartz  &  Bransford,  1998).    Wolfe  and  Goldman's    (2005)   study  discussed
       above is one of the only we know of that has explicitly asked 11 and 12 years olds to decide if two accounts of
       an event are in agreement or not. In the present study we wanted to investigate the comparison process for two
       source documents, each reflecting different kinds of sources one might encounter in doing historical inquiry.
               We   investigated  these  issues in the   context of   a history inquiry  question that  we    had investigated
       previously (Goldman et al., 2007): "Why did Chicago become a big city?"         The sources developed for that work
       included primary sources (e.g., a personal letter, a newspaper editorial from the early 1900s) and secondary
       sources (e.g., a text book passage on the growth of railroads, information from a website on immigration to
       Chicago over the period from 1830 to 1970). We selected four sources for use in the present study and presented
       students with a pair of them. Students were asked to analyze the similarities and differences in why the authors
       of the sources thought Chicago had become a big city.      In the present paper we provide descriptive information
       with respect to three aspects of students' approaches to this task. In particular, we were interested in (1) the
       response strategies they used, (2) how they would characterize agreement and disagreement across two sources,
       and (3) the rhetorical form of their written responses. For each aspect, we examined the impact of the specific
       source pairing.

      Method
       Participants
               Participants were 66 5th and 6th grade students (ranging between the ages of 10 and 12 years), all of
       whom attended one of three schools in a large, urban, public school system in the Midwest USA. The study was
       conducted as part of their normal social studies instruction in their intact classrooms.

       Task Materials and Procedure
               Each student received a pair of sources. The first source in the pair was an anchor text, dated 1975, that
       described immigration to Chicago from 1830-1970. It was attributed to a historian and stated that (1) Europeans,
       Mexicans, and    African  Americans    came   to  Chicago    seeking  jobs,  good   pay, and   steady   work,  and  (2)
       immigrants sought to improve their economic and living conditions in Chicago. Three different pairs of sources
       were  constructed  by following   the  anchor  text  with one    of  three sources.  Approximately     one-third of the
       students received each text set.
               Each set provided different opportunities for students to notice similarities and differences between the
       two sources.

       Set A Pairing
               The second source in Set A was a personal letter dated 1918 from an African-American woman living
       in Macon, Georgia   to a  church  in  Chicago.    In the letter, she says   why  she wants  to   leave Georgia   (unfair
       treatment by whites, difficulty finding equal-paying jobs) and asked for assistance in finding a job in Chicago.
       In this pairing of texts the details of the primary source (Source 2) corroborate some of claims made in the
       anchor text.

       Set B Pairing
               The second source in Set B was an account by a railroad industry expert, dated 2000, of the role of the
       railroad industry in the growth of Chicago. It opened with reasons that investors found Chicago attractive as a

2-20
railroad hub. The account mentions large growth in Chicago's population following the opening of the railroad
system. Overlap between the anchor source and the railroad source is indirect, requiring inferences about jobs
that railroads offer or transportation enabling people to easily get to Chicago.

Set C Pairing
          The second source in Set C was an editorial dated 1925 that advocated the Chicago stockyards as the
best place for immigrants to work. The author, Michael Armour of Armour Meats describes how working in the
stockyards benefits immigrants and their families because the pay is fair, regular, and all members of the family
could be employed. Like the Set A pairing, the editorial in Set C corroborates information in the anchor text.

Eliciting Comparisons across Sources
          Students were instructed to read each text, and then using the two texts, they were to respond to two
written prompts. Specifically, students were told to "read about what two authors think about why Chicago
became a big city. They agree on some things and disagree on others." We used the terms agree and disagree as
age-appropriate "stand ins" for the corroboration process that historians engage in when creating accounts of
historical events (e.g., Wineburg, 1994). Given our purpose ­ a descriptive exploratory study of        how   10 ­ 12
year olds' compare and contrast two sources ­ we needed prompts that would focus students on similarities and
differences in content. In previous work, Wolfe and Goldman (2005) found that terms such as "alike and not
alike"  and   "similar and  dissimilar"  seemed    to focus  students on  physical  properties  of the   actual texts
themselves.   The "agree"  and   "disagree"  prompts   seemed  to  be a  reasonable approach    to eliciting  content
comparisons.
          Students wrote their answers to the first prompt and then to the second. Presentation of the prompts
was counterbalanced across subjects, with approximately 50% receiving the "agree" prompt first and 50% the
"disagree" prompt within each set. The pairs of sources were present throughout the task, and students were told
to  use them  in writing their responses.   Students  had 45  minutes to  complete  the  task. On  average,  students
completed the task in 35 minutes.

Data Analyses and Findings
          The goal of the data analyses was to characterize students' written responses to the agree and to the
disagree prompts with respect to three coding schemes corresponding to our main questions: (1) the response
strategies students adopted for comparing the two texts,   (2) the kinds of comparisons they constructed for agree
as compared to disagree, as well as the impact of the specific text set on these responses, and (3) the rhetorical
form of the written responses. Each coding scheme was developed using the method of constant comparison and
iterating until  two coders agreed    on a  final set of  coding categories. Then   the  two   coders   independently
categorized each participant's written response to the two prompts. All student responses were scored by each
coder. Agreements ranged from 74% to 93% across the three coding schemes. Disagreements among coders
were resolved in discussion. We describe the coding scheme and the results of applying it for each of the three
questions.

Students' Response Strategies
          The coding scheme for response strategy provided a general indication of the overall response to the
prompt. It differentiated among responses that did indeed reflect comparison of the two sources as compared to
summaries of one or both of the texts and determined whether the response matched what the prompt asked for,
i.e., students included agreements for the agree prompt and disagreements for the disagree prompt.
          The  dominant  response  strategy  was   Comparison:   71%   of the   students responded    to both  of the
prompts with points of agreement between the two sources for the agree prompt or disagreements between them
for the  disagree prompt.  An  additional   12%   of  the students engaged   in a Summary      strategy and  provided
summaries   of  the  information  contained  within  each  source. The  remaining  students'   responses  reflected a
variety of  other approaches   to the  task but none  were  exhibited  by more    than 2 or 3  students.  This  Other
category included: supplying mixed points of agreement and disagreement in a response, discussing their own
opinions of agreement or disagreement in reaction to the source texts, describing only points of agreement for
the Disagree   Response,  and  listing only  negative  events (the "bad"  things  that happened)   for   the Disagree
Response. There were minimal differences between the sets of sources regarding the percentages of students
demonstrating Comparison responses for both the agree and disagree prompts: Set A: 68%; Set B: 65%; and Set
C: 81%.
          We also examined how many comparisons students stated for agree and for disagree prompts. A two
variable (agree or disagree prompt; set A, B or C) ANOVA indicated main effects of prompt and of set, with no
interaction. Students made more comparisons to the agree prompt (M = 2.61) than to the disagree (M = 1.53), F
(1,63) = 16.7, p, < .01. The pairs of sources that included the personal letter (A) or the stockyards editorial (C)
produced more comparisons (M = 2.32 and M = 2.48) than the pair that included the railroad hub source (B) (M

                                                                                                                        2-2
       = 1.41).   The   absence   of  an interaction   indicates  that these   trends held  for both the   agree  and  the disagree
       prompts.
                We    interpret  these   results as indicating   that  the agree  and  disagree   prompts  evoked    a comparative
       process  for   the  majority   of students   and   that agreements    were  easier  to  generate than  disagreements.    We
       expected that points of disagreement would be more difficult for students to identify because there were no
       explicit disagreements between the sources in any of the pairings. With respect to the source pairings, the two in
       which the sources had explicit content overlap yielded more points of comparison than the pairing in which
       there was less obvious content overlap. The characteristics of the actual comparisons indicate the content and
       aspects of the sources that were compared and the rhetorical form in which the comparisons were made. We
       describe   the two   prompts   separately    since for  both  content   and  rhetorical  form the   response  patterns  were
       different.

      Content of Students' Comparisons: Agree Prompt
                The responses of the 49 (76%) students who provided comparisons to the agree prompt were coded as
       Corroborations      or Inferred   Corroborations    of  information   across   the  two sources. (Note   that an   individual
       student could receive credit for each of these since students made multiple comparisons.) Ninety-six percent of
       the students   who     made   agree  comparisons      provided    Corroborations,   and  67%   percent   provided   Inferred
       Corroborations. Within the Inferred Corroboration category were two sub-categories of responses: Plausible
       and Implausible. Plausible Inferred Corroborations refer to student responses that appeared to make logical
       inferences based on the content of the two sources. Implausible Inferred Corroborations refer to those responses
       for which student responses did not exhibit relevant ties about or between the two sources. Of those Agree
       Responses that contained Inferred Corroborations, 82% exhibited comparisons that were Plausible, while 39%
       exhibited  comparisons     that   were Implausible,     a statistically significant difference   (Z test for  differences in
       proportions    = 4.12,  p  <  .01). Table  1  summarizes      the content  characteristics of the   responses   to the agree
       prompt.

       Table 1: Comparison Characterizations for Agree and Disagree Responses.a

       Response Type          Comparison Category                     Responses Containing Comparison
       Agree                  Corroboration                           96%
                              Inferred Corroboration                  67%
                                -     Plausible                       82%    of responses containing Inferred Corroboration
                                -     Implausible                     39%
       Disagree               Conflicting Information                 4%
                              Part-Whole                              18%
                              Sourcing                                8%
                              Different-But-Neutral                   78%
                                -     Theme/Main Idea                 45%    of responses containing Different-But-Neutral
                                -     Other                           63%
       aA student's response could be credited with multiple forms of comparison so percentages add to more than
       100%.

                The three sets of pairings behaved similarly for Corroborations: For set A, 100% of the students who
       made comparisons provided corroboration; for B, 93% and for C, 94%. There was some variation across sets
       with respect     to Inferred   Corroboration.     With    the  railroad text   (Set B),  a lower    proportion  of  students
       responded with Inferred Corroborations (53%) compared to 82% of students who did so for Set A and 65% of
       students who did so for Set C. Also notable is the difference in the proportion of Plausible versus Implausible
       Inferred Corroborations across sets. Data from Set B reveal equal proportions of Plausible and Implausible
       instances of Inferred Corroboration, whereas these proportions for both Sets A and C display proportionately
       higher amounts of Plausible versus Implausible Inferred Corroborations (86% to 36% for Set A; 100% to 36%
       for Set  C).   Not  only   did students   using   Set B   provide   fewer  instances  of Inferred   Corroboration   in  their
       responses,  but  those   who   did  provided    a higher  proportion    of comparisons   for  which  their inferences   were
       Implausible.
                Inferred    Corroborations    are   of particular  interest  for  multiple source   comprehension      because they
       suggest that students constructed new understandings about the growth of Chicago, at least in some cases. That
       is, it appeared that the analytic comparison of the two sources created the occasion for an inference that likely
       would not have been made if students had only read one of the sources or had not been explicitly asked to
       compare them. For example, a student responding to the Set A sources provided the following comparison:
       "they agree b/c Chicago has immigrants from lots of crontris. And Jullian want to be a immigrant from Macon,
       Georgia. So Chicago and Jullia want to immigrant and Chicago want to have immigrants. [sic]" This response

2-22
reflects a synthesis of information across the two sources: The connection was made between the immigrants
coming to Chicago to find work (anchor source) and Jillian Adams, the author of the personal letter (second
source in Set A). Nowhere in the letter was the word "immigrant" used. The student successfully applied a
concept from Source 1 to an instance of it in Source 2. Other responses indicated inferences that generalized
across  details  in the  two sources.  For   example,     the comparison   statement  "They   agree on  giving   money  2
chicago so people can have better jobs [sic]" generalizes from information about job opportunities in the anchor
text  and  financial investments    in Chicago     as a   railroad hub  (Source  2 in Set  B).  These  data  suggest   the
hypothesis that multiple source comparison may be a vehicle for deepening students' reasoning and depth of
understanding (cf. Perfetti, Britt, & Georgi, 1995).
          There was a low frequency of inclusion of inaccurate information in the responses to the Agree prompt,
6%   of students.   These   were coded    as inferences    from    the textbase that were  distortions of the  presented
information. No students responded with information that actually disagreed across the sources.

Content of Students' Comparisons: Disagree Prompt
          Although there were fewer comparisons generated to the disagree prompt than to the agree prompt,
there was a greater variety in the types of comparisons that students made. Trends for the disagree responses
were similar across the three sets of sources (see Table 1), with one exception discussed below.
          The dominant response category for the disagree prompt was Different-But-Neutral: 78% of students
had at least one of their disagree comparisons in this category. This category reflects the presence of some
information in one source that is simply not in the other. For example, some students' indicated that one source
mentioned a topic, such as poor working conditions in the South, but the other source did not say anything about
working conditions in the South. The Different-But-Neutral category included two sub-categories: Theme/Main
Idea (e.g., "The one was about railroads; the other was about immigration.") (exhibited by 45% of those who
responded in this category), and Other details (63% of these responses). Disagree comparisons that pointed out
Conflicting Information (4%), Sourcing (8%), and Part-Whole (18%) were far less common than Different-But-
Neutral. Conflicting Information refers to what students perceived as explicit conflicts of information between
the two sources. Sourcing refers to comparisons made with respect to details about the two sources (e.g., "Also
one is a letter and the other one looks like it got typed on the computer."). Part-Whole refers to comparisons that
highlighted the set-subset or set-superset relationship of points in each source (e.g., working in the stockyards
versus working in Chicago).
          There were interesting differences among the three sets of source pairs in the Different-but-Neutral
category. For Set B, 94% of students provided Different-But-Neutral responses, whereas these percentages were
less in Set A (60%) and Set (C (67%). Furthermore, of the Different-But-Neutral responses, for Set B, 69% of
comparisons fell under the Theme/Main Idea subcategory (immigration versus railroads). Main idea contrasts
were  less frequent   in Set A   (33%)  and   Set  C  (23%).    These   data suggest that students  were  attuned   to the
differences in the main ideas of the pairs of sources between their sets and did make comparisons on this basis.
The pairings in Sets A and C differed more in terms of the generality (anchor text) versus specificity (personal
letter and stockyard editorial) of information about living conditions and jobs.
          The   anticipated  greater difficulty of    the Disagree   as  compared  to the  Agree comparison      was   also
reflected in the frequency with which responses included points on which the sources disagreed at the surface
level  but at    a  deeper   interpretive level    actually   agreed.   These   instances  were  classified   as Surface
Disagreements, or misreadings/misinterpretations of the source. To illustrate, one student wrote, "The frist one
said you get paid don't mater if your black or white. They second author said because you don't get paid if your
black you got to be white. [sic]" The student noted this as a disagreement based on the surface text stating in the
anchor text (first case) that you got paid regardless of color and in the second (personal       letter) that the pay you
got   depended on color. What the student failed to take into account was the perspective of the author of the
personal  letter as  an  individual  living  in the   South   and  experiencing  exactly  the condition  that moving    to
Chicago held promise of correcting. Across all Comparison responses for the disagree prompt, 12% of students
provided   Surface   Disagreements,    with  Surface     Disagreements    for Set  A  at  20%  and  for Set   C  at 18%.
Interestingly, there were no instances of Surface Disagreements in responses for Set B.
          In summary, there was less consistency in the kinds of information students included in response to
Disagree prompts as compared to Agree prompts, they made fewer comparisons, and there was some indication
of difficulty keeping    in mind  the  perspective    of  the source   when   making  the disagree  comparisons.    These
patterns must be interpreted with caution because the affordances of the sources were likely more conducive to
positive  comparisons    (agreements)   than    to negative    (disagreements).  We   also note  that  these  results  are
consistent with survey research findings that suggest that the processing of positive and negative item stems
may reflect two different constructs regarding the way people attend to information (Pilotte & Gable, 1990).

Rhetorical Form of Responses to Agree and Disagree Prompts

                                                                                                                               2-2
                For those students whose Response Strategy was Comparison, we categorized the rhetorical form. The
       written responses ranged from simple listings of text details to more elaborate structures that included multiple
       sentences  containing   an interleaved   statement  coupled    with  statements   about    each of the  two  sources that
       supported the interleaved thought. Lists sometimes took the form of bulleted items. Interleaved comparisons
       could have described either agreement or disagreement but in either case reflected analysis and synthesis across
       sources, as in "They    both  agree  that immigrants     needed   jobs."  Often   these Interleaved    comparisons   were
       accompanied    by  Sequential    comparisons   describing   what     each  source     said that led  to  the Interleaved
       comparison statement. Both Interleaved and Sequential statements could also have occurred by themselves as
       one comparison within a response.
                Analyses of the rhetorical structure of students' comparisons indicated differences between the Agree
       and  Disagree  responses.  As    the data in Table   2   show,  students   were   significantly  more   likely to  exhibit
       Interleaved forms for Agree (86%) than for Disagree (35%), Z = 4.88, p < .01; Sequential was significantly
       more likely for Disagree (67%) than for Agree (6%), Z = 9.73, p < .01; and Lists occurred about equally often.
       There were no notable differences across the sets on rhetorical form. These results make sense in that finding
       similarities among sources calls for identifying or constructing commonality between two things; this is a form
       of information synthesis. In contrast, noting differences probably requires greater explanation of precisely what
       the point of disagreement is, a conceptual challenge that is likely to require more elaborate explication, for
       which it makes good sense to point out how each of two things differ from each other.

       Table 2: Percentage of responses containing each type of rhetorical form.b

       Rhetorical Form                          Agree Prompt                              Disagree Prompt
       Interleaved                              86%                                       35%
       Sequential                               6%                                        67%
       Interleaved and   Sequential  in one     16%                                       10%
       comparison
       Lists only                               24%                                       22%
       bA student's response could be credited with multiple rhetorical forms so percentages add to more than 100%.

      Discussion
                Our interest in this study was to provide descriptive information on how students in the age range 10­
       12  approached  the  task  of comparing    two documents      that provided   information     relevant to addressing    the
       inquiry question "Why did Chicago become a big city?". We found that the majority of students were able to
       engage in comparisons across the source texts but that finding agreements seemed to be easier than finding
       disagreements. Characteristics of the response strategies, the content of the comparisons that were made, and the
       rhetorical forms that students used indicated differences associated with whether they were responding to an
       Agree prompt or a Disagree prompt. Differences in performance associated with the specific pairs of sources
       students worked with were not unexpected given the differences in content and type of source. We discuss both
       of these findings  in terms   of students'  interpretation  of the   task itself, and  the  degree  to which   the source
       pairings supported the identification of agreements and disagreements.

       Interpretation of the Task
                Interestingly, students   interpreted the   task  of  finding   where    the sources   agreed  and  where   they
       disagreed in ways that reflected a general sense of these terms as opposed to a narrower sense. Agree, which can
       be narrowly defined as "being of the same mind or opinion," appeared to have been understood by students in
       terms of sameness or similarity between the two source texts. Disagree, when narrowly defined, means "being
       in conflict, contradicting, opposing." Again, students' responses suggest a more general sense of disagree as the
       ways in which the two sources were different from each other. These broader or more general interpretations
       may have resulted from the demand characteristics of the task we presented to them. In brief, we asked them to
       find agreements and disagreements between the sources. Had we asked them IF there were any ways the sources
       agreed or  disagreed  ­ providing    the  explicit possibility of  a "no"  or "none"    response,   students might   have
       constrained their interpretation of the prompts. This speculation is consistent with the findings of Garcia-Arista,
       Campanario,   and  Otero   (1996):   high school   students used   the study  contexts,    or conditions  of the  task, to
       determine the standards and comprehension strategies they would employ.

       Interpretations of the Task and Affordances of the Sources
                It is also likely that the interpretation of the task emerged through students' efforts to carry out the task
       with the  specific sources   we  gave  them.   What   it meant   to  act  on the   instruction  to find agreements   and
       disagreements between these pairs of sources was ambiguous. We had intentionally designed the situation that
       way and had selected source pairings that would encourage wide interpretations of agree and disagree. Thus, as

2-2
we described earlier, two source pairs had overlap in surface text and one had far less. In the face of lack of
information in the surface text, some students may have adjusted their definitions of agree or disagree so they
could find something to write on the response sheet (cf. Mannes, 1994).
         More specifically, we designed the source pairings intentionally to reflect a range of explicitness with
respect to points of agreement so that we could detect whether students responded on the basis of surface text
characteristics or deeper  interpretive understanding.   The  source pairings each   provided   a  different set of
affordances that influenced how well students were able to comprehend across the two texts and how they were
able to enact the comparison task. Not surprisingly, students were most successful at constructing comparisons
of agreement and disagreement between the anchor text and the stockyard text. This pair contained the most
salient connections in that the anchor text described details surrounding the influx of immigrants and migrants to
Chicago, including jobs and good working conditions. Both job and working conditions ideas were reiterated in
the stockyards source. Thus, both of these sources emphasized information about immigrants, job opportunities,
good pay, and the chance to make a decent living in the city of Chicago. Students had the most difficulty finding
agreements between the anchor and the railroad sources, as might be expected since the main topics appeared to
be unrelated. For example, information about immigrants was not mentioned at all in the railroads source and
neither the anchor  nor the  railroad source  mentioned  the  importance of railroads  as  transportation from   the
South to Chicago. The major connection that students might make between these two sources is an implicit one:
that perhaps the rise and success of the railroad industry provided many of the job opportunities sought out by
immigrants  to  Chicago.  The middle    point in  terms  of content and  difficulty with  the task was the   Set A
condition.
         The style  with  which  a text  is written  can also  influence students'   reasoning  about the    content
information. According to Paxton (1997), high school students processed text more deeply when the content
information  was   presented in "visible"   style versus "textbook"  style. Visible  style pertains to voice   and
authorship, and can manifest through use of first-person point of view or an expressed commitment about an
issue, both of which describe the texts utilized for Sets A and C, respectively. The second source in Set A was
the personal letter, for which the content is presented and emotions expressed from a first-person point of view.
The second source in Set C was the editorial, and as is often the case with newspaper editorials, the author
expressed a strong, committed point of view with respect to his opinion about the Chicago stockyards as an ideal
place for immigrants to work. The text on the railroad industry (Set B), on the other hand, is characteristic of
"textbook" style content.
         Finally, the structure of content information within the texts can affect students' ability to understand
and process information across multiple texts as well. Work by Nash, Schumacher, and Carlson (1993) showed
that student work was better organized when sources' content information was structured in the same way, with
better responses resulting from reading texts with a topical structure as opposed to chronological. In the present
set of sources, all but the railroad text were organized topically. As well, topical overlap with the anchor around
the growth of Chicago was not mentioned in the railroad text until the second paragraph.
         The results from this study demonstrate how the different affordances of each source pairing, coupled
with students' interpretations of the task, can affect student work. The proportion of students who were able to
execute the task by providing comparisons of agreement and disagreement across two texts was shown to vary
for the different task conditions in a manner that aligns with the literature regarding factors that influence how
well students are able comprehend and reason with different texts.

Implications
         In this study, we explored the multiple source comprehension skills and strategies of young adolescent
students within the domain of history. We did so with the goal of learning more about how children are able to
handle tasks for which they must analyze and compare information across two sources. Our findings indicated
that the majority of students who engaged in the comparison task were able to make comparisons between the
information found in two different sources. Not surprisingly, they were more successful finding agreements than
disagreements. First, the sources themselves created greater affordances for finding agreements than for finding
disagreements. Second, and related to the first point, in the absence of explicit disagreements, students responses
indicated a greater variety of patterns to the Disagree prompt. Furthermore, as we had expected, the affordances
of the specific pairs of sources affected student performance, with those requiring greater degrees of inference
showing different patterns than those where the surface text provided more directly accessible "answers" that
satisfied the task demands of providing ways the sources agreed and ways they disagreed.
         Multiple source comprehension is a life skill for the digital age that should not be ignored as the world
moves forward into the 21st century. Additional research is needed on how to foster students' multiple source
comprehension skills in the classroom, as well as how elements of instructional practice, assessment strategies,
and the design of learning environments may affect students' interpretations and approach toward a task, which
in turn would affect task performance.

                                                                                                                       2-2
      References
       Bain, R. B. (2005). "They thought the world was flat?" Applying principles of How People Learn in teaching
                high school history. In S. Donovan & J. Bransford (Eds.), How students learn: History, mathematics,
                and science in the classroom (pp. 179-213). Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
       Garcia-Arista, E., Campanario, J. M., & Otero, J. (1996) Influence of subject-matter setting on comprehension
                monitoring. European Journal of Psychology of Education, 11, 427-441.
       Golder, C., & Rouet, J.-F. (2000). Comprendre un text heterogene: Modele de situation ou modele d'argument?
                [Comprehension of heterogeneous text: Situation model or argument model?] Psychologie Francaise,
                45, 253-260.
       Goldman, S. R. (2004).      Cognitive aspects of constructing meaning through and across multiple texts.         In N.
                Shuart-Ferris & D. M. Bloome (Eds.), Uses of intertextuality in classroom and educational research
                (pp. 313-347). Greenwich, CT: Information Age Publishing.
       Goldman,     S. R.  and  Bloome,  D.  M.   (2004).  Learning to Construct  and   Integrate.  In A.   F. Healy  (Ed.),
                Experimental Cognitive Psychology and its Applications: Festshrift in Honor of Lyle Bourne, Walter
                Kintsch, and Thomas Landauer (169-182). Washington, D.C.: American Psychological Association.
       Goldman,     S. R., Lawless,   K. A., Gomez,    K., Bertenthal, M.,  Braasch, J.,  MacLeod,     S., Manning,   F. H.,
                Fujimoto,   K., &   Manderino,   M. (2007,  April). Assessing Multiple  ­ Source   Digital  Literacy  Skills.
                Paper   presented   at the symposium     "21st-Century  Literacy: A  Symposium      in  Honor    of Michael
                Pressley." American Educational Research Association Chicago, IL.
       Lee, P. J. (2005). Putting principles into practice: understanding history. In S. Donovan & J. Bransford (Eds.),
                How students learn: History, mathematics, and science in the classroom (pp. 31-78). Washington, DC:
                National Academy Press.
       Levstick, L. S., & Barton, K. C. (1997). Doing history: Investigating with children in elementary and middle
                schools. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
       Mannes, S. (1994). Strategic processing of text. Journal of Educational Psychology, 88, 577-588.
       Nash, J. G., Schumacher, G. M., & Carlson, B. W. (1993). Writing from sources: A structure-mapping model.
                Journal of Educational Psychology, 85, 159-170.
       National Research Council. (2005). How students learn: History, mathematics, and science in the classroom.
                Committee on How People Learn, a targeted report for teachers, M. S. Donovan & J. D. Bransford,
                Editors. Division of Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education. Washington, D.C.: The National
                Academy Press.
       Paxton, R. J. (1997). "Someone with like a life wrote it": The effects of a visible author on high school history
                students. Journal of Educational Pscyhology, 89, 235-250.
       Perfetti, C. A., Britt, M. A., & Georgi, M. C. (1995). Text-based learning and reasoning: Studies in history.
                Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
       Pilotte, W.J.,  &   Gable,  R.K.  (1990). The   impact of positive and negative   item stems    on  the validity of a
                computer anxiety scale. Educational and Psychological Measurement, 50, 603-610.
       Rouet, J.-.F. (2006). The skills of document use: From text comprehension to Web-based learning. Mahwah, NJ:
                Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
       Rouet, J.-.F, Favar, M., Britt, M. A., & Perfetti, C. A. (1997). Studying and using multiple documents in history:
                Effects of discipline expertise. Cognition and Instruction, 15, 85-106.
       Schwartz, D. L., & Bransford, J. D. (1998). A time for telling. Cognition and Instruction, 16(4), 475-522.
       VanSledright, B. A. (2002a). Fifth graders investigating history in the classroom: Results from a researcher-
                practitioner design experiment. Elementary School Journal, 103(2), 131-160.
       VanSledright,    B.  (2002b).   Confronting  History's  Interpretive Paradox  While    Teaching     Fifth Graders   to
                Investigate the Past. American Educational Research Journal, 39, 1089 - 1115.
       VanSledright,    B.A.   (2004).What   does   it mean   to read  history?:  Fertile ground    for    cross-disciplinary
                collaborations? Reading Research Quarterly, 39, 342-346.
       Wiley,   J., &   Voss,   J. F.  (1999).   Constructing arguments   from   multiple  sources:    Tasks   that promote
                understanding not just memory for text. Journal of Educational Psychology, 91, 301-311.
       Wineburg, S. (1994). The cognitive representation of historical texts. In G. Leinhardt, I. L. Beck, & C. Stainton
                (Eds.). Teaching and learing in history (pp. 85-135). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
       Wolfe, M. B., & Goldman, S. R. (2005). Relationships between Adolescents' Text Processing and Reasoning.
                Cognition & Instruction, 23(4), 467-502.

      Acknowledgment
       The assessment project described in the chapter is work funded, in part, by the Institute for Education Sciences,
       U.S.  Department     of  Education    (Grant    R305G050091).    Any   opinions,   findings,  and    conclusions    or
       recommendations expressed in this material are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of
       the funding organization.

2-2
