                    Conceptual Play Spaces and the Quest Atlantis Project

                     Sasha Barab, Adam Ingram-Goble, Melissa Gresalfi, Anna Arici, Sinem Siyahhan, Tyler Dodge,
                              Ken Hay, Indiana University, Center for Research on Learning and Technology
                                       Eigenmann Hall 524, 1900 E. 10th St., Bloomington, IN, 47406
                    Email: sbarab@indiana.edu, aingramg@indiana.edu, mgresalf@indiana.edu, aarici@indiana.edu,
                                  ssiyahha@indiana.edu, tdodge@indiana.edu, kehay@indiana.edu

                  Abstract:    In this presentation we overview our theory and design work around conceptual
                  play spaces. Conceptual play is a state of engagement that involves (a) projection into the role
                  of a  character   who,  (b)  engaged   in a partly  fantastical problem    context, (c) must  apply
                  conceptual   understandings      to make    sense  of  and,   ultimately,  transform    the context.
                  Additionally,   a conceptual     play space  designed   to   support  learning should   (d)  provide
                  opportunities to examine one's participation in terms of the impact it had on the immersive
                  context.   Four core  presentations   will  be offered,  each   demonstrating  how   the    notion of
                  conceptual play has been taken up in particular curricular instantiations through the platform
                  of Quest Atlantis. Quest Atlantis is a learning and teaching project that uses a 3D multi-user
                  environment to immerse children, ages 9-12, in educational tasks.

       Introduction
                  The   late 1980s  gave  rise to  a  move  away  from  the  predominant    "acquisition" metaphor    towards a
         "participation" metaphor in which knowledge is considered fundamentally situated in practice and not simply
         content to be acquired (Sfard, 1988). Such a perspective is grounded in work related to situated cognition, in
         which  concepts   are no   longer conceived    as  self-contained entities, but instead  as  tools   which  are always
         connected to activity    (Brown, Collins, & Duguid, 1989; Lave & Wenger, 1991).              Although the theoretical
         move of treating cognition, meaning, and learning as situated acts has proven to be an important theoretical
         move forward, it is through the advancement of gaming technologies and methodologies that the true potential
         of these powerful ideas can now be realized. In fact, such advancements allow us to both actualize the theory
         and,  more  importantly,   to push back   and   help us think  more   deeply   about what  a  theory  of learning  and
         cognition for the 21st Century might look like (Barab, Dodge, Thomas, Jackson, & Tuzun, 2007; Barab, in
         press). In particular, videogame technologies allow for the positioning of the learner as a first-person protagonist
         who is immersed within simulated and social worlds that allow individual and environment to transact (Barab,
         Zuiker et al., 2007).
                  Dewey and Bentley (1949) introduced the transactional perspective to characterize the inseparable and
         mutually constitutive nature of subject and object. The idea is that through participation, one becomes bound up
         as part of a context in which he or she experiences the consequences of particular understandings, resulting
         actions, and environmental consequences (Author et al, 2006). The adoption of an intention is tightly coupled to,
         and helps to knowledgeably act upon, the environment or situation, which allows for the dynamic (transactional)
         unity of individual,  concept,   and  the environment   (Barab,   Swenson,    Cherkes-Julkowski,   Garrett,  &  Young,
         1999). The goal from a curricular design perspective is to establish a context in which the learner can perform
         meaningful  actions   based   on conceptual    understandings  (e.g., regulate farmers'  use  of pesticides  based  on
         fictional data collected regarding PH levels), which will result in legitimate consequences.         Such positioning,
         one in which the learner virtually enters a situation or takes on the identity of virtual character, has the potential
         to transform school learning as we know it--especially if a learned has power in the designed situation through
         understanding and applying concepts as tools to make sense of and transform the virtual situation (Barab, in
         press; Gee, 2003; Squire, in press).

                  Figure 1. Core Elements of a Conceptual Play Space as well as Emergent Conjectured States.

                  Toward this end, and as part of our design of Quest Atlantis (QA), we have developed a theory around
         the power   of conceptual   play  for immersing    learners and  the  content  they are learning  in perceptually  and

3-0
semantically rich spaces (Author, 2004, 2007). In particular, we have a theory about the power and value of
conceptual play. Conceptual play is a state of engagement that involves (a) immersive projection into the role of
a character who, engaged in a partly fantastical problem context, (b) must apply conceptual understandings to
make  sense   of and,  ultimately,     (c) transform  the  context. Additionally,   a  conceptual  play  space  designed  to
support learning should (d) provide opportunities to examine one's participation in terms of the impact it had on
the immersive context. In this way, conceptual play involves four types of participation (immersive, conceptual,
transactive, and reflective), each designed to support an experiential state (see figure 1). Beyond "fun places" or
"example scenarios" that illuminate particular concepts, properly designed conceptual play spaces establish a
problem situation that can only be solved if one employs conceptual understandings as tools for understanding
and transforming problematic situations.
          We have been exploring the power and evolving our theoretical conceptions around conceptual play in
the context   of  the  QA    project.  Quest    Atlantis is   a standards-based   online   3-D learning   environment   that
transports students to virtual places to teach a wide variety of subjects, such as language arts, mathematics, the
sciences,  geography/social      studies,   and the   arts   while building   digital age  competencies    and  fostering a
disposition to improve the world (see www.QuestAtlantis.org ). Building on strategies from online role-playing
games,  QA    combines      strategies used  in the  commercial     gaming   environment   with lessons   from  educational
research on learning and motivation. It allows users to use avatars (see figure 2) to travel around virtual worlds
where they engage educational activities (known as Quests), talk with other users and mentors, and build virtual
personae. Quest Atlantis has been developed with substantial funding from the National Science Foundation,
John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation, and National Aeronautics and Space Administration.

Figure 2. QA screenshot showing a scene from a village on the left and the homepage for a student on the right.

          Like many    games,     QA   invites  students   to inhabit roles  and assume    identities, allowing students  to
move  beyond     their classroom     role  and  become     participant  stakeholders.  Similar  to school,  games   provide
challenges, but   in  this  case, these    challenges support   problem-based    and  player-defined   goals--a  possibility
often absent   at school.    Within    QA,   each    virtual  world has    a theme  (e.g., urban   ecology,  water  quality,
astronomy, weather) and houses a spectrum of challenges, called Quests, ranging from simulation to application
problems   of varying   levels    of complexity.  Consistent     with  national calls for  inquiry-based  mathematics   and
science learning, the Quests were designed in a manner that supports children (and mentors) to learn the process
of inquiry and domain-relevant content and concepts (AAAS, 1993; NCTM, 2000; NRC, 1999). At its core,
QA's  academic    lessons     or  Quests    are built  around     seven  social  commitments,    designed    to further the
development of young students' interpersonal skills and exposure to and expectations of social and personal
responsibilities (Author et al, 2004, 2007). Because QA is primarily used in schools, we have also developed a
teacher toolkit which allows teachers to monitor and direct student engagement with classroom-relevant aspects
of the QA environment.
          The program is geared for students ages 8-15 (U.S. grades 4-8) and has been successfully adopted by
approximately    200   teachers   in   the  United    States,   Australia, China,  Singapore,   Malaysia,    Denmark,   and
Sweden--without any external incentives--and supports over 7,500 registered students distributed across these
countries, 49%    of   whom   are    female. Research    on   the  implementation   of QA   has  demonstrated    significant
learning gains on standards-oriented assessments, including ones that are independent of the QA curriculum
(Barab, Zuiker,   et   al., 2007).   Equally   important   have    been personal  experiences   reported  by  users of  this
curriculum, with teachers and students reporting increased levels of engagement and interest in pursuing the
curricular issues  outside    of  school.   In  this symposium,     we  will  begin   with an  overview   of the notion   of
conceptual play spaces and the design principles that we have adopted for fostering them. In addition, we will
discuss the specifics of how Quest Atlantis instantiates these principles in its design of particular units.

                                                                                                                                3-
                  This introductory framing will be followed by four core presentations, each demonstrating how the
         notion of conceptual play has been taken up in particular curricular instantiations by using the platform of Quest
         Atlantis to develop and research the potential for supporting learning. First, the initial presenters will begin with
         a presentation of their work to design and implement a conceptual play space to support learning of statistics.
         They will share the design challenges as well as how the design was supported by a teacher and taken up by
         students in a fifth-grade classroom. From here, additional presenters will share on their work in fostering the
         development of social commitments such as environmental awareness and personal agency in children in the
         context of schools. While much of their data focuses on one particular classroom, their work more generally
         draws on data from hundreds of children worldwide. The next presentation introduces work on game-based
         professions as learning trajectories. This work focuses on using a profession in a game to help students build a
         model   of catalysts, examining   the understandings         of 5th graders. Lastly,  a  presenter   will discuss research
         comparing a science unit taught in either a traditional classroom setting or as a conceptual play space in QA.
         Results focus on the role of the teacher, engagement of students, and learning of students.

        Paper 1:       Becoming statistical consultants: The role of conceptual play spaces in
        supporting conceptual engagement

                                               Melissa Gresalfi, Adam Ingram-Goble

                  Traditional  structures  of schooling    tend    to reduce  students'   engagement   with   content to an   act of
         remembering and repeating, rather than designing and applying. This is true even with disciplinary content that
         is, at its core, intended to be used as a tool. For example, tools for statistical data analysis are intended to be
         used for   the resolution   of dilemmas,     to find   trends   in  complex  information,   and   to provide   support   for
         conclusions and recommendations. However, statistics is usually taught in elementary and middle school as a
         series of procedures that students must be able to execute, but not necessarily apply. For example, students often
         become proficient at calculating the median or mean of a distribution, but are rarely are asked to decide which
         measure they should use to best make sense of a data set, or consider the implications of these different choices
         on their conclusions. In contrast to these activities which demonstrate conceptual engagement with statistical
         content, merely being able to calculate measures of center is instead, I argue, purely procedural engagement.
         Procedural engagement, drawing on Pickering's (1995) notion of disciplinary agency, involves knowing how to
         use procedures accurately.     As has been documented in the TIMSS study, this is a commonly observed practice
         in American    classrooms   (United  States   Department     of  Education:   National  Center  for  Education   Statistics,
         2003),  with   students  practicing  the accurate     use  of   procedures,  often  without   knowing     when to use    the
         procedures, or why one might procedure might be more useful than other. Conceptual engagement involves
         knowing what to do and why it makes sense.            It is this level of engagement that is the goal of many reform
         programs,   which   seek to support  students     to, for example,   "learn  with  understanding"    (National Council   of
         Teachers    of   Mathematics,   2000). Building       on   conceptual     engagement,    critical    engagement   requires
         interrogating the usefulness, impact, or consequentiality of particular tools on meaningful outcomes. It is about
         using the disciplinary content to make sense of and even critique particular situations. To be truly critical, a
         child is positioned as an agent of change, offering their critique on a situation.
                  The   fact that students   typically   engage    only  procedurally  with  information    can be   understood   by
         considering   the kinds  of opportunities    that students   typically have   to engage  with  statistics.  In short, most
         textbooks   create  opportunities   primarily   only   for   procedural   engagement    by  asking   students  to practice
         calculations on data sets without taking time to explain what the question is that is being addressed, how the
         data serves   to represent  an aspect of  the   question,    or why   the use of  some   statistical tools might  be more
         appropriate than others. In contrast, in this project we sought to design activities that positioned students as
         consultants whose job was to make recommendations, and concepts and procedures from statistics as tools that
         students could leverage in order to support their recommendations and ensure that they were convincing.
                  In  this way,   we leveraged    the  notion   of  conceptual   play  spaces  to design   situations that allowed
         students to engage conceptually and critically with statistics.         This  was  achieved   by  positioning  students  as
         consultants whose job was to help the city council of Normal Village improve the quality of life for its citizens.
         In this unit,  students encountered   various     stakeholders   who  needed   help  in making    consequential   decisions
         about the design of their village, including what kinds of swings they should purchase in order to maximize their
         longevity; what kind of bicycle the park should offer for rental based on which is the safest; and what kinds of
         items should be in the park's snack stand in order to maximize profit but minimize conflict among parents and
         children. The dilemmas were designed to support different recommendations, all of which could be supported
         depending on the statistical method leveraged for analysis (e.g. students might make a different recommendation
         if they calculate the mean of a data set than if they consider the mode or look at the distribution of the data set).
         As students helped to design the park by making arguments for or against particular decisions, they engaged
         with  increasingly   advanced    statistical content,     and   were  challenged   to   offer increasingly   sophisticated

3-
explanations and justifications of their decisions. Our goal in this design was to better understand how particular
design choices afforded students' conceptual engagement.           We viewed this implementation as the first of many
rounds of conjecture testing and revising (Barab & Squire, 2004; Brown, 1992; Cobb, Confrey, diSessa, Lehrer,
& Schauble, 2003), and thus sought to collect data that richly portrayed students' engagement with elements of
the curriculum.
           The unit was implemented in a 6th grade class during the students' usual technology time, and was
taught by the first author, rather than the students' usual teacher.     The unit took 8 days to cover over a two-week
period. Three forms of data were collected: (1) video of individual student participation; (2) video of whole-
class conversation;     and  (3) records of  student   work.   Students'  work,    which    is the  primary   source  of data
discussed in this paper, was collected and evaluated initially through the Quest Atlantis system, and then later
coded according to the following themes: procedural engagement, seen in whether students explained how they
knew  that  they   used  their   chosen  method    accurately (reasonable   method);    conceptual    engagement,     seen in
whether they justified their conclusion by telling about the tools they used (justify); and critical engagement
seen in whether students justified the choice of method that they used in their analysis (justify method) , and
whether they connected their recommendation to the real world of the scenario (real world).              Codes were created
and refined by two coders, and were coded independently, with an initial agreement of 70%.                    Disagreements
were resolved by discussions between the coders until consensus was reached.
           Results of   the  analysis   illustrate that although    students    were    engaging    both  procedurally    and
conceptually,   they  were   not   engaging  critically with  the  dilemmas.    For  example,      although   many    students
explained how their analysis led them to their particular conclusions, they did not justify why they had chosen a
particular  analytic  method,    or why  the analysis   was   especially appropriate    for  the   data. In  considering  the
affordances of the designed activities and the play space itself, it seemed likely that students did not perceive
themselves as having choices about which analytic method to use, or at least, did not perceive a requirement for
justifying the choice of a particular method.      Specifically, although students were never told to calculate specific
measures or graph in particular ways, there was little emphasis in the unit on the implications that different
analyses have on the conclusions that are drawn. In effect, the design decision to make all dilemmas open-ended
based on the kinds of analyses that were executed did not appear to be a sufficiently strong affordance for
students to reflect on the role of different tools on decisions. In addition, there was little opportunity for the
students to see the consequences of the decisions that they had made in the QA environment itself. Again, we
suspect  that this  inadvertently   reinforced  students'  experience  that  analytic   decisions   are  not  consequential.
Following   this   analysis, we  conjecture  that,  in  part because  we    are attempting     to foster ways    of engaging
statistics that is so different  from   students'  past experiences,  stronger   opportunities     need  to be   designed  for
students   to engage    critically  with content.   The  next  iteration of  this  design   will    test this  conjecture  by
positioning students slightly differently, as "critical consumers," who need to evaluate the data-driven claims of
different advertisers.

Paper 2:      Using Games to Foster Academically-Relevant Social Commitments

                                          Adam Ingram-Goble, Tyler Dodge

           QA   was   intentionally  designed   as   a  "critical" curriculum,     that is, and     consistent   with critical
ethnography, as a curriculum with the goal of fostering within children a disposition to critique and transform
problematic situations. However, whereas critical ethnography involves empowering individuals at a particular
site to engage and question power relations, equity issues, and so forth, we strive to package these critiques as
potentials within a curricular context to be realized by future users. Complicating this challenge even more, we
do this work in the context of a gaming environment, albeit one with a socially-responsive agenda at its core
(Author., 2007). At times, this critique remains implicit, bound up within a narrative, and at times it becomes
more explicit, such as when, on a member's homepage icons communicate are lit up based on the amount of
work a Quester has completed.
           This study examines the results of the first two iterations of the newly designed introductory narrative
in QA that establishes the seven social commitments as ideological identity characteristics, not only of the game
narrative but also in the players' lives. The QA social commitments--personal agency, diversity affirmation,
healthy communities, social responsibility, environmental awareness, creative expression, and compassionate
wisdom     (Author  et. al., 2004)--represent   an   explicit response   to Apple's     (1976)  discussion    of the  "hidden
curriculum," or the "tacit teaching to students of norms, values, and dispositions that goes on simply by their
living in and coping with the...expectations and routines of schools" (p. 211). In QA, we struggled between the
making of these commitments as implicit or explicit, and determined to create a fantastical space where students
engage   idiomatic    narratives   designed  to    immerse   them  in a  sea    of choices     that call  to  question   their
commitment. We will present our findings on how design changes corresponded to alignments of the social
commitments with the student's personal lives and their academic work.

                                                                                                                                  3-3
                  An example activity that was designed to reveal these alignments is the introduction activity. It engages
         the students in seven micro-contexts, one per commitment, where they are forced to grapple with a decision that
         characterizes the commitment. For example, in the social responsibility trajectory, players must decide whether
         the city should close a homeless shelter to create a park for young families, or keep the shelter open. They
         interview game characters that provide opinions for each choice, then report their own argument regarding the
         shelter. In the first design iteration, the students were directly engaged in seven micro-contexts as their first
         experience    with   the social   commitments.    The    resulting behavior    of  the  students  was  to   negotiate    their
         understandings of the commitments in terms of our designer goals. In our second design, we inserted a new
         activity that encouraged students to interrogate their understanding and meanings based on simplistic definitions
         of  the social  commitments.      The  student   then   proceeds   to engage   the  seven   micro-contexts,   where,   upon
         completion, they interrogate how their encounters with the micro-context have changed their understandings of,
         and relationships to the social commitments. Additionally, we gathered data on which commitments students
         identified themselves with, and how those associations change throughout their involvement in our curriculum.
                  The idea of social commitment happens at multiple levels in Quest Atlantis, from individual Quests, to
         multi-stage missions, to year-long and multi-year trajectories. Some of activities explicitly focus on work related
         to the  commitment    and    some involve    an  explicit focus  on   academic    content or a  particular scenario   that is
         related to  a social  commitment.     In  addition   to our  data  from   the introductory   sequence,   our  data    analysis
         involves looking at log files of gameplay, student-produced work, and emails and chat, selected from a subset of
         the over 7500 Questers. The data reported in this study includes frequency counts such as how many children in
         a two-month period luminated on at least one commitment, on two commitments, and so on. Our presentation
         will pull from analysis of two-dozen randomly selected students who completed a particular trajectory to better
         understand   their   notions and  commitment      to environmental    awareness     and creative  expression     (2/7 project
         social commitments). Lastly, this report includes stories from a deeper examination of 12 students all of whom
         luminated at least 4 times and for whom we examined a number of activities they completed in order to better
         understand how social commitments were taken up by these students. In this presentation we will show not only
         how we managed to embed social commitments in a game, but also to iterate between the empirical data and
         design  decisions    to  show     the relations   among      academic   content,   videogame     affordances,    and   social
         commitments. It is our belief that the integration of all three allows us to usefully improve the value of each one.
         An examination of these different responses will be presented, along with analysis of video and survey data that
         as a unit demonstrates that players indeed made deep personal connections to the game contexts and to better
         understanding the potential importance of academic content.

        Paper 3:       Conceptual Play Spaces, Models and Professions

                                                 Sasha Barab, Ken Hay, Sinem Siyahhan

                  In   the world   of  massively   multiplayer    online  role  playing    games   (MMORPG),      professions   are a
         relatively unique way that game players develop their power in the game.              In World of Warcraft (WOW) there
         are two  types    of professions  ­   crafting  professions   and  gathering  professions.    Gathering professions (i.e.
         mining,  skinning,   herbalism,   fishing, etc.)  enable  the  player  the ability  to  collect the raw    materials  for the
         crafting professions and some other quests.       Crafting professions (i.e. tailoring, engineering, alchemy, cooking,
         etc.) take the raw materials gathered by the collecting professions and craft beneficial items (i.e. bags, armor,
         weapons, potions). In WOW, you are allowed only two of the ten primary professions, but you can learn all
         three secondary professions (cooking, fishing and first-aid).         Both the raw materials of the gatherers and the
         items created on the crafters are a major element of WOW's economy.
                  As   a gaming    construct,   professions   are  interesting  in  terms  of  their pedagogical    potential  within
         conceptual play spaces.      Primarily,   as  we  have  argued  elsewhere     about   game  character development,     (Hay,
         2007),  the development      of a profession   is the understanding    and  developing    a  model.   Gamers must spend
         considerable amounts of time understanding the "model" that is at the center of their profession and how it
         connects to the character construction that is their game-playing model.              Second, they represent a long term
         commitment to understanding and "leveling up" in the profession over long periods of time.                 The WOW items
         you can gather or craft are associated with levels (1-375) that are loosely correlated to character levels (1-70).         A
         level 50 Miner cannot mine high level ore deposits that would be useful to a Level 70 Character; likewise, a
         Level 10 character cannot use the crafted armor that level 375 Blacksmith can create.
                  Because there is exclusivity (you can only select 2 Professions), an interdependence is created that
         requires interdisciplinary cooperation.       If everyone is a Miner and a Skinner, then there is no one to create
         anything from these raw materials.         If everyone    is a Leatherworker      and Blacksmith,   then   there are  no  raw
         materials  to create  anything    with.   This   creates  an  interdependence     for the entire world   that  is addressed
         collectively  through    the game's   market   system,  the  Auction   House,  or   through  Guilds   that can   purposively
         orchestrate   their  members    into  the right   balance  of  professions    for the  common    Guild   benefit.     Finally,

3-
Professions represent a set of pedagogically interesting tensions.      This includes tensions between long-term and
short-term goals, between primary rewards and enabling goals, between individual and collective goals, between
the power of expertise and the easy immediate payoffs.
         In  Quest   Atlantis we  developed     a set of  professions (chemical   engineering,  nuclear radiation,  and
marine biology) that focus of a narrative involving fantastical creatures name Zorbies that play a vital role in the
absorbing radiation within a community in Quest Atlantis.        For example, in the chemical engineering profession,
Questers learn about chemical reactions and how to speed up them up through the use of heat and catalysts.
They also   have  to  balance the  money   they    can make   with different  colored Zorbies   against the  amount  of
harmful  radiation  the   Zorbies can  absorb   for   the community.    To  be successful, they  have   to develop  the
understanding of reaction properties of different catalysts and how to handle the chemical byproducts in a safe
and effective manner.     Questers wrestle with their interdependence with other Questers, because the solution is
only realized with collective and coordinated actions or the expensive "Sweepers" must come to the community
to restablize the community.
         Treating the profession trajectory as a type of conceptual play space, this presentation will report on
our design-based research including the QA professions learning framework, the tensions between the models
and model representation within the technological affordances of QA, learning outcome measures, and on the
challenges   of facilitating  collaborative action     among   Questers   located in  temporally   and  geographically
distributed locations.   We will draw on log file data from hundreds of children distributed globally, as well more
focused interviews with locally accessible children. Using the data, we overview broad themes as well as core
lessons  with   the goal  of  illuminating how     one   can leverage game-based    professions  to  support  academic
learning and meaningful collaborations around academic work.

Paper 4: Gaming the Classroom: A comparison of Learning and Engagement in a 3D
Multi-User Virtual Environment and a Traditional Classroom Environment

                                                       Anna Arici

         While many have fueled a debate between the positive and negative impact of video gaming, most
accept that games are culturally mainstream in the lives of school children. Those averse to gaming, advocate
for strict boundaries between schools and games, while proponents of gaming argue that learning and inquiry is
intrinsic and fundamental in game play, and should be leveraged for its educational value (Barab et al., in press;
Gee, 2005; Squire, in press). Thus far, the majority of gaming research has centered on games produced by the
entertainment   industry,  because  few  have     had the  resources to generate  a  game  that simultaneously   meets
educational  goals,   is theoretically based,   and   is  technologically sophisticated.  Complex    educational game
environments are a nascent endeavor, and there is much to examine regarding how they differ and compare with
current pedagogical practices. Specifically:
   x     How do gaming contexts and traditional approaches differ in terms of learning, engagement,
         quantitative outcomes, and the qualitative experience for the learner?
   x     What, if anything, is gained by taking mainstream curriculum and unfolding it within a gaming
         environment?
         This   study  directly examined    these  questions   by comparing    a  science unit  taught  in a traditional
classroom setting with an equivalent unit embedded in a 3D Multi-User Virtual Environment (MUVE). The
design experiment, in which this study takes part, is also the Quest Atlantis project (QA). While learning gains
have been found within QA, none have been systematically equated for and compared to traditional educational
contexts until now.
         Measures of learning and engagement were gathered within a 3-week water quality unit, taught in a
local 6th grade classroom with the same teacher for both conditions (created from his 4 intact classes, with the
naturalistic setting necessitating a quasi-experimental design).     While both conditions share equivalent content,
the Traditional condition is text-based, and activities are teacher-led. The 3D MUVE condition is completely
virtual, and places   the teacher in the   role of  resource, while  students  uncover   information within  the larger
structure of Quests. Research measures were both qualitative and quantitative in nature, measuring learning and
engagement    via   traditional  written   assessments,    standardized   measures,   as  well  as  ethnographic    and
observational data techniques. The two educational curricula were designed in tandem, so that domain content,
standards and assessment are equivalent, but differ in theoretical approach and context. Both curricula were
generated from typical water quality units and standards, and all content and materials were reviewed by experts
(current science teachers) for face validity and equivalency. Assessments were identical for both conditions.
Participants were 110 6th graders (ages 11-12) who participated as part of their daily science class. Students
were randomly    assigned    by the  registrar  to the   various classes, and  considered  roughly   equivalent  by the
teacher.

                                                                                                                            3-
                  A pretest and delayed posttest were designed to measure learning gains in the two conditions. The
         pretest was created from standardized science assessment items to ensure prior equivalency among groups. The
         delayed  posttest   was designed    with short answer    items  to directly   measure   students'  ability to recall water
         quality concepts and solve problems in the domain; the content was verified by two classroom teachers and one
         science  expert.  The   pretest  of standardized  science    test items   showed     no significant differences  between
         conditions [t(91) = .16, p = .87, nor between classes within the conditions [F(3,89) = 1.09, p = .36], indicating
         equivalent ability with respect to the target content. However, the delayed posttest, administered at an 8 week
         delay after the unit was completed, showed the 3D MUVE groups (M = 23.65, SD = 5.85) scoring significantly
         higher than the traditional groups (M = 18.4, SD = 6.52) both when collapsing across group membership [t(91)
         = 4.02, p < .001] and between classes within the conditions [F(3,87) = 5.73, p < .001]. These results show
         significantly more learning in the 3D MUVE group, maintained over 2 months following the intervention.
                  Twice during the study, students were interrupted from their activities (both groups doing an equivalent
         assignment) to respond to a series of questions on their current state of engagement in the task at hand. This
         Engagement    Questionnaire     was  based  on   that of  Csikszentmihalyi's      (1990)  study  with   `flow', where  he
         interrupted students involved in various activities to respond to their current state of engagement, motivation
         and challenge in the task. From this scale, a variable of engagement was created by collapsing the questions of
         "Is this activity exciting?", "Do you enjoy what you are doing?", and "Do you wish you were doing something
         else?" The Internal consistency estimate for these three items was             = .88. Comparison between conditions
         showed   that   the 3D  MUVE     groups   (M   = 6.50,   SD   =   2.10)   scored  significantly  higher engagement    and
         enjoyment than the traditional groups (M = 2.64, SD = 1.94) when collapsing across group membership [t(104)
         = 9.73, p < .001]. Also of interest, when we loaded both the learning gain scores and engagement reports in a
         discriminant function analysis, they were able to explain 83% of the variance with each variable explaining a
         significant amount (43% and 40% respectively) of the variance in group membership.
                  When    asked  "What    is your  main reason    for  doing  this task?",    36% of  the QA   students  chose  the
         category `being interested in the task' or other (18%), while the majority of traditional students (65%) reported
         doing their similar task `to get a good grade' and another 30% did it because "the teacher told me to," compared
         to only 12% of QA students. These numbers differed significantly from chance, Chi Square = 30.38, p < .01.
         Similarly, when asked why you were doing this activity, 98% of the traditional said because they were required
         while only 54% of the 3D MUVE students selected this reason with 46% selecting that they were doing the
         activity because "they wanted to be doing it," not because required. Again, this was significantly different, Chi
         Square =24.87, p < .001.
                  Additional measures of engagement included the degree to which students opted to participate in non-
         required activities, framed as optional quests in the 3D condition or extra credit assignments in the traditional
         condition. These tasks were highly similar in nature, however, the rate of completion varied greatly between the
         two groups. In the 3D group, 38 out of 51 (74.5%) opted to do the optional quests, while in the traditional group
         only 2 out of 54 (3.7 %)) did the `extra credit'. Moreover, QA students did their additional work despite no
         promises of additional benefit or credit in the game. Finally, observational data and exit interviews supported
         the differences in engagement stated above, showing QA students were very engaged in the 3D MUVE learning
         experience. All but 5 students in the 3D group logged on to Quest Atlantis after school had ended (91%), many
         completed additional unassigned learning Quests from home (16 %), and 14% requested an after school `job'
         within the QA community.
                  This   study   provides further  evidence    of the  power    of conceptual    play  spaces, demonstrating   that
         students   who  were    assigned the   3D  MUVE       game,   rather   than   the traditional environment,    had   deeper
         engagement and deeper learning over time. These results are especially interesting given that the teacher in this
         instance came to think of the study as a test between `man and machine', and thus was more committed and
         more  on   task in  the traditional curriculum   than  usual,  and  was   minimally     involved in the QA    class  times.
         Qualitative observations and exit interviews suggest that although the domain content between conditions was
         equated and the assignments were similar, the qualitative experiences were quite different. QA students seemed
         immersed in the 3D learning world, typically reported feeling an active participant in the learning scenario.
         When they spoke of finding information in the 3D space, they consistently phrased it in the first person, for
         example,   "when    I collected  water   samples and     took them   to   the lab",  or  "when   I was  interviewing   the
         fishermen",   despite the fact that these actions were all completed via online avatars rather than in person. This
         level of participation, engagement, and immersion in a world that can only be realized through extensive field
         trips or a virtual  environment,    demonstrates the   potential   for gaming     as a powerful  addition  to mainstream
         curricula.

       References
         American   Association   for the    Advancement   of   Science    (AAAS)    (1993).    Benchmarks   for science  literacy.
                  Project 2061: Science for all Americans. Washington, D.C.
         Apple, M. W. (1976). Curriculum as ideological selection. Comparative Education Review 20(2), pp. 209­215.

3-
Barab, S. A., Cherkes-Julkowski, M., Swenson, R., Garrett, S., Shaw, R. E., & Young, M. (1999). Principles of
       self- organization: Ecologizing the learner-facilitator system. The Journal of The Learning Sciences,
       8(3&4), 349-390.
Barab, S, A. (in press). Narratizing disciplines and disciplinizing narratives. In S. A. Barab & A. Ingram-Goble
       (eds.) Games as 21st Century curriculum. Dordrecht, Netherlands, Springer.
Barab, S. A., Cherkes-Julkowski, M., Swenson, R., Garrett, S., Shaw, R. E., & Young, M. (1999). Principles of
       self-organization:  Ecologizing the learner-facilitator system. The Journal of  The  Learning  Sciences,
       8(3&4), 349-390.
Barab, S. A., Dodge, T., Thomas, M, Jackson, C., & Tuzun, H. (2007). Our Designs and the Social Agendas
       They Carry. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 16(2), 263-305.
Barab, S. A., Zuiker, S., Warren, S., Hickey, D., Ingram-Goble, A., Kwon, E-J., Kouper, I., & Herring, S. C. (in
       press). Situationally Embodied Curriculum: Relating Formalisms and Contexts. To appear in Science
       Education.
Barab, S. A., & Squire, K. (2004). Design-based research: Putting a stake in the ground. Journal of the Learning
       Sciences(13), 1-14.
Brown, A.  L. (1992).  Design   experiments: Theoretical and   methodological challenges  in creating  complex
       interventions in classroom settings. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 2, 141-178.
Brown, J. S., Collins, A., & Duguid,   P. (1989). Situated cognition and  the culture of learning. Educational
       Researcher, 18 (1), 32­42.
Cobb, P., Confrey, J., diSessa, A. A., Lehrer, R., &  Schauble,   L. (2003). Design   experiments  in education
       research. Educational Researcher, 32(1), 9-13.
Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1990). Flow: The Psychology of Optimal Experience. New York: Harper and Row.
Dewey, J. & Bentley, A. F. (1949). Knowing and the known. Boston: Beacon.
Gee, J. P. (2003). What video games have to teach us about learning. New York: Palgrave.
Gee, J. P. (2005). What Would a State of the Art Instructional Video Game Look Like? Innovate 1(6).
Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. New York: Cambridge
       University Press.
National Research Council. (1999). Designing mathematics or science curriculum programs: A guide for using
       mathematics and science education standards. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.
National Council of Teachers of Mathematics. (2000). Principles and standards for school mathematics. Reston,
       VA: Author.
Pickering, A. (1995). The mangle of practice: Time, agency, and science. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago
       Press.
Sfard, A. (1998). On two metaphors for learning and the dangers of choosing just one. Educational Researcher,
       27 (2), 4­13.
Squire, K. D. (in press). Games as ideological worlds. To appear in Educational Researcher.
United States Department of Education: National Center for Education Statistics. (2003). Teaching Mathematics
       in seven countries: Results from the TIMSS 1999 Video Study. Washington, DC: US Department of
       Education.

                                                                                                                    3-
