 When do diagrams enhance learning? A framework for designing
                                      relevant representations

                      Jodi L. Davenport, David Yaron, David Klahr and Kenneth Koedinger
                                               Carnegie Mellon University
                                      5000 Forbes Avenue, Pittsburgh PA 15213
              Email: jdavenport@cmu.edu, yaron@cmu.edu, klahr@cmu.edu, koedinger@cmu.edu

          Abstract. Although many studies demonstrate large learning gains when instruction includes
          diagrams,  diagrams     do  not   always  lead  to  improved       outcomes.   How     can instructional
          designers  know    whether   a  given   diagram    will enhance    learning?   We   have   developed   a
          framework    of three   factors that  influence    the  effectiveness   of a  diagram   in  a particular
          learning  situation: the  learning   objective, the    design of   the  visual representation    and  the
          cognitive  processing   of  the learner.  In a  randomized-design       study  conducted   in a  college
          chemistry class, we found that instruction that included diagrams created with this framework
          led to enhanced performance on open-ended transfer items compared to traditional instruction,
          particularly for low-performing students. We propose that a concept-based cognitive theory of
          multimedia learning that includes a conceptual working memory component may explain why
          the efficacy of diagrams depends heavily on the prior knowledge of the learner as well as the
          conceptual information available in the representation.

Introduction
          Many laboratory-based studies have demonstrated large learning gains when instruction includes both
diagrams and verbal descriptions. Gains have been reported in domains as diverse as brake systems, lightning
formation, pulleys, bicycle pumps, and the circulatory system (Ainsworth & Loizou, 2003; Hegarty & Just,
1993;  Mayer,   2003).  The    learning  benefit  from  the  presence   of   text in addition to   pictures  is  particularly
significant when measured by tests of problem-solving transfer. Mayer refers to this enhanced learning as the
multimedia effect (Clark & Mayer, 2003).
          While many studies have findings consistent with the multimedia effect, the mere presence of diagrams
does not guarantee increased comprehension. For instance, seductive details that are interesting but irrelevant,
such  as  a football helmet    struck by  lighting, may   detract  from  learning    about   the  process  behind   lightning
formation (Harp & Mayer, 1998). The coherence effect suggests that pictures only help if they are relevant to
current instruction and exclude interesting but extraneous information (Clark & Mayer, 2003).
          Do  relevant  pictures  always    help?  The coherence      effect demonstrates    that off-topic  but interesting
pictures can hurt learning. However, even seemingly relevant pictures may fail to provide the large learning
benefit demonstrated in studies of the multimedia effect. For instance, Davenport et al. carried out a series of
randomized-design studies in chemistry classrooms to test whether molecular-level diagrams would enhance
conceptual   understanding   of   chemical  equilibrium   (Davenport,    Klahr,   &  Koedinger,    2007).  Molecular-level
diagrams were considered to be highly relevant by the course instructor and similar diagrams had led to better
performance in other classroom studies (Kozma & Russell, 2005). Two versions of a tutorial on equilibrium and
acid  base  chemistry   were  constructed.  The    tutorials had  identical  text and   differed  only  in the  presence  of
molecular-level diagrams. Learning was measured by multiple choice questions, interactive problem solving and
open-ended transfer assessments.      Although students made significant pre-to-posttest learning gains, students
that received instruction that included diagrams performed no better than students in the text-only condition.
          Why did relevant diagrams fail to promote learning? A verbal protocol study conducted by Davenport
et al. suggested that molecular-level diagrams promoted shallow learning strategies (Davenport, McEldoon, &
Klahr, 2007). In this study, participants self-explained a tutorial on acid base chemistry that either contained
diagrams (Diagram+Text condition) or identical text with no diagrams (Text Only condition). Consistent with
prior work   on  self-explanation     (Chi, Bassok,    Lewis,    Reimann,    &   Glaser, 1989;    Chi,  Deleeuw,    Chiu, &
Lavancher,   1994),   self-explanations     in the  Text-Only     condition   were   positively   correlated with   transfer
performance.    Surprisingly,  in the Diagram+Text      condition  self-explanations     were negatively    correlated with
transfer. That  is, the more   self-explanations,   the  lower    the transfer test  performance.    An   in-depth  analysis
revealed   that participants   in the  Diagram+Text      condition    were   less likely  to produce    deep,   causal self-
explanations and made a greater number of statements that mapped surface features of the diagrams to the text.
In both studies there were highly significant learning gains from pre to posttest, so it was unlikely that a ceiling
effect masked a learning benefit of diagrams.
          As findings suggest that some diagrams may support superficial learning processes, how can we predict
whether a given diagram will enhance learning? Molecular diagrams are certainly relevant to learning about

                                                                                                                                1-11
         molecular processes: it is unlikely that the failure was due to the presence of blatantly extraneous information or
         seductive details (Harp & Mayer, 1998). Therefore, other factors must be considered to determine whether and
         when a particular representation will enhance instruction.

        Models of multimedia learning
                  Current models of multimedia learning fail to offer specific guidance to instructional designers about
         how to select pictures that will enhance learning in a specific context. Two prominent models of multimedia
         learning by   Mayer    and  Schnotz     share three main   assumptions:     dual-channel   processing,   limited  capacity
         working memory, and active processing as a requirement for learning(Mayer, 2005; Schnotz, 2005). The dual
         channel  assumption    is  that modality   influences how   information   is processed  in  the brain   because  there are
         separate   channels  for   processing    auditory/verbal   information   and  visual/spatial  information.    The  limited
         capacity assumption     is that working    memory,  which    is divided  into visual   and verbal  subsystems,   can  only
         process  a  limited amount    of   information in a given   channel  at a given  time.   The final assumption of both
         models   is that active   processing  is required for  information   to  be  consolidated  into long    term  memory   and
         learning to occur. That is, information must be actively selected, organized and integrated with prior knowledge.
                  Although the two models of multimedia learning largely overlap, they differ in their hypotheses about
         the construction of mental models. The key difference in the models is whether integration of information from
         multiple modalities occurs before or after the information is structured. Mayer proposes that a pictorial and
         verbal  mental   model    are   created independently   then  integrated,   whereas    Schnotz  proposes    that a single,
         integrated mental model is created that takes into account both pictorial and verbal content. While the current
         theories offer plausible explanations of how text and diagrams may be processed and integrated in general, they
         do not offer an explanation of why the processing of a given diagram would lead to more effective learning than
         the processing of some other diagram. Thus, the models are not able to offer concrete guidelines for creating
         diagrams that are likely to enhance learning.

       Three considerations for effective diagrams
                  Although   current     models  of multimedia   learning  do not  specify   what   features of  diagrams   lead to
         relevance   and  enhanced   learning,   many   research  results in the  literature of multimedia   learning   and  visual
         perception suggest key factors for instructional designers to consider when selecting diagrams.             We propose a
         framework that uses three factors to determine the effectiveness of diagrams, based on a review of research
         findings. To determine whether a particular diagram will enhance learning, instructional designers must consider
         the interplay of 1) the specific learning objectives 2) how the diagram makes key information salient and 3) the
         learner's cognitive processing and prior knowledge.

        Specific Learning Objectives
                  The  first consideration    for any   instructional design  is  the  specific learning objective.    What  is the
         explicit goal of instruction? What is the correct mental model that you want students to construct? For example,
         if the goal of instruction is to develop a mental model of a mechanical system (such as a bicycle pump), the
         learner must identify the parts of the system and the causal relationships between these parts. In this case, the
         mental model of a bicycle pump is a mental reenactment of the process of air being pushed through the pump. A
         diagram  or  series of  diagrams    likely enhances   the  development   the  mental   model  because   the  pictures may
         graphically constrain the interpretation of ambiguous language, e.g., what type of "valve" is pushed down and
         what does it look like (Scaife & Rogers, 1996).
                  When instruction involves more abstract concepts, the learning objectives or desired mental model may
         be more difficult to specify.   A study by Schnotz and Bannert (2003) demonstrates the importance of identifying
         specific target  knowledge      as different representations may    lead  to the creation  of  different mental    models.
         Schnotz and Bannert (2003) tested whether the type of diagram influenced students' mental models of time
         zone. Participants were given instruction that either included a "circle diagram" depicting the earth from the
         north pole or a "carpet diagram" that depicted a flat, rectangular map of the earth. Both diagrams were clearly
         marked   with time   zones    and  geographic  features.   Participants developed   mental   models   of time  zones   that
         reflected the surface properties of the diagrams they viewed. At test, those in the "circle diagram" condition
         performed   more  accurately    on  questions  related  to circumnavigation   whereas   those   in  the "carpet  diagram"
         condition performed more accurately on questions related to time zone differences. Thus, instructional designers
         must make a conscious decision about the structure of the mental model they would like to convey based on the
         types of tasks the learner will perform in the future.

        Design of the Diagram
                  The second consideration is how does the design of a diagram effectively guide attention to important
         information?  Every   representation    makes  certain  aspects  of the  represented   world  salient   while suppressing

1-1
other details. For instance, black and white line drawings typically make the parts and overall shape of an object
salient but suppress details about color and texture. If the parts of a mechanism are important to instruction but
the color  is irrelevant, black  and white   line drawings   may  be   more effective   than  color. In  addition   to the
Schnotz and Bannert     (2003) study mentioned above, a number of researchers have found that learning benefits
depend on the alignment of instructional goals with diagram features (Ainsworth, 2006; Goldman, 2003; Larkin
& Simon, 1987; Schnotz & Bannert, 2003). For instance, Hegarty & Just (1993) found that diagrams of pulley
systems enhanced learning for kinetic information but not for configurational information.
         Another consideration when designing diagrams is to determine the role that the representation plays in
providing   important   information.  Ainsworth's    DeFT     framework    (2006)   proposes   the   existence   of three
functional types of multiple representations: 1) complementary representations that support different learning
processes or provide different information, 2) constraining representations that provide concrete examples to
clarify and disambiguate language and 3) representations that support the construction of deep understanding
that encourage the development of more abstract concepts. The role that the diagram plays may influence what
surface properties of a diagram are relevant for a given instructional goal.

Cognitive Processing of the Learner
         The final consideration is the cognitive processing of the learner. In order for learning to occur, the
student must select meaningful information from the diagram for processing. Both general perceptual processing
and specific prior knowledge influence what information people extract from a diagram.
         Although we have the perception that we are "seeing" what is actually there, much research in the field
of visual perception suggests that we actually attend to a small portion of the world around us and that what we
do  see is  heavily  influenced  by  our   prior  knowledge.   For  instance,   research   on "change    blindness"    has
demonstrated that people fail to notice large changes such as an object that appears or disappears or a central
object that changes colors (Simons & Levin, 1997). Other research has demonstrated that expectations influence
the interpretation of visual information (Davenport, 2007; Davenport & Potter, 2004). Thus, the design of a
diagram is only the first step to learning, the instructional designer must also support the cognitive processes
that allow the learner to select relevant information for processing.
         In   addition to general  perceptual    processing  considerations,   an  individual's   prior knowledge      also
influences how information is extracted from a diagram (Lowe, 1996). The learner must be able to attend to
relevant features of the diagram and draw connections from what is already known to target knowledge. Some
required  inferences   may be   surprisingly sophisticated.   For instance,  in   learning about  a  bicycle  pump,    the
learner must infer that pushing down the handle of the pump would cause air to flow out of the open valve at the
bottom because air is an entity that has mass and decreasing the volume of air results in greater pressure on the
valve. Causal knowledge from everyday experience is required to generate a model of how the motion of one
part affects another part of the pump.
         Studies in multimedia learning have found that prior knowledge in the domain of instruction influences
the efficacy of a given diagram. Some studies have found that diagrams are particularly beneficial for learners
with low-knowledge      learners and  may    be  detrimental  for high-knowledge     learners  (Kalyuga,     Chandler,  &
Sweller, 1998; Mayer, 1989). However, other studies have demonstrated diagrams will not be effective if the
learner lacks prior knowledge that is required to understand a diagram (Petre & Green, 1993). Further, work by
Butcher (2006) suggests that diagrams that are designed to support the cognitive processes required for deep
comprehension     may  prove most    effective. The  level  of ability of  the  learner and   the sophistication    of the
diagram must be aligned if a picture is to enhance learning.

Current Study
         In the current study we investigated whether considering the specific learning objectives, the design of
the diagrams, and the cognitive processes of the learner would lead to enhanced learning in chemistry. In prior
studies, molecular-level diagrams did not enhance learning of equilibrium chemistry. In the present investigation
we test whether molecular-level diagrams that were designed using the proposed framework enhance learning in
a  college  level chemistry   course.  Further,   as our   diagrams    illustrate fundamental   concepts     in chemical
equilibrium, we tested whether these diagrams were particularly beneficial for low-performing students.

Specific Learning Objectives
         The learning target in the current study was an expert mental model of equilibrium systems that was
derived  from  an  expert/novice  verbal   protocol  analysis  (Davenport,  Klahr,   &  Koedinger,   2006;    Davenport,
Yaron, Karabinos, Klahr, & Koedinger, 2007). Chemistry experts (faculty and chemistry graduate students) and
novices (students with one year of college-level chemistry) solved equilibrium problems while talking aloud.
Experts were more successful at problem solving and were also more likely to integrate chemistry concepts with
algorithmic   manipulations.  This   study revealed  that  experts  use  a  conceptual   framework      that we  call  the

                                                                                                                              1-1
         progress of reaction, to guide their reasoning and problem solving of chemical equilibrium systems. Experts
         conceptualize reversible chemical reactions as a continuum of possible states from all reactants to all products
         with the movement from one state to the next constrained by the stoichiometry of the chemical equation. In an
         analysis of  introductory   chemistry  textbooks,  Davenport    et al. found    that the  expert  mental   model   of the
         progress  of reaction  is not   made  explicit.  Traditional  instruction   mainly   consists  of   worked  examples   of
         quantitative problems and does not demonstrate strategies that use an expert model of chemical reactions to
         guide problem solving.

        Design of the Diagram
                  The  key   features of  the expert  mental  model   of  chemical    equilibrium   are   1) a  chemical   reaction
         describes a continuum of possible states of a chemical system progressing from all reactants to all products, and
         2) the equilibrium  state will  lie  between the  two  extremes    of  this continuum.    In  order   to make the  expert
         conceptual framework explicit, we created molecular-level diagrams designed to depict states of a chemical
         reaction along a continuum. The diagrams depicted static states of a chemical system in which the state with
         maximal reactants is on the left and the state with maximal products is on the right. These diagrams differed
         from the  molecular  diagrams    typically present  in textbooks   (and prior   experiments)     that presented only  the
         initial and equilibrium states of chemical systems and omitted the full range of possible concentrations. Thus,
         the physical representations of the molecular diagrams were aligned with the expert mental model of chemical
         equilibrium systems.

        Cognitive Processing of the Learner
                  The  diagrams    in our study  encouraged   students   to make     the inference  that  the  chemical  equation
         specifies how a system may change and that conservation of mass is obeyed (that is, atoms may be rearranged,
         but not created or destroyed). Further, the diagrams were designed to build on prior knowledge of non-reversible
         reactions in which the reactions go to completion. In reactions that go to completion, starting molecules react to
         form new molecules, and the newly created molecules can never re-form molecules in the starting state. Based
         on conversations  with   domain   experts  and  student interviews,    we   believe  that students    have knowledge   of
         reactions that go to completion from prior courses.
                  Finally, we  expect  that  the new  diagrams   will  be particularly   beneficial   for the  lowest  performing
         students. Our hypothesis is that the diagrams will provide scaffolding for the low performing students to help
         them construct an expert-like mental model of chemical equilibrium processes. We expect less of a benefit for
         high performing students who are more likely to construct the expert model from the text alone.

       Method
        Participants
                  171  students   (88 female,  83 male,  ages   18-22) enrolled  in   Modern     Chemistry   at   Carnegie Mellon
         University participated in this study in partial fulfillment of course requirements.

        Materials
                  Two    versions of  an online  lecture on  chemical  equilibrium    were    created. The   "traditional" version
         explained equilibrium concepts as they were taught the prior year and presented worked examples of problems
         similar to those found in textbooks. The "diagram" version incorporated molecular level diagrams depicting the
         expert conceptual   framework    of  the   progress of  reaction   alongside    worked    examples    of   problems.  The
         instruction was delivered as a series of six short movies created with Camtasia. These movies displayed hand-
         written lecture notes with voice-over explanations. See Figure 1 for examples of the two types of instruction.
                  Eleven open-ended transfer questions were interleaved with the instructional videos to assess student
         comprehension    of equilibrium   concepts.  These   questions   asked  students     to synthesize    information  in the
         instruction, to reason   from  graphs,  and  to make   predictions  about   novel    chemical  systems.    Students  were
         required to transfer knowledge from the instruction in order to reason about new chemical reactions and create
         explanations for their responses. An example of a transfer question is; "The following reaction has come to
         equilibrium: 2 H2S(g) + O2(g)       2 S(s) + 2 H2O(g). How will the addition of O2 influence the amount S? Explain
         at the molecular level why the addition of O2 will or will not affect the amount of S."

1-1
                   Figure 1. Screen shots of Traditional (left) and Diagram (right) conditions.

Design
          Using class performance on quizzes and exams up to the point at which the equilibrium lecture was
given, students  were  binned   into  lowest (bottom   quartile), average (25th-75th percentile)  and  highest  (top
quartile) performance  groups.   Half of the  students in each    group were randomly    assigned to   complete the
"traditional" lecture and half   were  assigned to complete    the  "diagram"   lecture. After completion   of  the
assignment all students had access to both versions of the online course.

Procedure
          The course was given as a homework assignment for students to complete outside of class. Students
viewed the onscreen lectures and were prompted at six points during the online course to type their responses to
the conceptual transfer questions. The activity had no time limit and students could take as much time as they
needed to complete the activity.

Coding
          All responses were coded blind to condition by a research assistant. As students were not limited in the
amount of information they could provide in response to the open-ended transfer question, a final score for each
question was calculated as the total number of correct minus incorrect statements on each of the 11 questions. In
the example transfer question given in the Materials question, a typical correct statement would be, "Since the
concentration  of O2  increased,  the forward  reaction rate is   increased and the  amount  of   S(s) produced  is
increased." Typical incorrect statements for this question were; "Oxygen did not influence the amount of sulfur
because the system would have decreased the amount of reactant not product," and           "Adding oxygen won't
change the amount of S because it's not producing SO3 or a compound of both elements."

Results
          An ANOVA carried out with condition (traditional vs. diagrams) as the independent variable revealed a
trend of higher performance in the diagram version (M = 11.0) compared to the traditional version (M = 9.7) of
the tutorial, F(1, 169) = 2.58, p = .11. A planned comparison revealed that the lowest performing students in the
diagram condition made more correct statements (M = 10.9) than those in the traditional condition (M = 7.73),
F(1,43) = 4.05, p = .05. See Figure 2.

                                                                                                                       1-1
                  Figure 2. Mean final score as a function of class rank and condition (Traditional vs. Diagram).

       Discussion
                  The current study tested whether diagrams that were designed with careful consideration of the learning
         goals, information content of representations, and prior knowledge of students would enhance student learning
         of equilibrium   concepts.   A  classroom-based,    randomized   assignment   study suggests  that instruction   that
         included molecular level diagrams improved learning, particularly for the lowest performing students.

       Conclusions
                  We   propose  three   factors that  influence the  effectiveness of  instructional diagrams:   the specific
         learning objective,  how   a diagram     makes relevant information  salient, and   how the  learner  interprets  the
         diagram based on his or her prior knowledge and perceptual processing. The current study demonstrates that
         diagrams   created   using this framework    improve   learning, particularly for low  knowledge      students. First,
         diagrams should be chosen to map to a specific instructional goal. In the current work, our instructional goal
         was for students to create a mental model of equilibrium systems that allowed them to make predictions and
         reason about reversible chemical reactions. Second, diagrams should be designed to make target knowledge
         explicit. In the current work, we created diagrams that mapped to an empirically derived, expert mental model
         of equilibrium systems. In particular, the diagrams made salient that a chemical reaction describes a range of
         possible states along a continuum. Finally, diagrams should consider the cognitive processing of the learner and
         provide  a  bridge from prior   knowledge   to the  target knowledge. In  equilibrium  systems    the processes  (the
         chemical reactions) that cause a system to change state are simultaneous and probabilistic. Unlike mechanical
         systems in which students must simply animate the components in order to create a mental model, the model of
         an equilibrium system requires additional inferences as a number of molecules simultaneously change from state
         to state. In the current study we built on prior knowledge of reactions that go to completion in order to create a
         framework for students to understand the behavior of reversible reactions.
                  Prior studies that  investigated   whether molecular-level diagrams   enhanced  learning  failed to    find a
         multimedia benefit (Davenport, Klahr et al., 2007; Davenport, McEldoon et al., 2007). In light of the proposed
         framework, the lack of the multimedia effect may have been due to the fact that the textbook-based molecular-
         level diagrams were not adequately aligned with an expert model of chemical equilibrium.
                  Our results demonstrate that diagrams enhanced learning for the lowest performing students. In fact,
         students in the low performing group who were randomly assigned to the diagram condition performed roughly
         as well  as high performing     students in either condition. These results  are consistent  with prior findings  on
         multimedia learning that suggest a particular learning advantage for low-knowledge learners (Kalyuga et al.,
         1998; Mayer, 1989). The diagrams offered no additional learning benefit for high-performing students.        As the
         diagrams    targeted basic-level  knowledge    of   equilibrium, high-performing    students may   have   the   prior

1-1
knowledge or metacognitive skills to spontaneously create expert-like mental models from information in the
text-base instruction.

A Concept-based Cognitive Theory of Multimedia Learning
         The current study adds to the body of work suggesting that prior knowledge and the conceptual content
of diagrams influences multimedia learning (Butcher, 2006; Kalyuga et al., 1998; Mayer, 1989; Petre & Green,
1993). How do current theories of multimedia learning account for such effects? Both the models of Mayer
(2005) and   Schnotz    (2005) suggest   that   prior  knowledge  and   the content    of diagrams   influence the active
processing   of multimedia   instruction. However,     in  both models,    text and pictures  are processed in  modality
specific channels and intermediate representations reside in verbal and visual/spatial components of working
memory    before   being integrated with     conceptual   information   in long  term   memory.   In contrast  to  current
theories of multimedia learning that suggest that modality-specific processing is relatively long lasting, recent
research in neuroscience suggests that multimodal information is integrated very early in processing, within
1/25th of a second (Foxe et al., 2000; Giard & Peronnet, 1999).
         Further, recent findings in cognitive psychology and neuroscience suggest that conceptual information
from long term memory may influence what information is initially selected for processing (Davenport, 2007;
Davenport & Potter, 2004; Grill-Spector & Kanwisher, 2005). In order to explain findings that the meaning of a
sentence  or picture   influences how     it is immediately     recalled,  cognitive   psychologists have proposed   the
existence of    a conceptual   component     of working    memory    (Baddeley,    2000;  Potter, 1993, 1999).    Dubbed
Conceptual Short Term Memory (Potter, 1993; 1999) or the episodic buffer (Baddeley, 2000) this conceptual
component    of   working  memory   integrates    information   from    a  variety  of sources and   maintains  abstract,
meaningful conceptual "chunks." A conceptual component of working memory would likely explain the large
disparities in the efficacy of diagrams on learning due to differences in individual knowledge. Thus, a concept-
based cognitive theory of multimedia learning that includes conceptual working memory may more accurately
reflect the current state of research in cognitive psychology and neuroscience and expand the explanatory power
of the theory to explain whether and when diagrams will help various types of learners.

Summary
         Relevant    diagrams  have the   power   to   significantly enhance    learning. However,   avoiding  seductive
details is not enough to ensure the relevance of a particular diagram for a particular learning goal. The current
study suggests    that multimedia  instruction   that  is designed   to consider   learning goals, the  design  of visual
representations   and  learner abilities will   likely enhance   learning,  particularly  for low  performing   students.
Further, the work suggests that current cognitive theories of multimedia learning may need to be revised in order
to account for new findings in cognitive psychology and neuroscience that provide evidence for the existence of
a conceptual component in working memory (in addition to auditory/verbal and visual/spatial components). The
conceptual component of working memory may explain the many findings that the efficacy of diagrams depends
heavily on the prior knowledge of the learner as well as the conceptual information available in the diagram.
Future work     will investigate how and     when     the interplay  of the learning   objectives, diagram  design   and
cognitive processing lead to large learning gains and further develop and extend a concept-based, cognitive
account of multimedia processing.

References
Ainsworth, S. (2006). DeFT: A conceptual framework for considering learning with multiple representations.
         Learning and Instruction, 16(3), 183-198.
Ainsworth, S., & Loizou, A. T. (2003). The effects of self-explaining when learning with text or diagrams.
         Cognitive Science, 27(4), 669-681.
Baddeley, A. (2000). The episodic buffer: a new component of working memory? Trends in Cognitive Sciences,
         4(11), 417-423.
Butcher,  K.  R.   (2006). Learning  from     Text    with Diagrams:    Promoting    Mental   Model   Development    and
         Inference Generation. Journal of Educational Psychology, 98(1), 182-19716.
Chi, M. T. H., Bassok, M., Lewis, M. W., Reimann, P., & Glaser, R. (1989). Self-Explanations - How Students
         Study and Use Examples in Learning to Solve Problems. Cognitive Science, 13(2), 145-182.
Chi,  M.  T. H.,   Deleeuw,  N.,  Chiu,   M.  H., &    Lavancher,    C. (1994).  Eliciting  Self-Explanations  Improves
         Understanding. Cognitive Science, 18(3), 439-477.
Clark, R. C., & Mayer, R. E. (2003). e-Learning and the Science of Instruction. San Francisco: John Wiley &
         Sons, Inc.
Davenport, J. L. (2007). Consistency effects between objects in scenes. Memory & Cognition, 35(3), 393-401.

                                                                                                                             1-1
         Davenport, J. L., Klahr, D., & Koedinger, K. R. (2006, November). The influence of external representations on
                  chemistry problem solving. Paper presented at the Forty-seventh Annual Meeting of the Psychonomic
                  Society, Houston, Texas.
         Davenport, J. L., Klahr, D., & Koedinger, K. R. (2007). The influence of diagrams on chemistry learning. Paper
                  presented  at the Biennial  Conference   of the  European   Association  for  Research  on  Learning   and
                  Instruction, Hungary, Budapest.
         Davenport, J. L., McEldoon, K., & Klahr, D. (2007). The influence of molecular-level diagrams in Chemistry
                  instruction. Paper presented at the 29th Annual meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, Nashville,
                  TN.
         Davenport,  J. L.,  &   Potter, M.   C. (2004). Scene     Consistency   in  Object    and Background    Perception.
                  Psychological Science, 15(8), 559-564.
         Davenport, J. L., Yaron, D., Karabinos, M., Klahr, D., & Koedinger, K. R. (2007). Chemical equilibrium: An
                  evaluation of  a  new  type of instruction. Paper presented    at the Gordon   Conference  for Chemistry
                  Education Research and Practice, Lewiston, ME.
         Foxe, J. J., Morocz, I. A., Murray, M. M., Higgins, B. A., Javitt, D. C., & Schroeder, C. E. (2000). Multisensory
                  auditory­somatosensory   interactions in early   cortical processing  revealed   by high-density electrical
                  mapping. Cognitive Brain Research, 10(1-2), 77-83.
         Giard, M. H., & Peronnet, F. (1999). Auditory-Visual Integration during Multimodal Object Recognition in
                  Humans: A Behavioral and Electrophysiological Study. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 11(5), 473-
                  490.
         Goldman,   S.  R. (2003).  Learning  in complex   domains:  when     and   why do  multiple   representations help?
                  Learning and Instruction, 13(2), 239-244.
         Grill-Spector, K., & Kanwisher, N. (2005). Visual recognition: as soon as you know it is there, you know what
                  it is. Psychological Science, 16(2), 152-160.
         Harp, S. F., & Mayer, R. E. (1998). How seductive details do their damage: A theory of cognitive interest in
                  science learning. Journal of Educational Psychology, 90(3), 414-434.
         Hegarty, M., & Just, M. A. (1993). Constructing Mental Models of Machines from Text and Diagrams. Journal
                  of Memory and Language, 32(6), 717-742.
         Kalyuga, S., Chandler, P., & Sweller, J. (1998). Levels of expertise and instructional design. Human Factors,
                  40(1), 1-17.
         Kozma, R., & Russell, J. (2005). Multimedia Learning of Chemistry. In R. E. Mayer (Ed.), The Cambridge
                  Handbook of Multimedia Learning. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.
         Larkin, J. H., & Simon, H. A. (1987). Why a diagram is (sometimes) worth ten thousand words. Cognitive
                  Science, 11, 65-99.
         Lowe, R. K. (1996). Background knowledge and the construction of a situational representation from a diagram.
                  European Journal of Psychology of Education, 11(4), 377-397.
         Mayer,  R. E.  (1989). Systematic  thinking fostered   by illustrations in scientific text. Journal of Educational
                  Psychology, 81, 240-246.
         Mayer, R. E. (2003). The promise of multimedia learning: using the same instructional design methods across
                  different media. Learning and Instruction, 13(2), 125-139.
         Mayer,  R. E.  (2005). Cognitive  Theory  of Multimedia    Learning.    The Cambridge     Handbook  of Multimedia
                  Learning.
         Petre, M., & Green, T. R. G. (1993). Learning to read graphics: Some evidence that 'seeing' an information
                  displat is an acquired skill. Journal of Visual Languages and Computing, 4, 55-70.
         Potter, M. C. (1993). Very short-term conceptual memory. Memory & Cognition, 21(2), 156-161.
         Potter, M. C.  (1999). Chapter  2 Understanding   Sentences  and    Scenes:  The Role   of  Conceptual Short-Term
                  Memory. Fleeting Memories: Cognition of Brief Visual Stimuli.
         Scaife, M., & Rogers, Y. (1996). External cognition: How do graphical representations work? International
                  Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 45(2), 185-213.
         Schnotz, W. (2005). An Integrated Model of Text and Picture Comprehension. The Cambridge Handbook of
                  Multimedia Learning.
         Schnotz, W., & Bannert, M. (2003). Construction and interference in learning from multiple representation.
                  Learning and Instruction, 13(2), 141-156.
         Simons, D. J., & Levin, D. T. (1997). Change blindness. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 1(7), 261-267.

       Acknowledgements
         Thanks to Jennifer Olsen for coding and to the members of the Chemistry working group, Michael Karabinos,
         Gaea Leinhardt and Jim Greeno, for helpful discussions. This work was supported by the Pittsburgh Science of
         Learning Center, National Science Foundation grant SBE-0354420.

1-1
