                   Developing a Design Culture in a Computer Clubhouse:
                               The Role of Local Practices and Mediators

                      Kylie A. Peppler, Indiana University, 201 N Rose Ave, Wright 4024, Bloomington,
                                                    IN 47405, kpeppler@indiana.edu
               Yasmin B. Kafai, UCLA Graduate School of Education and Information Studies, 2128 Moore Hall,
                              Box 951521, Los Angeles, California 90095-6293, kafai@gseis.ucla.edu

                 Abstract:     This  paper    focuses  on   the  development    of a  design   culture in   a  Computer
                 Clubhouse,    a type   of community     technology  center    known  for its emphasis   on   design  and
                 creative production. Drawing from theories of situated learning and cultural historical activity,
                 we  used   a  mixed    methods    approach    to document,    describe, and   analyze   local portfolio-
                 building practices and the role of mediation that best supports more complex types of design-
                 based technological fluencies. The study also explores aspects of the Clubhouse setting that
                 mediated community members' participation in design activities and then discusses how these
                 findings can be used in other after-school settings interested in implementing design cultures
                 with racially and ethnically marginalized youth.

                 While schools have always been seen as a primary site for learning, after-school settings are gaining
         recognition for their contributions to the development of student identity formation (Gee, 1996), technology
         fluencies (Schon, Sanyal, & Mitchell, 1998), and traditional forms of literacy development (Hull & Schultz,
         2001). More than 2,000 after-school programs and community technology centers (CTCs) have opened in the
         last decade, most of which have been created with the goal of providing access to safe and engaging after-school
         spaces along with educational games and introductory computer activities, including email communication, web
         surfing, and word processing (Vasquez & Duran, 2000; Zhao, Mishra, & Girod, 2000). Most well known of
         these after-school   initiatives  is the  Fifth Dimension    program,     which  was   established    in the 1980s   as  a
         partnership between community centers and local universities (Cole, 1998). At these sites, college students and
         youth play games, work on homework, and write to whimsical characters via email. Results of an extensive
         evaluation demonstrated    that  across   the Fifth Dimension     program  contributed   to gains  in computer    literacy,
         mathematical understanding     and   problem-solving,    as well   as reading,  writing, and  grammatical    skills (Cole,
         2007). A set of common local practices and mediating means for organizing activities (Kozulin, 1998; Wertsch,
         1997) have been documented that support the maximization of learning and development at these after-school
         programs, including the use of computers, task cards, the meta-organizational maze, and a mythical figurehead
         known sometimes as "El Maga" (Cole, 2007). All of these deliberately constructed mediational means (i.e., the
         tools and artifacts) serve to regulate youths' interactions as they pursue their personal goals at the after-school
         programs.
                 Like the Fifth Dimension, many after-school programs have focused on the development of traditional
         literacies and technology skills (i.e., word processing and typing), although there has been an increasing need to
         involve youth in creative production and a fuller range of technology fluency building activities in order move
         youth  from consumers    to creators   of   technologies  (Peppler  &  Kafai,   2007). A  small   subset  of after-school
         programs,  most   notably   including    those  in  the  Computer     Clubhouse  Network,    explicitly   focuses   on the
         development of a design culture, moving youth beyond basic computer skills and helping them to design, create,
         and invent  with  new   technologies   (Resnick,    Rusk, &  Cooke,    1998).  Computer     Clubhouse    youth  engage  in
         applications such as Adobe® PhotoshopTM, Macromedia® FlashTM, and Kai's SuperGooTM that encourage skills
         beyond typing and general computer familiarity, allowing participants to use various design tools to develop
         creativity, critical thinking, and technological fluency (Gallagher & Michalnik, 2007). However, very little is
         known about the local practices and the role of mediation that best supports even more complex types of design-
         based  technological   fluencies,    such as  computer    programming.    We    need   a better understanding     of   how
         mediational means in traditional after school programs can be extended for such fluency-building activities.
                 A Computer Clubhouse in South Los Angeles offers a promising opportunity to explore the ways in
         which  the  local  culture  has   developed     their  collective  understanding   of  new   tools   for  authorship   and
         communication,    particularly   capitalizing  on  software that   allows designers   to use  computation    or computer
         programming (Kafai, Peppler, & Chiu, 2007). Aiming to uncover how design cultures are developed within
         existing community structures, we used a mixed methods approach to document, describe, and analyze (1) the
         local practices that  underlie   the larger Computer     Clubhouse    design community,     focusing  on  local portfolio-
         building practices. We also (2) explored aspects of the Clubhouse setting that mediated community members'
         participation in design activities, which was important to our understanding of how and why youth get involved
         in design  activities amidst   a  host of   other  possibilities, including  video gaming    and   web   surfing  that are

2-
predominant     in  youth   culture.    Other   in-school   and   out-of-school    settings  could   benefit   from    better
understanding the critical role of mediation and local practices in the establishment of a robust design culture.
These issues are of relevance to the Learning Sciences community because of the shared interest in promoting
design-based activities as a tool for learning.

Background
          In this investigation we draw upon the field of situated theories of learning (see for example Lave &
Wenger,   1991)    and cultural   historical activity  theory  (Vygotsky,   1978;  Wertsch,   1985).    This body  of  work
builds on the notion that human learning is not just a matter of cognition but is fully embedded in the material,
social, and  cultural  world   (Lave    &    Wenger,   1991).  Situated   learning theory    places importance    on   social
interaction as being fundamental to learning. Central to this theory is the notion of "communities of practice,"
which   serves  to  support   the values  and   behaviors   to be  learned  (Lave   and  Wenger,    1991).   Starting at the
periphery of the community, learners begin as novices and move toward fuller forms of participation as they
become more knowledgeable participants. In our study, the central activities that are being studied are design
project  activities and  the  community      practices around   making    and sharing  these  projects.  In  these theories,
social mediation plays a crucial role in participation.
          Social  mediation,  as  originally   theorized  by   Vygotsky   (1978),  describes  how   learning  is developed
through social interactions with others. Through social interactions, an individual can come to learn the habits of
mind    and semiotic   languages    through   which   an individual  derives  meaning    and   constructs  his or  her own
knowledge (Vygotsky, 1978; Wertsch, 1985). In this case, members of the Clubhouse community learn about
the software    programs,   skills, techniques,  and   habits  of  mind   related to creative  production    through   social
mediation. Wertsch (1985) extends this understanding by arguing that social mediation is semiotic in nature,
with tools or artifacts providing the means through which an individual internalizes the higher mental processes
central to social transactions in particular cultures or communities. Mediators that seemed to play a strong role
in this context   can  include  other   members,    mentors,   artifacts, and the  token economy     at work   in  the local
culture. Mediators inspired youth to use creative production as a way to position themselves within the local
community.
          We    are not   the first  to document     and  describe   the   local  practices  and  mediational    means   for
involvement in after-school activities. There is already a rich body of work documenting and describing the core
local practices and mediating activities that create and support such a community in the Fifth Dimension after-
school centers, including descriptions of the artifacts or tools that serve as mediators to participation (Cole,
1998; Cole, 2007). At the Fifth Dimension centers, tools are used to mediate participation and development at
several levels: (1) they provide a context and incentive for children to master knowledge and a wide range of
skills; (2) they   provide  undergraduates     with opportunities   to    connect theory with   practice  while  mentoring
children;   and (3)  they create    sustainable activity systems   in  a  variety of settings.  The  Fifth   Dimension   has
designed and documented the implementation of social mediators at their sites in order to interest youth in game
play and traditional literacy building activities,
          Our work serves to highlight the mediational means for youth to get involved design activities in the
Computer Clubhouse setting ­ a very different activity system aiming to increase the development of new media
literacies in addition to the traditional literacies. Most of the previous work on building design cultures has been
located within the context of schools within the Learning Sciences community where students serve as a captive
audience in the implementation of design-based curricula (Kolodner, Camp, Crismond, Fasse, Gray, Holbrook,
Puntambekar, & Ryan, 2003). Researchers here have focused on motivational issues getting students engaged in
long-term projects (Collins, Bielaczyc, & Josephs, 2001). Getting kids interested in design in the out-of-school
hours is entirely different, especially given the competition from video games, television programs, and web
sites. This study adds a new perspective to this body of work by drawing on well-established concepts from
activity theory, including mediators and local practices, in order to document, describe, and analyze the unique
after-school design cultures in place at the Computer Clubhouse.

Methodological Approach
          We used a concurrent mixed methods approach (Creswell, 2003) involving participant field notes and
an analysis of a design archive stored on a central server. A mixed methods design also supported triangulation
among    several  different  sources   of data  and    allowed  us to  examine    different, yet sometimes     overlapping,
multilevel  facets  of the  research   site. We  analyzed   the data  in  two phases,  based   on   the following  research
questions: (1) what practices define the Computer Clubhouse design community, and (2) what aspects of the
Clubhouse    setting mediated     members'    participation in  design    events? Over   40  undergraduate    and  graduate
student field researchers took extensive participant field notes over a period of three years. We randomly pulled
20 percent of the field notes (n = 58 discrete observations, which sometimes took place on the same days) from
the larger  field   note  archive   (n  = 284   discrete  observations)    to use  for  further  analyses.   This  database
documented more than 98 youth and observations were evenly distributed across the three years of the study.

                                                                                                                                2-
         Participant  field   notes and  other  qualitative  data  sources  were   analyzed  using     a grounded    theory   approach
         (Glaser & Strauss, 1967; Strauss 1987) and imported into NVivo software to code the field note data and extract
         passages.   Data  was  coded    primarily  by   the first author   and differences   were     debated  until   consensus   was
         reached on 100% of the data coded. We coded field note excerpts for recurring design practices and mediational
         means that invited members' participation in design events.

        Archival Analyses
                  Having a folder (or a portfolio as we call them here) on the central server for storing files is a good
         indication of being a participant in the design culture. An analysis of the server revealed that 273 youth have
         folders on the server and have engaged in some sort of design activity ­ even if only to save pictures from the
         web. This represents about one fourth of the known Clubhouse community that participates in design activities.
         Information on the file types, name, and date created was extracted using a batch file and then imported into an
         SPSS data spreadsheet for further analyses. When we analyzed the file types stored on the server, we found that
         the most  popular    creative software    used  by  youth  at this Clubhouse     was  Scratch,   a   new  multimedia     visual
         programming environment (541 documents), followed by Microsoft Word (461 documents), Bryce 5 (270), Kai
         SuperGoo (143) and Movies/animations (78). Programs that had less than 50 documents stored on the server are
         not represented in this list. This list merely represents the most popular software used to create saved projects
         from January 2005 ­ December 2006.         In addition to the server analyses, the youths' Scratch work--including
         animated    stories, videogame    art, and interactive    or playable  art using   pop  culture  images     and   sound--was
         collected on a weekly basis and entered into an archive for further analyses. Log files were generated for each
         project  (n = 541),   including   the  name(s)  of  the known   creator(s)  (n  >  76 unique    project  creators),   the  date
         created, the dates that the project was continued, and if the project was derived from another project.

       Local Practices: Building Design Portfolios
                  In this section, we take a closer look at the portfolio-building practices that were central within this
         design community. Clubhouse youths' desire to play a part in the participatory culture (Jenkins, 2006) often was
         the determining    factor  in their decisions   to  engage   in creative   production.  The     downloading     of web-based
         images to a personal folder was the top activity of the Clubhouse. Over 10,000 images were downloaded a year
         and stored in the youths' folders. Although downloading images and storing them in a folder isn't necessarily a
         design practice, youths' interest in collecting of online media was often driven by a desire to participate in the
         local downloading culture, and was often a departure point for their design activities (Jenkins, 2006). Of all
         possible entry points into the design community, no practice was as powerful and consistently attractive as the
         emulation of popular texts, so there seems to be an underlying connection between these two practices. We
         summarize the Portfolio practices to include the multiple practices of naming, saving, and storing files in a
         location (either on the server, on a desktop computer, or printed and saved in a particular location), which can be
         easily retrieved for later reworking or for display among the Clubhouse or online community. At the Clubhouse,
         about  86%   of  youth  that  participate in design  practices    stored project  files with    the  intent to retrieve  them,
         rework   them,   and  share  or display   them  for  others  (Peppler,   2007).  This   is a  purposeful    and performative
         practice among     Clubhouse    members    that establishes   the  youth's  membership      in  the  design  community     and
         positionality in   the group.   This   practice overlaps     somewhat    with  core  Information      Technology     concepts,
         including "information organization," and also resonates with a similar practice of artists (both traditional visual
         artists and media artists) who collect their work in a portfolio to be reworked or later displayed. This is an
         important   practice  that is fundamental    to producing    creative  works.   In the  random      selection  of  field notes,
         explicit reference to this practice occurs 35 times in 15 field notes. It's one of the most heavily documented
         practices at the Clubhouse and warrants further attention for several reasons.
                  Saving files served several functions for the members, and warranted a variety of practices surrounding
         saving and storing files. The files that youth stored in their folders are a reflection of their identities ­ what they
         value, what they like, and what they aspire to. One of the more common practices that youth engaged in was
         using a search engine to collect and download images, primarily of pop culture icons, song lyrics, images of
         sports  teams  or  religious  iconography.   Youth   also    saved files so that  they  could   create  a   portfolio of  their
         projects to continue working on during their next visit to the Clubhouse or to show another member on what
         they've been working. New mentors were often greeted at the front door of the Clubhouse by youth offering to
         show them their work, either posted on the wall or saved in their folders. This practice was highly valued and
         encouraged    by  the  Clubhouse    Coordinator     but was   also readily  embraced       by  members    of   the Clubhouse
         community.
                  Furthermore, design practices are built on the idea that youth can save and then later come back to their
         work, building these practices over time. However, learning to navigate the server space to store files in one's
         folder is not an easy task. There are consequences to forgetting to save files and there are intricate file structures
         to navigate   in order  to  store work,   and  youth  often   dedicate   time to managing       this space  so  that  they can
         efficiently find things. In the following field note excerpt, a Clubhouse youth named Mia engages in the practice

2-
of searching and saving images to her folder, reflecting on why she chose some of the images. This excerpt
begins as she and a mentor are looking up pictures that correspond with words in Mia's word search. Mia wants
to know more about these words, all names of flowers, and so she goes to Google Images to learn more. Once
she's there, she decides that these pictures are worth collecting in her folder.

        Mia [who is in the second grade] took control of the computer and went to Google Images and
        typed in the word, "amaryllis." She had no problems navigating the Internet or remembering
        the  spellings,  despite  the fact that  these  were difficult words  that  she had   probably   never
        encountered. She was also easily able to pronounce the words. After finding the amaryllis,
        Mia searched for buttercups and said, "they're pretty." She decided to download them to her
        folder as well... Shortly thereafter we were looking up images of all sorts of things­mostly
        puppies and other baby animals. Mia had found some baby hamsters that she thought were
        really cute and had previously stored them in her folder so she pulled up those images... She
        then went to her folder on the server and we looked through all of the images and then she
        started talking more about the pop icon images that were stored there. There was Usher, Ciara,
        Destiny's Child and a few others. She suggested that we look for more. "Who else should we
        look for?" she asked. I was at a loss and suggested Raven Symone since I knew that Kaylee
        liked her. Mia said, "Nahhh... how about Mariah Carey?" (05/06/05)

        In this excerpt, we see that Mia, a relatively new member, has been working to build the number of
files that she has stored in her file. We don't have a good feel for the purpose for these practices but they seem
to be sufficient for Mia's needs, acting as a type of trading card that has increasing value the more she has stored
in her folder. At this point in time, the images that Mia collects are there because they're "pretty" and she likes
them, not because she intended to use them anywhere else, such as in a Scratch project. However, this shifts in a
field note written a month later, where she shows the mentor the pictures stored in her folder, ultimately giving
her the idea to  import   these  images  into   Scratch and  sing a song  by  Destiny's    Child  ("Mia's  Girl  Song,"
06/02/05.) Here we see that Mia's practice of saving files to her folder provides a foundation and inspiration for
creative production. Finally, because portfolios are often an amalgamation of personally meaningful material
and are reflective   of many  hours   of work,   they  are formally designated   as private   spaces ­   akin to school
lockers. In the following field note excerpt, Kaylee shows her folder to one of the mentors but pauses before she
opens one of her SuperGoo files to decide whether it would be appropriate to share this particular file with the
mentor. Kaylee's sense of ownership and privacy is reflective of the Clubhouse norm of dedicating folder spaces
as private spaces that need warrant permission before files are viewed by anyone else at the Clubhouse.

        Kaylee   starts  to  look through  her   folder and  then says,  "In this   folder I  have...all these
        pictures of Chris Brown." I asked her about one of her SuperGoo files and she said, "You
        can't see that...Wait, oh you can see that..." and she opens the file. She points to the girl in
        the image with Chris Brown and said, "I didn't like that girl. I was sooooo mad that she was
        right there, so I messed up her face." I laughed because she used SuperGoo to stretch and
        elongate her face ­ it was a fitting (and very expressionate) use of SuperGoo. When I asked
        her who that was, Kaylee told me, "She's a Teen Vogue Model." (08/24/06)

Multiple Mediators: Reasons and Inspiration behind Participation
        In the following passages, we take a look at three types of mediators--artifacts, people, and a token
economy--that were important to drawing the kids into the design culture and conclude this discussion with
some  negative   cases  that were   uninterested  in   working in   Scratch, even   when     presented   with the same
opportunities for participation, in order to learn more about why some members may conscientiously decide not
to participate. It's important   to note   that this section only  takes a   closer look   at the multiple    mediators,
rationales, and inspirations behind youths' involvement in design events (a sub-selection of the activities that
take place at the Clubhouse) and does not explore why youth come to the Clubhouse in general or the role that
multiple mediators play in this process.

                                                                                                                           2-
        Artifacts as Mediators: Dang, that was tight!
                             In the first type of mediator, youth appropriate project ideas or materials from other projects
         that are displayed at the Clubhouse. This type of mediation occurred four times in the random selection of field
         notes. In  the  following    field note  excerpt,   Arnold    viewed   Alicia's   Scratch  project   that featured   knights
         beheading two dragons and decided that he would like to use the idea in his first Scratch project:

                   [Alicia's] dragon program had 2 dragons and 2 knights in a lava background. The project
                   displayed  2 dragons     breathing out   fire then  one  knight  dodging   of the dragon's  flame  and
                   coming  around  it to    chop off  its head.  When     the head  was  chopped   off  you   could see   its
                   progression until it hit the floor (meaning you could actually see the movement of the head
                   being chopping off and falling to the floor)... It even inspired one of the members, Arnold to
                   invest in making a project. After he viewed Alicia's product he exclaimed, "Dang, that was
                   tight! I gotta make myself one of those! Can someone teach me?" Halvor and Sarah both
                   decided to assist Arnold. (05/16/06)

                   Observing what others have done in Scratch can be an exciting way to stimulate project ideas. In the
         next  few  days  following   Alicia's   showcasing      of her  scratch  project,  five more   dragon-and-knight-themed
         projects showed up in the archive. Yet when we analyzed the files, none of the projects used an existing Scratch
         file project to build from. Instead, it seems that youth preferred building their own from scratch when they were
         repurposing ideas from another project.

        Social Mediators: The Role of Friends and Mentors
                   Social mediators   also  played   an   important  role in  creating  the design  culture.  Youth  seemed     to be
         drawn into design practices via their drive to be social in the Clubhouse space. Youth were eager to work with
         mentors and other members toward some end goal, oftentimes to collaboratively produce design texts. Towards
         these ends, mentors also sought out youth that wanted to work on projects. In our previous work, we found that
         mentors engaged in work in Scratch, on average, 20% of their sustained mentoring interactions (Peppler, Kafai,
         & Chiu, 2007). We also found that mentors and members equally initiated design projects, commonly asking
         one another "Do you want to work on a project?" In this sense, the desire to work collaboratively with others
         provided  strong  motivation   for  creative   production.    In fact, youth   in absence   of this  collaborative   support
         structure were less willing to engage in design practices, waiting to be redirected by others in the community,
         particularly mentors.  In the  following     field note    excerpt taken   from the  same   field note,   Alicia was   found
         aimlessly spinning in her chair when her time to participate in the gaming community had expired. In the weeks
         preceding this field note, Alicia eagerly engaged in creative production and had made the dragon and knight
         project. Alicia was then redirected to working on her project (and actually continuing the project mentioned in
         the previous excerpt) by a mentor acting as a social mediator:

                   After I came down from jotting more notes about the Clubhouse, I noticed that Alicia was not
                   playing video games on the TV anymore and just spinning around in a chair at the green table.
                   I went up to her and asked why she wasn't playing video games anymore. Alicia smiled and
                   said "Because   you  only  get  one    hour   to play  and you   can  only play  more   if you   make  a
                   project." (OC:  It was   not  Alicia's choice    to discontinue  playing   video  games,   but  standard
                   placed by the Clubhouse.) (5/16/06)

                   In this excerpt, the mentor plays a strong role in redirecting Alicia, which has ripple effects on the rest
         of the community as we saw in the previous excerpt where her dragon project inspired others to make Scratch
         projects as well. However, another concern surfaces in this excerpt, which highlights the tension between certain
         community practices and resources. Ashley wanted to play videogames, but was redirected to make a project in
         order  to earn   more  game   playing   time.    Peers  also  acted   as social   mediators but   oftentimes   through    the
         presentation of the artifacts mentioned in the previous section. In addition, because of the restrictions at the site
         where researcher were first and foremost mentors, interactions almost always involved some combination of
         mentors and members. How the youth related to one another in the absence or in the presence of mentors is
         under-documented because researchers were not allowed to simply observe and take notes at the site. Rather
         they had to be actively involved in the Clubhouse activities. Therefore, there is not enough field note data to say
         much about peers acting as mediators. However, we do know that membership at the Clubhouse is very much
         mediated  by   youths'  existing   social networks      at home    and  at school.  For  example,    youth  pull  in  fellow
         classmates and neighbors to join the Club.

        The Mediating Token Economy: Pulling in Gamers

2-200
         Finally, we examine the role of the token economy in enticing youth to become involved in design
events. In 2006, the local Clubhouse Community resumed the practice of giving youth "club bucks" (i.e., play
money)   in  return  for their   time spent   designing  projects,   like those    done  in  Scratch. There   was  a  lot of
speculation about the negative effects of the token economy on youths' participation in the collection of field
notes. Overall, we can't substantiate these claims because during this time creative production climbed to an all
time high without any perceptible impact on the quality of work being produced. We focus this discussion on
one of   the   positive impacts  that   the token   economy    seemed     to have   on   the local culture. As   previously
mentioned,   youth  at  the  Clubhouse    formed  various    smaller  communities     of practice--two   communities     that
operated in different spaces of the Clubhouse, yet played an important function in the day-to-day activities--the
gamers and the designers. The activities in which these two groups engaged were at times entirely separate from
one another and the practices that they engaged in were not necessarily valued in the other community. Making
meticulous artistic decisions about the color of the background, for example, is not a highly valued practice in
the gaming     community    but  would  be  a   highly valued  in  the design   community.    Instead,  gamers   valued   the
ability to quickly create a project and exchange it for club bucks.
         Although it's outside the scope of this paper to discuss the practices of the group of gamers that used
creative production     for reentry  in gaming   community,    we    felt that  it was   important to  note that  the token
economy can act as a mediator for involvement in the design practices ­ regardless of where we might situate
these members of the spectrum from peripheral ­ to full participation. In the following field note excerpt, one of
the members who is consistently found playing games at the Clubhouse asks one of the mentors to make "a real
project" using Scratch so that he can earn club bucks.

    We opened up the scratch program because he said he wanted to make a scratch project. We both had
    no idea what to do. I asked him what he had in mind to create. He didn't give me a clear answer. All he
    kept saying was that he wanted to make "a real project, a real one." I, of course, had no idea what he
    meant by this. (I thought, "Aren't all projects real?") He went on to say that he wanted to make a real
    project to get club bucks. But my questions about what he wanted to create were futile." (02/08/06)

Clearly, club bucks provided a strong rationale for working in Scratch. Whether this had a positive impact on
the local culture is debatable. One of the positive effects of the club buck economy includes drawing in youth
from the gaming communities to use production as a means to further participate in gaming activities. However,
youth responded differently to these types of mediators. In the following field note excerpt, Jorge responds to
another member that he is disinterested in earning club bucks for his project: "At some point a [member] asked
Jorge, "Wow, you're going to get a lot of club buck for this project!" Jorge replied, "I don't do it for the club
bucks. I do it because I enjoy it." (02/10/06)." In this excerpt we see that Jorge, who is an active gamer at home,
comes to the Clubhouse not to play games but to make them. He tells us that it's really for personal enjoyment
and me makes projects because he enjoys it. This maps onto what we know about Jorge, an older member that
comes to the Clubhouse almost exclusively to work in Scratch or to occasionally do homework.
         Before we move on to discuss implications of our findings, we should note that a small group of youth
(n = 3) conscientiously chose not to work with Scratch. Although numbers were small, it's worth taking a look
at these events to look at the rationale for not participating in popular design activities. One club member, Jose,
objected first and we identified several reasons for his conscientious objections, including that his older brother,
Jorge, had received a lot of attention for his work. There are a few other cases that have a similar rationale and it
seems that not having an explicit and guided introduction to Scratch may have left them feeling like they needed
to know more in order to be successful with this software. Once they learned more, however, most cases became
interested in  using  Scratch   as a  tool  for creative production.   Some     youth  did   not use  Scratch because  they
already have an in-depth knowledge--and are accustomed to the controls and functions--of another type of
software, such as Macromedia Flash.

Discussion
         In  our  discussion,    we  return to  the pivotal   role of  local   practices  and    mediators in creating   and
sustaining   a design   culture. In  sum,   we  found   that  several  of the   local portfolio-building   practices  at  the
Clubhouse, such as image gathering and file storing, were natural springboards into design practices. In fact,
these leading activities can be seen as emergent design activities. Although these activities differ from those of
the Fifth  Dimension,    they   share   several  similarities to  the  role  of leading   activities. Similar  to the  Fifth
Dimension's task cards, finding and storing images on the computer provides a structured entry point into the
larger community.     However,     unlike   leading activities at  the Fifth    Dimension,    we  found  that most    design
activities appealed to cross-age and cross-gender groups and was the same across youths' developmental stages,
from elementary to high school.
         Membership in the design community was largely defined as having multiple design files stored on the
server, creating work and saving files for later reworking, and engaging in the practice of creating work with

                                                                                                                                2-20
         other members of the community. Scratch was also found to be the most widely used creative software at the
         Clubhouse,    which was   somewhat   surprising  since previous  efforts  to instill a  programming    culture  had  not
         previously taken root (Kafai, Peppler, & Chiu, 2007). Similar to the Fifth Dimension, the computers were strong
         mediators in literacy building activities. In the former, the idea of a mythical persona which one emails readily
         engages   young  children in print literacy building  activities in addition  to some   levels  of  technology   fluency
         building, including navigating the internet, typing, and maintaining an email account. However, the youth at the
         Clubhouse engaged in activities that promoted a wider range of technology fluency building activities, ranging
         from typing   to computer  programming     to other forms   of creative  production.    In the  course of  these  design
         activities, Clubhouse youth expanded beyond multiple literacies found in the Fifth Dimension to include media
         literacy (Jenkins, 2006; Peppler & Kafai, 2007), visual literacy (Barton & Hamilton, 2000; Peppler, 2007), and
         more comprehensive technology fluency (Resnick, Rusk, & Cooke, 1998; Kafai, Peppler, & Chiu, 2007).
                   Three types of mediators seemed to play a particularly important role in this process: artifacts, people,
         and the token economy. Other artifacts, such as sample Scratch projects, images on the wall, Scratch cards, and
         drawings  all seemed  to  capture  youths'  attention  and lead  them  to ask  themselves,     "can I  make    one too?"
         Similar in function to task cards and the meta-organizational maze at the Fifth Dimension, these artifacts served
         to provide inspiration, structure activities and provide assistance as needed. In addition to these artifacts, peers,
         mentors,  and  coordinators  played  a  strong  mediating  role  in  creative production.     Oftentimes   youth   would
         engage   one  another or  ask  a  mentor  if  they  wanted  to   work collaboratively      on a project,   and  working
         collaboratively  seemed   to provide  a context  for   exploration,  effectively lowering     the risk associated    with
         working in new software environments. Finally, we noted the role that the local token economy can have on
         creative production. Despite having mixed reviews by several mentors, the token economy successfully drew in
         members from previously disinterested groups, like those solely engrossed in video game play, into the design
         culture. Just as the Fifth Dimension was conceived as a partnership with UCLinks, so too was this initiative
         reliant on the role that University mentors play at the site. And despite the strong role that mentors play in
         promoting a design culture (Kafai, Desai, Peppler, Chiu, & Moya, 2008), when the token economy was in place,
         we saw some of the highest amounts of creative production over a two-year period ­ all of which took place in
         the absence of mentor support. Unlike the Fifth Dimension sites, Computer Clubhouses continue to serve the
         local community throughout the year regardless of whether University mentors are present.
                   A key question to be considered is whether the success of the Computer Clubhouse design culture can
         easily translate into other settings. There are surely things that we can take away from the Clubhouse setting, for
         how to best organize and mediate participation in design activities in classrooms and other after-school settings.
         Using a   theory of Constructionism   (Kafai,  2006)   to guide  the organization    of the   space seems   to be  a key
         consideration. Youth should have access to computers for multiple purposes ­ not just design activities ­ so that
         they can  see  how  these  experiences   build  upon   one another.  Web     surfing for   materials,  learning  how  to
         download,  save   and retrieve files is really a foundational    portfolio-building  practice,  which  more    elaborate
         forms of creative production are built upon and should be given substantial treatment in the classroom. Of note,
         what to download leads us to another important point: one of the key factors that promoted design activities
         included the ability to use popular media in their work. The sharing and displaying of work drawing on these
         types of references resonated with their peers. It remains an open question, especially in school settings, what
         other media aside from popular images and text we can use to attract youths' interest and participation in design
         cultures.
                   Designing   learning environments     in  after  school   settings  that   promote    diversity, access,   and
         participation in the new media culture can be a challenging and complex undertaking. This paper provided a
         richer description of what such a culture of design looks like, specifically exploring the portfolio practices that
         are so integral to this community and mediational means that promote and sustain long-term involvement. While
         this is only one case of building a design culture, we think that a better understanding of how design cultures are
         structured and sustained can provide insight for designing the next generation of learning environments.

       References
         Barton, D., & Hamilton, M. (2000). Literacy Practices. In D. Barton, M. Hamilton & R. Ivanic (Eds.), Situated
                   Literacies: Reading and Writing in Context (pp. 7-15). London: Routledge.
         Creswell, J. W. (2003). Research Design: Qualitative, Quantitative, and Mixed Methods. Thousand Oaks, CA:
                   Sage Publications, Inc.
         Cole, M. (1998). Cultural Psychology: A Once and Future Discipline. Cambridge, MA: The Belknap Press of
                   Harvard University Press.
         Cole, M. (2007). Fifth Dimension: An After-School Program Built on Diversity. New York, NY: The Russell
                   Sage Foundation.
         Collins,  A., Joseph, D.  &  Bielaczyc,  K.   (2001).  Design  Research:  Methodological       and  Theoretical   Issues.
                   Journal of the Learning Sciences, 13(1), 23-56.

2-202
Gallagher, L., & Michalnik, V. (2007). Assessing youth impact of the Computer Clubhouse Network: May 2007
         Youth     Impact       Survey    administration.      Menlo     Park,     CA:      SRI     International.
         [http://www.computerclubhouse.org/evaluation/Clubhouse%20Survey-May%202007.pdf]
Gee, J. P. (1996). Social Linguistics and Literacies: Ideology in Discourses (2nd Edition ed.). London: Falmer.
Glaser,  B. G., &  Strauss, A.   L.  (1967). The  discovery  of grounded   theory.  Chicago:  Aldine  Publishing
         Company.
Hull, G. & Schultz, K. (2001). Literacy and Learning out of School: A Review of Theory and Research. Review
         of Educational Research, 71(4), 575-611.
Jenkins, H. (2006). Convergence Culture: Where Old and New Media Collide, New York and London: New
         York University Press.
Kafai, Y., Peppler, K., & Chiu, G. (2007). High Tech Programmers in Low-Income Communities: Creating a
         Computer Culture in a Community Technology Center. In C. Steinfeld, B. Pentland, M. Ackermann &
         N.  Contractor (Eds.),  Communities  and  Technologies    2007: Proceedings of the  Third  International
         Conference on Communities and Technologies Conference. New York: Springer.
Kafai, Y. (2006). Constructionism. In K. Sawyer (Ed.), The Cambridge Handbook of the Learning Sciences (pp.
         45-56). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Kafai,  Y., Desai, S.,  Peppler, K., Chiu,   G. &  Moya,  J. (2008).   Mentoring Partnerships   in a Community
         Technology Center: A Constructionist Approach for Fostering Equitable Service Learning. Mentoring
         & Tutoring, 16(2), 191-204.
Kolodner, J., Camp, P., Crismond, D., Fasse, B., Gray, J., Holbrook, J., Puntambekar, S., & Ryan, M. (2003).
         Problem-based learning meets case-based reasoning in the middle-school science classroom:       Putting
         Learning by DesignTM into practice.    Journal of the Learning Sciences, 12, 457­495.
Kozulin, A. (1998). Psychological Tools: A Sociocultural Approach to Education. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
         University Press.
Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge, England:
         Cambridge University Press.
Peppler, K.  &  Kafai, Y.  (2007). From  SuperGoo   to Scratch:  exploring creative digital media  production in
         informal learning. Learning, Media, and Technology, 32(2), 149­166.
Peppler, K.  (2007).   Creative  Bytes: Literacy  and  Learnig  in the Media   Arts Practices  of  Urban Youth.
         Unpublished Doctoral Dissertation, University of California, Los Angeles.
Resnick, M., Rusk, N., & Cooke, S. (1998). Computer Clubhouse: Technological fluency in the inner city.       In:
         Schon,  D., Sanyal,  B.,  and  Mitchell, W.   (Eds.), High  technology  and  low-income    communities.
         Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Schon, D.A., Sanyal, B., Mitchell, W.J. (1998). High technology and low-income communities: Prospects for
         the positive use of advanced information technology.   The MIT Press, Cambridge.
Strauss, A. (1987). Qualitative research for social scientists. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Vasquez, O.A., & Duran, R. (2000).     La Clase Magica & El Club Proteo: Multiple literacies in new community
         institutions. In M. Gallegos & S. Hollingsworth (Eds.) What counts as literacy: Challenging the school
         standard (pp 173-189). New York, NY: Teacher's College Press.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Interaction between Learning and Development. In Mind In Society: The development
         of higher psychological processes (pp. 79-91). Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Warschauer, M. (2006). Laptops and Literacy: Learning in the Wireless Classroom. New York, NY: Teachers
         College Press.
Wertsch, J. V. (1985). Vygotsky and the Social Formation of Mind. Cambridge, Massachusetts and London,
         England: Harvard University Press.
Wertsch, J. V. (1997). Mind as Action. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Zhao, Y., Mishra, P., & Girod, M. (2000) A clubhouse is a clubhouse is a clubhouse. Computers in Human
         Behavior, 16: 287-300.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by a dissertation year fellowship from the Spencer Foundation to Kylie A. Peppler as
well as a grant from the National Science Foundation (NSF-0325828: Resnick, Kafai & Maeda) to Yasmin B.
Kafai and was conducted in collaboration with Mitchel Resnick's research group at the MIT Media Lab. The
views expressed are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily represent the views of the supporting funding
agencies or the University of California, Los Angeles.

                                                                                                                     2-20
