                            Learning with Simulations in Medical Education
              Validity and Design of Learning Settings in Particular Contexts
           Adélaïde Blavier, National Fund of Scientific Research, University of Liège, 5, B35, boulevard du Rectorat,
                                          4000 Liège, Belgium, Adelaide.Blavier@ulg.ac.be
                      Jan Zottmann, Frank Fischer, LMU Munich, Leopoldstr. 13, D-80802 Munich, Germany
                                         jan.zottmann@psy.lmu.de, frank.fischer@psy.lmu.de
              Annette Aboulafia, Interaction Design Centre, University of Limerick, Ireland, annette.aboulafia@ul.ie
                Lucile Vadcard, Vanda Luengo, MeTAH, 1251 avenue centrale, 38400 Saint Martin d'Hères, France
                                      Lucile.Vadcard@upmf-grenoble.fr, vanda.luengo@imag.fr
           Peter Dieckmann, Marcus Rall, Center for Patient Safety and Simulation (TuPASS), University Hospital of
                                      Tuebingen, Silcherstrasse 5, D-72074 Tuebingen, Germany
                            peter.dieckmann@med.uni-tuebingen.de, marcus.rall@med.uni-tuebingen.de

                  Abstract: The aim of this symposium is to initiate the discussion on learning with simulations
                  in   the  medical   sector.  Indeed,   this domain     represents  a   very   complex   and  dynamic
                  environment dealing with a great variety of knowledge (declarative, pragmatic, procedural,
                  gestural,  etc.) that can be   learned under    diverse pedagogical    forms. The  four presentations
                  describe various forms of computer-based technology, which aim to enhance the teaching and
                  learning capabilities of doctors mostly in the form of 3D visualisation, full-scale simulation
                  and  haptic  technology.    They focus   on    research conducted     in the area of anaesthesia   and
                  surgery. These studies emphasize on the necessity to adapt the learning environment to the
                  objective of the training (validity of the learning situations). If the presentations are specific to
                  the medical domain, their methodological and theoretical approaches can be generalized and
                  used in other learning situations.

       Introduction
                  For several years, a lot of training settings have been designed and analysed in medical context. For
         example, modern simulation (3D, haptic, full scale, etc.) in medicine allows performing professional gestures in
         a quite realistic environment. However, these environments have limited capacity to efficiently support training
         because of the difficulty to provide learners with the relevant feedback in the relevant form (Issenberg et al.,
         1999). Indeed, the medical domain represents a very complex and dynamic environment which deals with a
         great variety of knowledge that can be learned under diverse pedagogical forms. So far, research activities from
         different perspectives acted independently to a large extent. One goal of this symposium is to bring together
         researchers from these different perspectives to explore potential synergies with respect to concepts, methods
         and technologies.
                  Highly specialised medical activity involves different aspects of knowledge: declarative, pragmatic,
         perceptual and gestural (sensorimotor). Declarative knowledge deals with explicit elements of knowledge, it is
         made for communication (encyclopaedic knowledge, like anatomy). Pragmatic knowledge allows the expert to
         use  the declarative knowledge     and  apply it to  a  particular  situation. It involves problem  solving,  reasoning,
         control and prediction. It is an experimental part of knowledge, and it is validated by empirical means. However
         it still remains a worded part of knowledge, which enables communication. This is not the case for the last type
         of knowledge: perceptual and gestural knowledge. It deals with dexterity, eye-hand coordination, spatial skills,
         and  it  is transmitted   by a  guided  imitation.   It  cannot  be  easily worded,    and  relies on some     pragmatic
         representation and validation frameworks. As declarative knowledge is well identified, and can be modelled by
         well-known computer representations, pragmatic and gestural knowledge are much more difficult to identify
         and represent.
                  Learning medicine implies the learning of each of these kinds of knowledge, their interactions and their
         use  in  practice. Different   learning situations   are involved   in this process.   Classical transmissive   lectures,
         problem-based learning, laboratories, operating under supervision... different technologies can be introduced in
         these learning situations. The technical and epistemic characteristics of the environments influence the kind of
         learning they are relevant for. These learning situations are both integrated in the "operating under supervision"
         phase, or constitute an additional phase, aiming at reducing the gap between theory and practice. The related
         technologies constitute a very important and relevant category of the medical training. In this wide category we
         will distinguish   different kind  of   simulators   according   to their technological    characteristics and  accuracy
         (Romero, Ventura, Gibaja, Hervás, & Romero, 2006):
              x   Screen-Based Simulators is the most classical, typically the user indicates the sequence of action using
                  the proposed interface and the system shows the state result of this manipulation.

3-
    x    Virtual Reality (VR) is a technology allowing a user to interact with computer-generated space and
         objects which    are presented   in  a three-dimensional   format    (the  most  current)  and  sometimes     with
         sensory information (sound, tactile, etc.). While its use is still not widespread, virtual reality is finding
         its way into the training of health care professionals. Use ranges from anatomy instruction, to surgery
         simulation  (particularly  in   laparoscopy)  are  held to  examine     the latest research  in utilizing  virtual
         reality in the medical fields.
    x    Training Devices and Part-Task Trainers, of intermediate fidelity, allow users to acquire the skills for a
         specific task prior to patient contact.
    x    Realistic Simulators are realistic human simulator and they include an organ or a life-mannequin which
         simulates a real patient. Special sensors allowed detection of the face mask and tracheal tube. Several
         preprogrammed events, including patient bucking, cardiac arrest, changes in blood pressure etc., could
         be activated.
         All these learning environments train or improve some knowledge. However, an important problem in
the design of these learning settings in medicine is the lack of theoretical background of these projects. They
mainly focus on the training of a technique to learn without taking into account some pedagogical aspects or
cognitive components of the task. Because of the lack of theoretical background, most of these training settings
have a problem of validity: they do not train the skill that they have to (content validity) or they do not represent
the task that they want to train (construct validity, Gallagher, Ritter, & Satava, 2003). This important problem of
validity can explain why a lot of these (expensive) training settings are not used by residents or are inefficient in
the learning of medical specialities. In fact, first, medical students or residents do not have a lot of time for
training, thus, this training has to be as efficient and relevant as possible, and secondly, the financial budget
involved  in these  training  settings is high  and   has to be  used  in  an appropriate   and   necessary  way.   In this
context, it is thus essential to study the appropriateness and the validity of these training settings in order to
improve their benefits for the learning of medical procedures.
         This symposium aims to study the validity of some training settings, to ask questions on the design of
these learning situations, to present limits of some settings and to suggest some changes that have been made in
order to improve the relevance of the training setting. If this symposium is specific to the medical context, the
discussion on learning and validity and the theoretical approach of the papers go beyond a specific domain and
can be applied   to other  domains   (work    situations or learning   settings, e.g.  aviation). The four  presentations
describe various forms of technology, which aim to enhance the teaching and learning capabilities of physicians
mostly in the form of 3D visualisation, simulation and haptic technology. They focus on research conducted in
the areas of anaesthesia   and   surgery. The   first presentation  focuses   on   the use  of inanimate    models  in the
training of surgical gestures. The findings suggest that the training environment has not to be necessary very
sophisticated and realistic in order to reach some learning objectives. The second presentation describes the
steps for the designing of a haptic simulator for spinal anaesthesia. It emphasizes the need to consider not only
the accurate recreation of the real world but also all the features of a learning system. In the same way, the third
presentation describes the design of a screen-based and web-based simulator in orthopaedic surgery. Finally, the
fourth presentation  studies  how   observation    can   enhance learning    with    a full-scale simulator. For   that, it
analyzes the effects of a collaboration script in simulation-based courses. The findings suggest that collaboration
scripts can help turning passive learning situations during observation phases into more active and focussed
ones.
         Beyond the focus on medical context, all presentations have some important common characteristics:
they use new technology in order to enhance learning, they place the pedagogical and cognitive aspects at the
centre of their  approach     and   they  are mainly     multidisciplinary  (the  research   teams   involve  physicians,
psychologists, pedagogues, engineers and computer scientists).
         The objective of this symposium is to discuss with the audience in a participative way about some
challenges of the learning in this domain which is directly related to the introduction of new technology and
computer  factors.  It aims   to  present  some    of medical   educational   paradigms     in relation  to the kinds    of
knowledge    (declarative, pragmatic,    procedural,  gestural, etc.), pedagogical     learning   forms  (operating under
supervision, problem solving based learning, collaborative, etc.) and technological devices (full-scale simulator,
screen-based simulator). If the presented researches are specific to the medical domain, their methodological
and theoretical approaches can be generalized and used in other learning situations.

Validity of bench models in learning minimal invasive surgery
         Learning   in surgery   is a  very   long process,  including    a lot  of  different types  of knowledge     and
competencies (anatomical identification, diagnosis activity, psychomotor skills). All these knowledge types are
principally learned in operating room, despite of the limits inherent to this mode of training (risk for the patient,
resources in time, personal). Moreover, with the introduction of some new surgical technologies, the training
becomes more difficult and has to be organised in another way. The main innovation over the past decade is the
minimal   invasive  surgery,  which    has   revolutionized  general   surgery,    laying   new   obstacles for surgeons

                                                                                                                              3-
         attempting to acquire laparoscopic skills. This surgical technique is performed with the help of a camera and
         long   instruments  introduced  through    small   incisions into the   body.  Laparoscopic       surgery   brings a  lot of
         advantages, particularly for the patient (very small incisions, smaller risks of infections, higher accuracy due to
         the magnification by the camera, fast recovery). For all these reasons, minimally invasive techniques are now
         ubiquitous and indispensable in the management of surgical disease. However, despite the clinical benefices,
         significant challenges have been noted: the view of the surgical site is indirect and restricted, the surgeon has to
         observe and manipulate tissues and organs through very small incisions with long and rigid instruments, the
         tactile perception is lost, the feedback of the action is principally visual with a 2D image and finally, the degree
         of freedom for the instruments movements (DOF) is restricted at 4. All these drawbacks are responsible for the
         long learning curve observed in the training of the residents (Blavier, Gaudissart, Cadière & Nyssen, 2007a,
         2006; Sidhu et al., 2004; Forbes, DeRose, Kribs, & Harris, 2004). A new robotic system has been designed in
         order to suppress main drawbacks of classical laparoscopy: it allows to regain 3D visualization of the operative
         field (perceptive advantage) and the DOF lost in classical laparoscopy (dexterity advantage).
                  In this context of new technology introduction, we evaluated the validity and the role of bench model
         (inanimate   trainers) on the training  of medical   students  and residents   in   these   two   techniques (classical  and
         robotic laparoscopy, cf. Blavier, Gaudissart, Cadière & Nyssen, 2007b). To separately evaluate the effect of
         instruments dexterity and of depth perception according to the task, 60 medical students without any surgical
         experience were divided in 3 groups: one using the robotic system in 3D, another using robotic system in 2D,
         and  the third using   traditional laparoscopic    technique (2D  view).  After    a   phase of   familiarisation  (pick and
         place) with  the  technique of  their  condition,  subjects  performed    four specific   fine  motor  tasks of    increasing
         complexity (checkerboard, rings route, circle pattern cutting and suture and knot). We measured the speed, the
         accuracy and their subjective impressions about their performance (satisfaction, self-confidence and difficulty).
         Data   showed  that the  training  with   these two  techniques   differently  improved     the   performance    and gesture
         accuracy of participants. Classical laparoscopy that is performed with a 2D view and low dexterity, required
         more practice than robotic system that is more intuitive in the view mode and gestures.            Indeed, 2D view is less
         natural and requires more controlled cognitive processes and thus a specific training in order to act in a 2D
         world (as shown in cognitive psychology, cf. Marotta, Kruyer, & Goodale, 1998). Because of this difference
         between the two techniques, all tasks were not appropriate for the two techniques according to the learner's
         expertise: some tasks were too easy with one technique (e.g. pick and place in classical laparoscopy) and very
         difficult with the other while it was the contrary for another task (e.g. suture and knot were very difficult in
         classical laparoscopy and not with the robotic system). Performances in rings route task were the only one to be
         significantly correlated to the other tasks: indeed, rings route resumed a lot of useful and usual fine movements
         required in minimal invasive surgery and reproduced some components of the complexity of the suture gesture
         (except  the knot).  Moreover,     scores on  this  task were  highly   correlated     with  the  subjective evaluation   of
         satisfaction, self-confidence and difficulty. Therefore, this task seemed to be a very efficient and accurate way to
         evaluate minimal invasive systems or to improve and train surgical performances. Furthermore, we showed that
         training with one technique did not lead to the mastery of the other technique: the transfer of skills from a
         technique to the other was very difficult. In conclusion, the training with both techniques out of operating room
         has to be differentiated and more intensive in classical laparoscopy (Blavier et al., 2007a,b).
                  Concerning    the  bench  models,    this study showed   that  using  bench    models    allows  us to  understand
         better the nature   of  the cognitive   and   motor   processes   involved  in     the execution   and   in  the  control of
         laparoscopic gestures. This allows us to improve the quality of the training devices. Moreover, if bench models
         improve surgical performance out of operating room, several studies have shown that the skills acquired on
         bench models are transposable in operating room (Hamilton et al., 2002). Contrary to animals or cadavers, the
         principal advantages of bench models are their low cost, the possibility to repeat several times a same task at
         any time and thus to evaluate a training or to assess a performance (Stone & McCloy, 2004; Gallagher, Ritter, &
         Satava, 2003). Finally, studies using bench models show a benefit of the training in the improvement of the
         performance but also in the feelings of mastery, familiarity, satisfaction, self-confidence and facility, which are
         essential factors of well-being, motivation, accurate performance and new technology acceptance in operating
         room (Issenberg et al., 1999; Hamilton et al., 2002). By all these characteristics, most of studies encourage the
         use of bench models in training of surgical skills in parallel to traditional learning in operating room, but the
         type and the difficulty of the task have to be designed according the level of subject's expertise and adapted to
         the technique to train.

       Designing a simulated haptic learning environment for spinal anaesthesia
                  One   of  the strengths   of simulator-assisted  learning is   the application     of  knowledge    in  a hands-on
         approach without patient risk or time constraints. In the medical profession simulation technology is gaining
         widespread acceptance because of its ability to demonstrate multiple patient problems, the reproducibility of
         content, safety  of the   environment,    and the  ease  of  simulating   critical events   (Issenberg et   al., 1999).  The
         simulator  offers  the  ability to    provide   hand-on  learning  in   a risk-free,    realistic environment,     including

3-00
constructive feedback and error correction that is crucial in the development of expertise in medical practice
(Ericsson, Krampe, & Tesche-Rmer, 1993).
         Clearly    there are  promising   potential applications   for  simulation-assisted    learning  in  the  field of
medical  procedural   skills. However,    to date, much   of  the  research has  taken  place   in a  fragmented   manner
directed primarily at modifying simulation technology and "parachuting" it into a variety of medical work or
training environments.     Many   simulators  have   been  developed     focusing   on the  technical    aspects,  such  as
reproducing  the physical     and sensory    environment  and    hereafter evaluated   in educational    settings, e.g.  for
anaesthetic  procedures      (Gorman, Krummel,      Webster,    Smith,   &  Hutchens,   2000;   Dang,    Annaswamy,      &
Srinivasan, 2001; Wilson, Pallotta, Reynolds, & Owen, H., 2003; Magill, Anderson, Anderson, Hess, & Pratt,
2004; Färber, Heller, & Handels, 2007).
         It is of course important that the value of a simulator as an educational method must be explored and its
usefulness over existing methods identified, before widespread implementation of new technology, as argued by
Morgan, Cleave-Hogg, McIlroy and Devitt (2002). However, designing simulation tools for training also imply
designing educational activities and educational context. Thus, pedagogical issues should be incorporated into
the design   process from    the very beginning.    Designing    a simulation-based    training system   need   to address
technical, clinical and pedagogical considerations. As argued by Shaffer et al. (2001) the design process need to
consider not only the accurate recreation of the interactions among anatomy, pathology and therapeutic actions,
but also features of a learning system, such as functionality that allow rehearsal and practice, instructor review
and testing  capabilities.   Only a  full simulation    system,  including  a high-fidelity  simulation   engine,   a well
developed simulation curriculum, and a robust set of interactions with other physicians, can develop the most
subtle and important parts of a physician's skills (ibid).
         Similar considerations were applied to our project of design and development of a simulator for "spinal
anaesthesia"   that involved   researchers   from   the University   Hospital   and  our  University    centre  of design.
Simulating the components of this procedure, adding learning features and making the simulation usable for a
medical training is multidisciplinary research collaboration. The research team represents medical clinicians,
medical educators, psychologists, engineers and computer scientists. All researchers were involved in all the
phases of the research process although to a different degree.      The case studies were designed and conducted by
the medical experts with methodological support from educational psychologists. The engineers and computer
scientists designed  and     redesigned the  haptic  devise   in   close collaboration  with  the  medical    doctors   and
educational psychologists. The testing and interpretation of the results was conducted with all parties involved.
         The lack of design approaches in the area of simulation-assisted medical learning was incentive to the
proposed   approach,  which    we    named   the Design-Based       Medical   Training (DBMT).       If improvements     in
simulator-assisted training are to proceed effectively, we propose to apply the following basic design principles:
    1.   Learning outputs, including core competencies, should be defined and be integral to the development
         and implementation of the learning systems.
    2.   A   multidisciplinary   approach  should   be  applied  to the  design and  evaluation    of  technology  (virtual
         reality, simulation and web-based learning) and through an iterative process to its applications.
    3.   Applications     of such systems    should  include, not   just training, but selection   for  specialty  training,
         credentialing (and re-credentialing) and competency-based assessment of medical doctors. Advanced
         forms of these applications can result in adaptive and personalised training programmes.
    4.   The role of human-human and human-machine interaction should be factored into the development of
         training programmes at the design stage.
         The training in "spinal anaesthesia" was selected to serve as a pilot for developing an improved system
of  learning using   an   integrated approach.   The    DBMT     approach   was adopted    with    the  aim  to develop   a
simulated-assisted learning environment for training of the psychomotor and cognitive skills involved in "spinal
anaesthesia", including a training program/curriculum.
         Perform this technique the anesthetist needs to place a needle in the thin layer of fluid that surrounds
the spinal cord. As there are no visual clues, the doctors need to `feel' the resistive forces as the needle passes
through the different layers (skin, subcutaneous tissue and ligaments). Verbal explanation of these sensations to
trainees is obviously very difficult. Recognition and identification of the different sensations can only be learned
by experience - although having a mental representation of the anatomy and the procedure also seems to be
important.
         In order to define core competencies, we carried out a pilot study in a large teaching hospital over a
period of  one year.  It  applied both  qualitative  and  quantitative   data such  as questionnaires    and  focus group
discussions, and involved in total 66 participants (consultants, trainees, nurses and patients). The results from
the study were essential in order to identify so-called "user requirements" for the design of the system.          For the
first prototype of the simulator we focused on recreating the feel of going though the different layers of tissue,
which was argued to be one of the most important indications of correct needle insertion, and also the most
difficult aspect of the process to explain to trainees. The specification of the authentic `feel' was carried out with
a  number   of consultants    and trainees   based  on  a haptic    devise that were   designed    for  this purpose    (the

                                                                                                                                3-0
         `landscape' model   with  force  feedback). The   results  were applied  to  the design   of  the haptic   devise which
         consists of: i. the different sensations for surface resistance, for example needle tip on skin; ii. pop-sensation,
         when   the needle  breaks through   and  proceeds  to the  underlying  layer;  iii. viscosity, the sensation of going
         through tissue.
                 The   simulator  applied  a   PHANTOM     haptic   device from  SensAble     Technologies   Inc.   The interface
         consisted of a model of a spine and included educational components such as audio and visual feedback The
         `requirement' to be able to visualize the procedure was created using 2D and 3D animations. While performing
         the procedure it is possible to simultaneously view the needle insertion in a small window on the interface. It is
         also possible to rotate the image of the (transparent) back to view where the needle had been placed.
                 The ability to visualize the process goes beyond what is possible in real settings. This feature makes the
         simulator powerful for training purposes. Viewing the same image of the spinal cord from multiple perspectives,
         and having the ability to reflect and discuss various options before a second attempt makes the learning process
         easier and possibly faster. To learn by exploring, by making mistakes and by responding to feedback in a safe
         environment are valuable features of effective learning processes.
                 An initial assessment of the haptic devise was carried out with a number of consultants and trainees
         with a very positive result. However, a more methodical assessment is needed to identify which aspects of the
         simulated procedure are required for successful training, such as e.g. in what way visualization support building
         a mental model of the procedure, the relationship between the haptic sensation and the visualization, and the
         introduction of problem-based learning situations. The validation of its teaching and learning efficacy will be
         conducted in the near future in a number of hospital settings applying a Competence-based Knowledge Space
         Theory (Heller, Steiner, Hockemeyer, & Albert, 2006). Following this a curriculum will be developed which
         includes training on the final prototype of the hactic learning environment.

       Learning        by   Problem       solving:       a case     study     of  screen-based            and    web-based
       simulations design
                 Percutaneous    techniques    in orthopaedic   surgery  have been   developed     during  these  last  15   years,
         enhancing the safety of patients while reducing morbidity and duration of recovering. These techniques imply
         that the control of surgeons' actions is entirely made by X-rays taken during the operation. There is no more
         open surgical area. This shift in means of control, from direct 3D visualisation to indirect 2D visualisation,
         evidently modifies the way the techniques can be taught and learned. In French University Hospitals surgical
         techniques  are taught  during   real interventions,  by observation   and  increasing    responsibilities given  to the
         resident by the expert surgeon. This pedagogical set up, which was sufficient when direct visualisation was
         possible, presents some limits for the learning of percutaneous techniques.
                 Our work aims to design a computer based learning environment to accompany and foster the learning
         process in percutaneous orthopaedic surgery. The design process implies a pluridisciplinarity of researchers:
         psychologists,  educationalists, computer   scientists and   surgeons.  In a   first step the approach     consists on a
         crossed analysis of the prescribed technique, based on academic articles and courses, and the real activity of
         surgeons during the operations, based on videos and post verbalisations of operations. Results show evidence of
         discrepancies between prescription and reality, even some contradictions and violations. The second step of our
         design process focuses on the elicitation of pieces of knowledge used by surgeons in action to operate. This long
         term analysis   of expertise has  conducted  to   the formalisation  of about    a   hundred  of  knowledge    elements,
         together with the definition of their domain of validity (Vadcard & Luengo, 2005). One key aspect of the design
         process of the project is that the results of these psycho-cognitive analyses have been expressed in a sufficiently
         formalised way to allow their computer implementation. The network of problems (defined by their didactic
         variables such as: kind of lesion, quality of the bone, age of patient...), actions performed (insert a pin, take an
         X-ray...), controls  of actions  (the  elicited elements   of knowledge),   and    systems   of  representation  (X-ray,
         speech, vision, proprioception...) is the key element of a dynamic learning environment which can diagnose
         learners' knowledge and calculate appropriate feedback to be given.
                 The learning environment architecture relies on the communication of different components. A screen-
         based simulator for the placement of screws in case of pelvis diseases allows learners to act, and produces traces
         of these actions that are communicated to the diagnosis component. This one, thanks to the traces of actions and
         the previously  described network,    calculates  hypothesis  concerning   the learner's  used   knowledge    during the
         problem-solving session. These hypotheses are communicated to a didactic decision making component, which
         calculates the best fitted feedback to be given to the learner, according to the actions performed (Luengo, Mufti-
         Alchawafa, Vadcard, & Vu Minh, 2007). At the present state of development of the project, possible feedbacks
         are the proposition of another problem to solve (the choice of the problem is calculated thanks to the didactic
         variables), a precise part of an online course to consult, a clinical case to consult (clinical cases can play the role
         of counter-examples or reinforcement). Evidence is already validated of learning added-value of the use of the
         single simulator   component.    Further  validations  are ongoing,  dealing   with   two  aspects  of   the  work:  the
         pedagogical added-value of the whole environment, and the validity of the design process.

3-0
Learning        with    full-scale        simulations:          Effects      of   a     collaboration          script      for
observers
         Simulation-based      learning  can  play  a  significant  role for learning    about  the   real world:   simulations
provide learners with rich and dynamic situations in which knowledge is supposed to be acquired that can hardly
be obtained in the context of traditional lectures (see Swaak, van Joolingen, & de Jong, 1998). Most patient
simulator   trainings  in  medical    education   do  not solely   aim   at fostering   domain-specific     (medical   factual)
knowledge of the learners, but also more domain-general knowledge, like heuristics to cope with situations of
medical  crisis  for  instance. The    key points   of Crisis   Resource    Management      (CRM)     are  examples   for  such
heuristics  and  include    principles   like  "know   the   environment",       "call for  help   early"   or "communicate
effectively" (Howard, Gaba, Fish, Yang, & Sarnquist, 1992; Rall & Gaba, 2005). Ultimately, it takes more than
just medical factual knowledge to be successful as a health professional: effective communication and adequate
strategies  to prevent  and    handle   critical incidents  are essential   aspects    when    performing   in medical    crisis
situations.
         Active  participation     is considered  a  major  advantage    of  simulation-based      training courses   likewise.
However, only few persons can usually act concurrently in the simulator hands-on while the remaining group
observes the running scenario live or via video. Most of the individual learners' time in simulator courses is
actually spent  watching    others    perform.   While learning   through   observation    can  be  beneficial  under   certain
circumstances (see Rummel & Spada, 2005), the observational phases found in many simulator courses tend to
be hardly structured, leaving the observing participants in an unfocussed and passive state.
         In  our research,   we    have explored   how    collaboration   scripts can   be  used   to instructionally  support
students in these observational phases. In short, collaboration scripts are instructions that distribute roles and
activities among learners and can also include content-specific support for task completion (Kollar, Fischer, &
Hesse,   2006).  There     has been    good   empirical   support   from    many     domains    on  the    positive effects of
collaboration scripts, for example the individual acquisition of knowledge (see King, 2007), the acquisition of
domain   general  knowledge     (Stegmann,       Weinberger,    &  Fischer,  2007)     or  the  improvement     of  interaction
between learners (Weinberger, Ertl, Fischer, & Mandl, 2005).
         In a field study, effects of a collaboration script for observational phases in a full-scale simulator course
with video-assisted debriefing in anaesthesia were investigated with 35 medical students from the University
hospital of Tuebingen. The empirical study had a control group design and aimed to investigate the effects of a
collaboration   script in   simulation-based     courses  with  video-assisted    debriefing    on  the    individual learning
process, the collaborative learning process and the individual learning outcome with respect to applying the
CRM heuristics in crisis situations. The collaboration script was represented on a sheet of paper and designed to
support the individual learning processes by drawing the attention of the students to specific CRM key points
during the  observational    phases.   Moreover,   the script   introduced   a   collaboration  phase  where    student dyads
were asked to reciprocally suggest examples of appropriate as well as inappropriate or missing applications of
CRM from the respective session observed. A control group attended the regular simulator course.
         Even though the whole intervention was rather short, results showed the expected positive effects of
the script on individual and collaborative learning processes: scripted students showed an increased focus on
CRM heuristics (t(13.00) = -4.13, p < .001, d = 1.56) and improved information exchange on CRM (t(12.00) = -
5.62, p < .001, d = 2.21) as compared to the control group. They were also more active during the observational
phases with    regards to   elicitation (t(16) = -2.47,   p < .05, d = 1.45),    externalization   (t(15.96) = -2.67,  p < .05,
d = 1.14) and consensus building (t(15.81) = -4.63, p < .001, d = 1.94). Regarding individual learning outcomes,
subjective and objective measures diverged strongly, resulting in a complex pattern with no clear advantage of
the script condition: interestingly enough, the self assessment data revealed that students in the control group
actually perceived a significantly higher improvement of CRM skills throughout the course than the scripted
students (t(31) = 2.36, p < .05, d = .88). The groups did not show any significant differences in a CRM skills test
at the end of the course.
         Findings    suggest    that  collaboration    scripts  can  help   turning    passive   learning   situations  during
observation    phases  into more   active  and   focussed   ones.  The individual      and collaborative   learning  processes
could be fostered, but the script failed to show the expected positive effect on the learning outcome, leading us
to the assumption     that  either the  intervention  was   too short  or   that the   validity of the CRM     skills test was
insufficient. With regards to the divergence found between the perceived improvement of CRM skills and the
low scores in the CRM skills test, one could speculate the danger of developing illusion of competency (Stark,
Gruber, Renkl, & Mandl, 1998) was eventually reduced by the collaboration script. Further research including
both longer periods of script intervention and a more fine-grained analysis of processes and outcomes is needed.

References

                                                                                                                                   3-03
        Blavier, A., Gaudissart, Q., Cadière, G. B., & Nyssen, A. S. (2006). Impact of 2D and 3D vision on performance
                 of novice subjects using da Vinci robotic system. Acta Chirurgica Belgica, 106, 662-664.
        Blavier, A., Gaudissart, Q., Cadière, G. B., & Nyssen, A. S. (2007a). Comparison of learning curves in classical
                 and robotic laparoscopy according to the viewing condition. American Journal of Surgery, 194, 115-
                 121.
        Blavier, A., Gaudissart, Q., Cadière, G. B., & Nyssen, A. S. (2007b). Perceptual and instrumental impacts of
                 robotic laparoscopy on surgical performance. Surgical Endoscopy, 21, 1875-1882.
        Dang, T., Annaswamy, T. M., & Srinivasan, M. A. (2001). Development and evaluation of an epidural injection
                 simulator with force feedback for medical training.    Studies in Health Technology and Informatics, 81,
                 97-102. PMID: 11317827 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]
        Ericsson, K. A., Krampe, R. T., & Tesche-Rmer, C. (1993). The role of deliberate practice in the acquisition of
                 expert performance. Psychological Review, 100, 363-406.
        Färber, M., Heller, J., & Handels, H. (2007). Simulation and training of lumbar punctures using haptic volume
                 rendering and a 6 DOF haptic device. Proceedings of SPIE, Vol. 6509, 65090F.
        Forbes, T. L., DeRose, G., Kribs, S. W., & Harris, K. A. (2004). Cumulative sum failure analysis of the learning
                 curve with endovascular abdominal aortic aneurysm repair. Journal of Vascular Surgery, 39, 102-108.
        Gallagher, A. G., Ritter, E. M., & Satava, R. M. (2003). Fundamental principles of validation, and reliability:
                 rigorous science for the assessment of surgical education and training. Surgical Endoscopy, 17, 1525-
                 1529.
        Gorman,   P., Krummel,    T.,  Webster,  R., Smith,  M.,  & Hutchens.  D.    (2000). A  Prototype   Haptic Lumbar
                 Puncture Simulator. In J. D. Westwood, H. M. Hoffman, G. T. Mogel, R. A. Robb, & D. Stredney
                 (Eds.), Medicine Meets Virtual Reality (pp. 106-110). Amsterdam: IOS Press.
        Hamilton, E. C., Scott, D. J., Fleming, J. B., Rege, R. V., Laycock, R., Bergen, P. C., Tesfay, S. T., & Jones, D.
                 B.   (2002). Comparison     of video  trainer  and virtual  reality training   systems  on acquisition  of
                 laparoscopic skills. Surgical Endoscopy, 16, 406-411.
        Heller, J., Steiner, C., Hockemeyer,    C.,  & Albert, D. (2006).  Competence-Based     Knowledge    Structures for
                 Personalised Learning. International Journal on E-Learning, 5, 75-88.
        Howard, S. K., Gaba, D., Fish, K. J., Yang, G. C. B., & Sarnquist, F. H. (1992). Anesthesia crisis resource
                 management      training: Teaching  anesthesiologists  to handle  critical  incidents. Aviation, Space  &
                 Environmental Medicine, 63(9), 763-770.
        Issenberg, S., McGaghie, W., Hart, I., Mayer, J., Felner, J., Petrusa, E., Waugh, R., Brown, D., Safford, R.,
                 Gessner, I., Gordon, D., & Ewy, G. (1999). Simulation technology for health care professional skills
                 training and assessment. JAMA, 282, 861-866.
        King, A. (2007). Scripting collaborative learning processes: A cognitive perspective. In F. Fischer, I. Kollar, H.
                 Mandl, & J. M. Haake (Eds.), Scripting computer supported communication of knowledge: Cognitive,
                 computational and educational perspectives (pp. 13-37). New York, NY: Springer.
        Kollar, I., Fischer, F., & Hesse, F. W. (2006). Computer-supported collaboration scripts ­ a conceptual analysis.
                 Educational Psychology Review, 18(2), 159-185.
        Luengo, V., Mufti-Alchawafa, D., Vadcard, L., & Vu Minh, C. (2007). Design of adaptive surgery learning
                 environment     with bayesian  networks.   INTED2007.     Proceedings  of  the International Technology,
                 Education and Development Conference. Valencia, Spain.
        Magill, J., Anderson,    B., Anderson,  G.,  Hess, P., & Pratt, S. (2004).   Multi-Axis Mechanical   Simulator  for
                 Epidural Needle Insertion. In S. Cotin & D. N. Metaxas (Eds.), Proceedings of the ISMS 2004 (pp.
                 267-276). Berlin: Springer.
        Marotta, J. J., Kruyer, A., & Goodale, M. A. (1998). The role of head movements in the control of manual
                 prehension. Experimental Brain Research, 120(1), 134-138.
        Morgan, P. J., Cleave-Hogg, D., McIlroy, J., & Devitt, H. (2002). Simulation Technology: A Comparison of
                 Experiential and Visual Learning for Undergraduate Medical. Students Anesthesiology, 96, 10-16.
        Rall, M., & Gaba, D. M. (2005). Human Performance and Patient Safety. In R. D. Miller (Ed.), Anesthesiology.
                 Baltimore: Lippincott.
        Romero, C., Ventura, S., Gibaja, E. L., Hervás, C., & Romero, F. (2006). Web-based adaptive training simulator
                 system for cardiac life support. Artificial Intelligence in Medicine, 38(1), 67-78.
        Rummel, N., & Spada, H. (2005). Learning to collaborate: An instructional approach to promoting collaborative
                 problem solving in computer-mediated settings. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 14(2), 201-241.
        Shaffer, D. W., Dawson, S. L., Meglan, D., Cotin, S., Ferrell, M., Norbash, A., & Muller, J.        (2001) Design
                 principles for the use of simulation as an aid in interventional cardiology training. Minimal Invasive
                 Therapy & Allied Technology, 10(2), 75-82.
        Sidhu, R. S., Tompa, D., Jang, R., Grober, E. D., Johnston, K. W., Reznick, R. K., & Hamstra, S. J. (2004).
                 Interpretation of three-dimensional structure from two-dimensional endovascular images: Implications
                 for educators in vascular surgery. Journal of Vascular Surgery, 39 (6), 1305-1311.

3-0
Stark, R., Gruber, H., Renkl, A., & Mandl, H. (1998). Instructional effects in complex learning: Do objective
        and subjective learning outcomes converge? Learning and Instruction, 8(2), 117-129.
Stegmann, K., Weinberger, A., & Fischer, F. (2007). Facilitating argumentative knowledge construction with
        computer-supported    collaboration scripts. International  journal of computer-supported  collaborative
        learning, 2(4), 421-447.
Stone, R., & McCloy, R. (2004). Ergonomics in medicine and surgery. British Medical Journal, 328(7448),
        1115-1118.
Swaak, J., van Joolingen, W. R., & de Jong, T. (1998). Supporting Simulation-based Learning: The Effects of
        Model   Progression     and Assignment    on   Definitional  and  Intuitive Knowledge.   Learning   and
        Instruction, 8(3), 235-252.
Vadcard, L., & Luengo, V. (2005) Interdisciplinary approach for the design of a learning environment. Paper
        presented  at the   E-Learn   2005  - World    Conference   on  E-Learning  in  Corporate, Government,
        Healthcare, and Higher Education, Vancouver, Canada.
Weinberger, A., Ertl, B., Fischer, F., & Mandl, H. (2005). Epistemic and social scripts in computer-supported
        collaborative learning. Instructional Science, 33(1), 1-30.
Wilson, J. G., Pallotta, O. J., Reynolds,  K. J., &  Owen, H.   (2003). An  Epidural Injection Simulator. Paper
        presented at the World Congress on Medical Physics and Biomedical Engineering WC2003, Sydney,
        Australia.

Acknowledgments
All authors would  like  to thank   the Network   of Excellence Kaleidoscope   (EC  6th FP) for supporting their
common research and the organization of this symposium.

                                                                                                                   3-0
