  Elementary Teachers' Ideas about Effective Science Teaching:
                                          A Longitudinal Study

                 Elizabeth A. Davis, University of Michigan, 610 E. University Ave., 1323 SEB,
                              Ann Arbor, MI, USA, 48109-1259, betsyd@umich.edu

         Abstract: Beginning elementary teachers face numerous challenges in engaging in effective
         science teaching,   and  the   expectations   for  elementary  science  teaching   are becoming     even
         more   demanding.   Since  teachers'    beliefs mediate  their practice,  characterizing   their beliefs
         about   effective  science   teaching   can   yield   insights about   ways    to  support   beginning
         elementary   teachers   as they   learn  to   teach science.   This   longitudinal  study  follows    six
         elementary   teachers in   their  early years   of teaching. Five   conceptions    of effective  science
         teaching  are identified.  In  addition, though    the teachers' beliefs  are  largely consistent   over
         time--indicating that these are, indeed, central beliefs within their beliefs systems--a move
         away from reform-oriented practices is identified for most of the teachers in their third year of
         teaching.   Implications   for teacher   preparation   and   induction  point  to  the  importance    of
         supporting teachers in understanding the rationales behind reforms such as inquiry-oriented
         science teaching and engaging students in scientific practices.

Introduction
         Effective   science teaching   helps    students   develop conceptual     understandings   and   inquiry  abilities
necessary to be productive citizens and science learners. It emphasizes engaging in and learning about scientific
practice (Anderson, 2001; Crawford, 2007). The "essential features" of inquiry (NRC, 2000) can be distilled
into asking and answering scientific questions, constructing explanations using evidence to support claims, and
communicating and justifying findings. This emphasis on scientific practices is echoed throughout the learning
sciences community (e.g., Edelson & Reiser, 2006; Gotwals & Songer, 2006; NRC, 2007). With support, young
children can engage in sophisticated scientific practices and develop deep understandings of appropriate science
concepts (Metz, 1995; Lehrer et al., 2000). Typical elementary science instruction in the US, however, does not
support students in achieving either of those outcomes (Weiss et al., 2003). In the US and elsewhere, elementary
teachers often  rely on "activities   that work"  (i.e.,  that run  smoothly   and  yield   expected  results) rather than
engaging in meaningful, coherent, inquiry-oriented science teaching (Appleton, 2002).
         Beginning elementary teachers, in particular, face challenges in engaging in effective science teaching
(Davis,  Petish, &    Smithey,   2006).    For   example,    beginning  elementary     teachers--who      in the   US  are
generalists--may lack substantial science subject matter knowledge (Anderson & Mitchener, 1994), may hold
unsophisticated  understandings    of the  nature  of  science  and  of scientific  inquiry,   and may   focus mainly    on
engaging  their  students  (Abell,  Bryan,  &    Anderson,   1998)  or  may    even avoid   teaching  science   altogether
(Appleton & Kindt, 2002). Preservice elementary teachers may view instruction as separable from and even
unrelated to  students,   or may    integrate    ideas about    instruction and    students  (Davis,  2006),   illustrating
differences in their professional vision (Sherin, 2007). Relatively little work has followed beginning elementary
teachers over their early years of practice, and even less research has focused on the development of beginning
elementary teachers'   views  of science   teaching.   Toward   the  goal   of filling this gap, this longitudinal   study
explores the research questions, How do beginning elementary teachers conceive of effective science teaching?
How do the teachers' ideas change over their first several years of teaching? Teachers' beliefs--especially their
central beliefs--can be crucial mediators of their practice (Pajares, 1992; Yung, 2006). Understanding these
perspectives can   help teacher    educators   provide   more   meaningful     and appropriate   support  during   teacher
preparation and induction.

Methods
         The study follows six elementary teachers over three or more years of practice; four began as first year
teachers who had moved into their own classrooms, and two already had two or three years of experience. (A
seventh teacher was excluded due to inadvertent changes to the interview protocol.) The participants graduated
in different cohorts from the same undergraduate teacher education program. They took similar coursework,
including versions of an elementary science methods course in which the essential features of inquiry were
increasingly emphasized. (I served as the instructor for four of the teachers.) Each is a white female, similar to
elementary   teachers  across  the  US     (NCES,  2003).    Each   taught   in a  self-contained    classroom.    Table 1
summarizes some characteristics of the teaching contexts (located all over the US) as well as their years of
participation in the study.

                                                                                                                                1-1
                 In addition to their work in the methods class as preservice teachers, data sources for the longitudinal
         study included three interviews each year, files tracking use of an online learning environment, daily descriptive
         logs, written reflections, and correspondence. These data were collected for up to five years for each teacher.
         The primary data source for this study are the first and third interview for each year, in which questions about
         effective science teaching were asked. The other data sources serve as secondary data for further evidence for
         assertions. While these data sources limit what we know about the teachers' actual practice, they do allow us to
         characterize the teachers' knowledge, ideas, and beliefs, and to track changes in these over time.
                 To answer the first research question about characterizing the teacher's conceptions of effective science
         teaching, the relevant interviews were coded according to the coding scheme summarized in Table 2. Codes
         were  tabulated for each  interview and  across teachers,   and  then  synthesized to identify themes   (Miles &
         Huberman,  1994).   Frequency  counts of codes      allowed rough comparisons    across teachers   and over  time,
         providing insight into the second research question about change over time.

         Table 1: Teachers' participation in study and school characteristics.

         Teacher    Year 1            Year 2      Year 3        Year 4         Year 5    Year 6       Year 7     Year 8
         Maggie                                                 Suburban private         Urban public school; >40%
                                                                Catholic sch.; 4th gr.   English as a Second Language;
                                                                (years "1" & "2")        3rd grade (gets MA in special
                                                                                         ed.) (years "3", "4", & "5")
         Tammy                                    Suburban private Catholic school; 3rd grade
                                                  (years "1", "2", "3", & "4")
         Whitney    Rural/suburban public 4-8 sch.; near
                    military base; highly transient; 4th gr.
         Lisa       Suburban public school; 4th grade; wide
                    range of SES
         Catie      Suburban          Different suburban private Catholic school;
                    priv. Catholic;   2nd grade; large class sizes (gets MA in
                    6th grade         science education)
         Kathleen   Sub. public       Same suburban public
                    school; 2nd gr.   yr.-round sch.; 3rd gr.

         Table 2: Summary of coding scheme.

               Coding Category      Examples of Indicators
                     Planning       Sequence, integration with other subjects, curriculum materials, school curriculum
                      Variety       Mixture of activity structures, mixture of investigation and text
                     Balance        Balance of activity structures, of investigation and text, constraints affecting balance
                  Assessment        Assessing prior knowledge, giving tests, formative assessment
            Learning, learning      Determining learning goals, achieving learning goals, making connections between
            goals, and learners     ideas, building on prior knowledge, attending to learners, active learning
          Inquiry practices and     Answering big questions, hands-on, experimentation, recording data, using evidence
               nature of science    to support claims, communicating ideas, being like scientists
                  Science facts     Learning factual knowledge, learning vocabulary
               Science concepts     Understanding concepts, real-world applications of science concepts, transfer
                 General skills     Looking up information, reading non-fiction, working in groups, taking notes
              General practices     Reviewing, using science journals
            Engaging students       Keeping students interested, making it fun
          Using books or texts      Using textbooks, using tradebooks, giving information

       Results
        How do beginning elementary teachers conceive of effective science teaching?
                 The six   beginning  elementary  teachers    involved in  this  study demonstrated   five  distinguishable
         conceptions about effective science teaching, with some teachers demonstrating multiple stances. These stances
         involved (a) planning toward learning goals and attending to learners, (b) developing students' understanding
         through experience, (c) prioritizing inquiry, (d) mixing hands-on and reading, and (e) developing general skills
         for citizens and learners. These stances vary in terms of the priority the teachers placed on their instruction as
         opposed to the outcomes of their instruction (i.e., how they prioritized teaching versus learning), as well as in
         the details of the instructional practices employed. Interviews are referred to by "x.y" where x is the year of the

1-00
data collection (equivalent to the teacher's years of experience, except for Maggie and Tammy) and y is the
interview within that year (either 1 or 3).

Planning toward Learning Goals and Attending to Learners
        Maggie, who was the most experienced of the teachers in the study, emphasized planning far more than
any of  the other  teachers,  who   rarely  (or  never) mentioned    anything  having    to do with   planning  in their
discussions of effective science teaching. Maggie spoke often about the importance of determining learning
goals and then designing instruction to meet those goals. For example, Maggie said,

        [H]aving some kind of curriculum in place would be effective science teaching, knowing what
        it is that you're supposed to cover in a year and, and I don't necessarily think it's a bad idea to
        have like a scope and sequence laid out of what you want to do and then being able to work
        your unit around it... (Maggie, int. 4.1 [the first interview of year 4, or Maggie's seventh year
        of practice])

Maggie's   focus on  helping  students   develop   understandings   was  similar to  Tammy's,   Whitney's,  and  Lisa's.
However, her emphasis on setting learning goals and developing plans to help students reach goals was unique.
        Maggie     also emphasized   assessment    far  more than   the  other teachers, talking  about   assessment as
serving multiple   purposes  (e.g., helping   an effective  science teacher  identify her   students' prior knowledge,
helping her determine how her students were understanding key concepts in a lesson). For example, she said,

        [Y]ou need to be able to assess the prior knowledge in the kids to see what they know already
        and see where they've gotten their information and then decide, if you're going to be effective
        with your teaching, to see what level you need to start with. (Maggie, int. 1.3)

In addition to assessing students' prior knowledge--crucial for Maggie, who prioritized building on students'
prior knowledge--Maggie        continued    by   discussing  assessing   through   reviewing    and   more  summative
assessment to "make sure that you can figure out what they have been learning" (int. 1.3). Maggie emphasized
that an effective science teacher would continually monitor her students' understanding and attend to their prior
knowledge and their experiences. Especially once she moved into an urban school in which her students came
from a wide range of language and cultural backgrounds, Maggie was far more likely than other teachers to
discuss her own students' cultural and contextual experiences and to connect this to effective science teaching.
        Maggie     combined   her   focuses  on  planning, learning   goals, and learners   as she described   effective
science teaching as involving developing long-term curricular plans oriented around learning goals and designed
to help one's students achieve the goals. For example, Maggie said, "I kind of sit down at the beginning of the
unit and think what do I really want these kids to take away from this?" (int. 3.3). She went on to integrate ideas
about big ideas in science, students' prior knowledge and experiences, and her planning process.
        Maggie's    definition of   effective science   teaching, in  sum,   was different   from  the   other teachers'.
Maggie prioritized both planning and assessment far more than the other teachers did. Maggie also reflected an
emphasis   on  the anticipated or   real outcomes  of  the  instruction. While   she did describe   a range  of activity
structures and activity types, these were couched in terms of how they helped her promote her learning goals.

Developing Students' Understanding through Experience
        Three of the teachers--Whitney, Lisa, and to a lesser extent Tammy--prioritized developing students'
understanding    through  experience     as they  defined   effective science   teaching.   Each  emphasized     inquiry
practices, hands-on  experiences,    or  both;   each emphasized    learning   and  learning goals    or outcomes;  and
Whitney    and Lisa  also both  emphasized     the importance    of students   developing   conceptual   understandings
and/or making real-world applications, specifically. Of these three teachers, Lisa was the one most likely to
characterize her definition of effective science teaching as involving inquiry (int. 2.1) and/or to frame it around
the answering   of scientific questions   (ints. 1.3, 2.1, 3.1). Neither  Whitney    nor Tammy     ever  used  the word
"inquiry" in their characterizations of effective science teaching. They were more likely to use language like
"hands-on" (Whitney: ints. 1.1, 1.3, 2.1, 2.3; Tammy: ints. 1.1, 1.3, 3.3) or "experiment" (Whitney: ints. 1.3, 2.3,
3.3; Tammy: ints. 2.1, 3.1, 4.3), terms that Lisa used, as well. Whitney often described what could be shortened
to "learning by doing"; for example, she said that effective science teaching involves having students "actually
doing things with the concept that you're teaching" (Whitney, int. 2.3). Whitney also emphasized that students
need to learn from activities. For example, when asked what characterizes effective science teaching, she said,

        It's not just a fun activity that, you know, they like, but they didn't learn anything from. I think
        you really to have effective science teaching, they can come out of the activity, they can come
        out of the unit, and they can tell you something about it. Not say 'we played with water one

                                                                                                                             1-01
                  day and then we measured the height of people in the classroom.' They can say, you know, 'I
                  learned that you can measure using these units, and this is for the, and I can take this cup of
                  water and tell you how much, tell how much water it would take to fill it. I can use these
                  tools'--being able to give more scientific terminology to things instead of just ... 'we did this
                  stuff.'... (Whitney, int. 2.1)

                  Whitney spoke often of the importance of making connections and being able to apply science ideas in
         the real world. For example, in interview 2.3, Whitney described at length a time when her students were able to
         apply ideas from their electricity unit to a real-world phenomenon they experienced several months later. Lisa
         also prioritized the importance of students being able to make real-world applications, and she reflected perhaps
         the most extreme  constructivist perspective    on   student learning of all the teachers in the study, saying, for
         example, that "all of [the students'] knowledge comes from experience" (Lisa, int. 2.1).
                  Each of these three teachers also reflected at least one additional, different emphasis. Whitney focused
         more heavily than did other teachers on engaging students as a part of effective science teaching, which for her
         meant building on students' interests (often, e.g., through a KWL [what do you Know, what do you Want to
         learn, and what have you Learned] structure). Lisa discussed the role of generalized practices within an effective
         science teacher's classroom; for example, Lisa talked about an effective science teacher's use of bulletin boards
         to pique students' interest (int. 1.3) or incorporation of writing into the science class (int. 3.1). Tammy also
         emphasized the importance of using a variety of approaches in effective science teaching (e.g., different activity
         structures) and developing in students a set of general skills such as the ability to take notes, as discussed below.
                  While these teachers varied in the specifics of what they said, each prioritized students' learning by
         doing, but none would be characterized as relying solely on "activities that work" (Appleton, 2002). All three
         show, in different ways, effective uses of experience in promoting students' understanding of science concepts,
         as well as a balanced stance with an emphasis on both the outcomes of teaching and the instruction itself.

        Prioritizing Inquiry
                  To a certain extent, Lisa, as discussed above, prioritized inquiry per se. It was Kathleen, however, who
         truly embraced ideas about inquiry-oriented science teaching. In five of the six interviews in which she was
         asked about her definition of effective science teaching, Kathleen spoke at length about inquiry and various
         inquiry practices. She elaborated on these ideas far more than the other teachers did. In addition, Kathleen's
         discourse reflected a level of sophistication about inquiry-oriented science teaching not reflected in the other
         teachers' talk. Kathleen regularly talked about the importance of framing students' work around scientifically-
         oriented questions that they could answer through investigation. For example, Kathleen said, "I think that it
         would be focused on one main question that everyone, the teacher, the student, everyone is aware that they're
         actually working to solve. ..." (Kathleen, int. 2.1). Even more prominent in Kathleen's talk was a focus on the
         use of evidence  in supporting   claims.    Kathleen   regularly described effective science teaching as involving
         students in making explanations, using evidence, making claims, and the like. For example, Kathleen said,

                  [E]vidence would have to be a big focus because I think that's a hard concept for them to
                  grasp, that they need to support what they're, what they're claming... (Kathleen, int. 1.1)

         In these ways, Kathleen's talk was very much aligned with the way inquiry-oriented science teaching had been
         framed in her elementary science methods course (adapted from NRC, 2000).
                  On the other hand, Kathleen was far less likely than the other teachers to mention learners, learning, or
         learning goals in her definition of effective science teaching. While Kathleen mentioned developing conceptual
         understandings occasionally, she did so far less often than Whitney and Lisa.

        Mixing Hands-On and Reading
                  Catie was unusual in that she highly prioritized the use of a variety of approaches, in defining effective
         science teaching; she did so even more than Tammy who was more tempered in her belief. While Catie valued
         the use of experimentation or hands-on experiences, she valued at least as highly the use of other approaches in
         conjunction with those hands-on experiences. For example, Catie said "it's definitely a combination of things"
         (Catie, int. 3.3). Similarly, after explaining at length a range of different approaches an effective science teacher
         would use, and when asked to summarize her ideas, she said, briefly, "to just mix it up. ... Um, to not be doing
         the same thing..." (Catie, int. 2.3). Catie spoke of an effective science teacher as one who achieved a balance:

                  [Y]ou've got to have the hands on stuff. Like that is super, super important. But you've also
                  got to have some book knowledge. Because without the book knowledge you're not going to
                  really understand what's going on with the hands-on activity. So I think there's got to be like a
                  nice 50/50 of that going       on at least. I know  the  National Science   Teachers Association

1-0
         recommends that middle school teachers have 80% of their classroom activities be hands on.
         ... [W]here do you come up with the time to figure out what you're going to do...? I mean
         essentially that's like four out of the five days that you teach science you're doing a hands-on
         activity, and that's just not realistic. But, you know I think 50/50 is, is good, where they've got,
         you know, like a concept being presented and then they've got some sort of activity to go
         along with it. (Catie, int. 1.3)

While Kathleen also discussed the importance of balance and of using more directed forms of instruction in
addition to inquiry-oriented science teaching, for Kathleen, the balance was heavily weighted toward inquiry; in
fact, in an early interview Kathleen said,

         ... I don't think it needs to be a 50/50 balance, I think that there should be more of them
         investigating, but I think that there needs to be a portion of it devoted to direct teaching in
         there so that they actually address the concepts. And I think that um, I wouldn't want it all to
         be investigation. I think a lot of it needs to be time to reflect that as investigation so it would
         be a classroom where they could investigate but also sit down and talk about what they come
         up with or present it in different ways or write about it... (Kathleen, int. 1.1)

Kathleen mentioned balance or variety in most interviews, but she elaborated on inquiry far more extensively.
         Catie, on the other hand, espoused the goal of a 50/50 balance, but in fact her talk reflected far more
emphasis on general instructional practices, including transmission-oriented practices, than emphasis on ideas
related to inquiry or even hands-on experiences. Catie was more likely than the other teachers to briefly list
instructional practices that she believed one might see in an effective science teacher's classroom. For example,
Catie mentioned using books, including tradebooks and textbooks (in all of her interviews); using videos (ints.
2.3, 5.1); incorporating discussion (ints. 2.1, 4.1); using worksheets (ints. 2.1, 2.3, 3.1, 4.3); using the computer
(ints. 3.1, 5.1, 5.3); doing projects or research (ints. 4.1, 5.3); and doing cut-and-paste activities (int. 4.3). While
most of the teachers discussed a range of instructional approaches, Catie was by far the most extreme in her
perspective. For Catie, the use of inquiry (which she does mention by name, unlike some of the other teachers)
or hands-on experiences is just one of many instructional practices in an effective science teacher's repertoire. In
particular, Catie emphasized   the role    of texts in science--the  "book knowledge"      that she believed   would
promote understanding (int. 1.3).
         Catie's rationale for the use of a variety of experiences for learners shifted across interviews (although
the shift may not represent a change over time). She talked, at different times, about the importance of using a
variety of approaches because "that's what scientists do so that's what my kids should be doing" (int. 2.1), to
build general skills and science knowledge (ints. 1.1, 2.3, 3.1, 3.3, 4.1, 5.1), to promote students' engagement
(ints. 3.1, 3.3, 4.3), and because of her concern about students' different "learning styles" (int. 4.1, int. 5.3).
Catie also mentioned the constraints against engaging in hands-on experiences, as noted above in the quote from
interview 1.3.
         At the same time, Catie   de-emphasized learners, learning goals, and learning in her talk (although she
did discuss these themes more often than did Kathleen). Also notable is that Catie was far less likely, in her
definitions  of effective science  teaching,    to  discuss the importance   of  students    developing  conceptual
understandings or making real-world applications of science ideas. While Catie does demonstrate concern for
conceptual understanding in other aspects of the data, the fact that she largely neglected this aspect when asked
to characterize effective science teaching, over a series of 10 interviews over 5 years, may be important.

Developing General Skills for Citizens and Learners
         While Catie tended--at least in her definitions of effective science teaching--not to focus on students'
learning of science concepts, she did emphasize an effective science teacher's achievement of a different type of
goal: the development of students' general skills. This was especially prominent once Catie moved into the
second grade classroom after her first year of teaching. Catie hoped to ensure that her young students would
develop the skills they needed to be successful students and productive citizens. For example, Catie wanted the
children to  be able to  extract information    from   a non-fiction book (ints. 1.1, 2.3,  5.1) and  to be   able to
collaborate together on a project (int. 3.3). Catie's emphasis is in keeping with a reasonable perspective among
primary-grades teachers, who often hope to inculcate in their students not just academic success but also other
kinds of skills and dispositions. Tammy, too, placed emphasis on the development of students' general skills.
Tammy    perceived  that  an effective    science teacher would  be  able to help  her students   learn  to   look up
information in books (int. 1.1, 3.1, 3.3), for example, or to be successful test-takers (int. 3.3). Tammy spoke of
these skills as being important in high school (int. 1.1) and because of the emphasis on test-taking in society
(int. 3.3). In sum, Catie and Tammy did prioritize student learning--but they valued general skill development
more than did the other teachers.

                                                                                                                            1-0
        How do teachers' ideas about effective science teaching change over time?
                 In general, the teachers were surprisingly consistent in their stances toward effective science teaching
         over the years of the data collection, suggesting that these may be central beliefs (Pajares, 1992). Teachers' ideas
         about effective science teaching tended not to change much from interview to interview, although of course the
         nuances of what they said differed. For example, Catie was remarkably consistent in her belief that effective
         science teaching  involves   a  mix of  different types of  experiences.  In interview 1.3, as noted   above,   she
         discussed wanting students to experience a "nice 50/50" of what she referred to as "hands-on stuff" and "book
         knowledge." This general stance toward the importance of "a variety" was obvious in each of the 10 interviews
         in which  she  was   asked about    how  she would   define effective science  teaching.  Similarly,  Maggie   was
         consistently oriented toward learners and learning; Whitney and Lisa were consistently oriented toward learning
         by doing  and  toward  making    connections; and   Kathleen was  consistently  oriented  toward    inquiry, and in
         particular toward using evidence to support claims. In each case, these themes were mentioned at least once
         (and typically multiple times)   in each  interview (with  one exception;    Whitney did  not mention   real-world
         application of ideas in interview 2.1).
                 That   said, some  teachers  did  demonstrate   some shifts.  For example,   Maggie's  orientation   toward
         planning (and especially toward identifying learning goals to guide her planning) became more pronounced over
         time, going from approximately 3 mentions across our first 4 interviews with her to approximately 14 mentions
         in the second 4 interviews. She also increased in her prioritization of students' learning of vocabulary to aid in
         their ability to precisely communicate their scientific ideas (and then this remained a consistent focus).
                 Most notably, for several teachers, a shift in the direction away from reform-oriented science teaching
         occurred during their third year of teaching. Whitney, Lisa, Catie, and Kathleen all experienced a form of this
         shift. While the shifts are discernible to an extent in the frequency counts of codes, they are mostly apparent in
         the substance of the statements themselves. For Whitney and Lisa, the shift involved a subtle movement away
         from high prioritization of hands-on experiences and learning by doing (for Whitney) and inquiry (for Lisa) and
         toward a wider range of experiences for learners. For example, in contrast to her early responses, at the end of
         her third year Whitney said,

                 I think effective science teaching is using a variety of methods to get to an answer... [Students
                 are] able to read something and understand it, the terminology and the things they're talking
                 about. They're able to, you know view a demonstration and discuss together how that works
                 or, you know what principles are behind that and also that they are able to experiment and
                 work in groups together. That they're able to, you know have built a group dynamic and be
                 able to work together to, you know solve, solve a problem or follow a procedure, like multiple
                 different things, not just I can write the stuff on the board, they can follow along but they can
                 do that or they can also, you know get a problem and try and figure it out together as a group.
                 Being able to do all of those things in the classroom instead of just one way of teaching and
                 one way of learning, that way all the kids are involved. (Whitney, int. 3.3)

         Whitney's responses previously had indeed described "one way of teaching and one way of learning" (int. 3.3).
         In interview 3.3, in  contrast  to most  of her previous  interviews, Whitney   discusses variety,  general   skills,
         general practices, and the use of text. Similarly, Kathleen, in year 3, mentioned inquiry only once (a significant
         contrast from earlier responses) and instead emphasized finding a balance. (In fact, she worried that she might
         eventually make just such a shift even in her first year of teaching, in her journal from 9/30/04.) In our final
         interview with Kathleen, she said,

                 I think that effective science teaching is a balance between kind of direct or ... basically just
                 providing information for them, whether it's in a text or a movie or whatever and balancing
                 that with allowing them to discover through activities um, science on their own and coming up
                 with their own conclusions with it, but I think you can't do just one. (Kathleen, int. 3.3)

         Kathleen's balance seemed to shift. While Catie was more oriented toward a mix of experiences for learners
         already--the "nice 50/50" she talked about in interview 1.3--she, too, shifted away from a prioritization of
         hands-on experiences and toward a range of experiences. In fact, Catie herself noted this shift, saying,

                 I've kind of branched away my thinking um, from doing like um, like before I was thinking
                 oh, I have to be doing so many more experiments with them ... but, you know even other
                 kinds of activities, like, you know a computer webquest like, you know assembling a planet
                 book, I think are good activities for the kids to gain knowledge, just as much as experiments
                 are. (Catie, int. 3.1)

1-0
          In sum,    for the  most  part, the   teachers' perspectives   on  effective  science  teaching   were   relatively
constant over the 3-5 years of the study. The exception is a slight but notable shift away from reform-oriented
practices in the teachers' third year of teaching. While the teachers' focus on using a range of tools is admirable,
it may de facto result in fewer experiences with phenomena and scientific practices for students.

Implications and Conclusions
          While a study of six teachers cannot yield generalizations about all elementary teachers, it is possible
to see in these six teachers a range of not unexpected types. Maggie's stance--valuing planning toward learning
goals and attending to learners--aligns with the notion of professional vision (Sherin, 2007). She integrated
understandings of her students with the big ideas in science that she identified, and developed short- and long-
term  curricular  plans  accordingly.   A  teacher  who   reflects Maggie's     stance toward  effective   science   teaching
demonstrates   characteristics   that  teacher  educators     typically  value;  a  science  teacher  educator   might   also
encourage    the  teacher  to  value   reforms  like  inquiry-oriented   science    teaching  and   teaching  for  scientific
practices, as well (NRC, 2007). Three teachers valued developing students' understanding through experience.
While two of these teachers never mentioned "inquiry" in their characterizations of effective science teaching,
their perspectives   nonetheless    provide   a leverage   point,  in   that they  already   value  developing   conceptual
understandings and real world applications of science ideas. These teachers could be supported in seeing the
value of  engaging   students   in  a  specific form  of  learning   by  doing--namely     engaging   in  scientific practice
(Edelson & Reiser, 2006; NRC, 2007). Kathleen demonstrates the opposite phenomenon. She values inquiry
and   understands  ways   of   engaging   students  in  inquiry.  She   lacks,  however,   a  serious focus  on  conceptual
understanding; the value is seen in practices for practices' sake. Kathleen and others like her could be supported
in recognizing that inquiry is valuable as an instructional approach because it promotes students' understanding
of science concepts and scientific work. Catie's stance is quite different from most of the others, though she and
Tammy are similar in some ways. Catie values a variety of instructional approaches, and has strong rationales
for doing so. Catie also faces a number of pragmatic issues, not the least of which is that she typically has 30 or
more second-graders in her class; any teacher would be hard-pressed to engage that many young children in
inquiry-oriented   instruction.  In   addition, Catie   remains   true   to  her own   learning goals--these     are  simply
different than   the learning   goals  associated  with   current  calls for  reform   in the US   (e.g., NRC,   2007).  For
teachers  like Catie,   teacher education  and   professional   development      might productively   focus   on expanding
understanding of the value of inquiry as well as its characteristics.
          These teachers were relatively consistent in their beliefs over the 3-5 years of the study. Nonetheless,
the move toward more conservative practices during the third year for four of the six teachers is important to
note. While    in some   ways   this  finding   confirms  existing   research  that indicates  that  beginning   elementary
science teachers move toward less risky instructional practices (Appleton & Kindt, 2002; Davis et al., 2006), the
current study extends these findings by indicating that the shift can occur even after three years of successful
teaching, and among teachers who are unusually dedicated to working on their science teaching. This finding
has clear implications for the need for induction support not just for first or second year teachers. In addition, it
raises questions about how educators can shape teachers' contexts such that they do not move away from the
reforms   they may      embrace  early  on  in  their  teaching.  Finally,   this  finding  informs   the  work  of  teacher
education. Preservice teachers need to be prepared for the forces that will work against their innovation (Lortie,
1975) and know of resources and other forms of support to which they can turn. Induction support, professional
development, structural changes, and preservice teacher education can all play unique but complementary roles
in helping teachers develop and maintain knowledge and beliefs related to innovative teaching practices.
          The consistency of these beginning teachers' beliefs lends credence to the claim that these are central
beliefs within    their belief systems  (Pajares,  1992),     and thus  may   mediate  especially   strongly  their  practice
(Yung, 2006). Indeed, many of the teachers moved directly into describing their own practice when asked to
characterize effective science teaching. That said, research is needed to overcome the limitations of this study
and   connect  beliefs   like these to  observation  of   the teachers'  actual  practice. Observational   study  in  Catie's
classroom indicates that her perspective on effective science teaching is well-aligned with her actual practice
(Beyer & Davis, in review) but wider scale research is necessary to determine the extent to which other teachers
also reflect these beliefs about effective science teaching and how these beliefs mediate teachers' instructional
work. That said, these findings extend longitudinal work on beginning teachers beyond their first year or two of
teaching, and    provide  a   focus  on disciplinary   practices  at the    elementary level.  The   findings illustrate the
differences in teachers' trajectories as they learn how to teach (Anderson et al., 2000). In sum, this longitudinal
study has implications for improving teacher education and induction support for elementary science teachers.

                                                                                                                                 1-0
       References
         Abell, S. K., Bryan,  L.  A.,  & Anderson,    M.  A. (1998). Investigating  preservice  elementary  science  teacher
                  reflective  thinking  using   integrated media   case-based  instruction  in  elementary   science  teacher
                  preparation. Science Education, 82, 491-509.
         Anderson, C. (2001). Designing systems to support learning science with understanding for all: Developing
                  dialogues among researchers, reformers, and developers (No. available at http://www.project2061.org/
                  events/meetings/textbook/science/anderson.htm). Washington, DC: Project 2061.
         Anderson, L. M., Smith, D. C., & Peasley, K. (2000). Integrating learner and learning concerns: Prospective
                  elementary science teachers' paths and progress. Teaching and Teacher Education, 16(5-6), 547-574.
         Anderson,  R.  D.,  & Mitchener,  C.   P. (1994). Research   on science  teacher  education.  In D. L. Gabel  (Ed.),
                  Handbook of Research on Science Teaching and Learning (pp. 3-44). New York: Macmillan.
         Appleton, K. (2002). Science activities that work: Perceptions of primary school teachers. Research in Science
                  Education, 32, 393-410.
         Appleton, K., & Kindt, I. (2002). Beginning elementary teachers' development as teachers of science. Journal of
                  Science Teacher Education, 13(1), 43-61.
         Beyer, C.,  &   Davis,  E.  A.  (in  review). Fostering   second-graders'   scientific explanations:   A   beginning
                  elementary teacher's knowledge, beliefs, and practice.
         Crawford,  B. (2007).  Learning  to  teach  science  as inquiry in  the rough  and tumble    of practice. Journal of
                  Research in Science Teaching, 44(4), 613-642.
         Davis, E. A. (2006). Characterizing productive reflection among preservice elementary teachers: Seeing what
                  matters. Teaching and Teacher Education, 22(3), 281-301.
         Davis, E. A., Petish, D., & Smithey, J. (2006). Challenges new science teachers face. Review of Educational
                  Research, 76(4), 607-651.
         Edelson,  D., & Reiser,  B. (2006).  Making   authentic   practices accessible to  learners: Design challenges  and
                  strategies. In R. K. Sawyer (Ed.), Cambridge Handbook of the Learning Sciences (pp. 335-354). New
                  York: Cambridge University Press.
         Gotwals, A., & Songer, N. B. (2006). Measuring students' scientific content and inquiry reasoning. In S. Barab,
                  K. Hay & D. Hickey (Eds.), Proceedings of the International Conference of the Learning Sciences
                  (Vol. 1, pp. 196-202). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
         Lehrer, R., Carpenter, S., Schauble, L., & Putz, A. (2000). Designing classrooms that support inquiry. In J.
                  Minstrell & E. Van Zee (Eds.), Inquiring into inquiry learning and teaching in science. Washington,
                  DC: American Association for the Advancement of Science.
         Lortie, D. (1975). Schoolteacher: A sociological study. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
         Metz,  K. (1995).    Reassessment   of developmental    constraints on  children's science   instruction. Review  of
                  Educational Research, 65(2), 93-127.
         Miles, M., &   Huberman,    A.  M.   (1994).  Qualitative data  analysis (2nd  ed.).  Thousand   Oaks,  CA:  SAGE
                  Publications, Inc.
         National Research Council (NRC). (2000). Inquiry and the National Science Education Standards. Washington,
                  DC: National Academy Press.
         National Research Council (NRC). (2007). Taking science to school: Learning and teaching science in grades
                  K-8. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.
         Pajares, M. F. (1992). Teachers' beliefs and educational research: Cleaning up a messy construct. Review of
                  Educational Research, 62(3), 307-332.
         Sherin, M. G. (2007). The development of teachers' professional vision in video clubs. In R. Goldman, R. Pea,
                  B. Barron & S. Derry (Eds.), Video research in the learning sciences. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
                  Associates.
         US Department     of Education  National   Center  for Education Statistics (NCES).    (2003).  Digest of  Education
                  Statistics, 2003. Retrieved July 1, 2005, from http://nces.ed.gov/programs/digest/d03/index.asp
         Weiss, I., Pasley, J., Smith, P. S., Banilower, E., & Heck, D. (2003). Looking inside the classroom: A study of
                  K-12 mathematics and science education in the United States. Chapel Hill, NC: Horizon Research, Inc.
         Yung, B. (2006). Assessment reform in science: Fairness and fear. Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Springer.

       Acknowledgments
         This research  is  funded   by a PECASE/CAREER          Award   REC   #0092610    and  a Center   for  Learning and
         Teaching  award   CLT  #0227557     from  the National  Science  Foundation   in  the US. However,     any opinions,
         findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the author. I appreciate the
         interest and cooperation of the teachers who made this research possible. I thank Carrie Beyer, Cory Forbes,
         Michele Nelson, Debra Petish, Julie Smithey, and Shawn Stevens for their invaluable help with this work.

1-0
