               Problem-Solving in History: Strategy Games and Schema
                                   Ben DeVane, Shree Durga, University of Wisconsin-Madison,
                                                    Email: devane@wisc.edu

               Abstract: This paper connects the conclusions of recent research on video games and learning
               to   prior research   on problem     schemata    and problem-solving.     This  study  examines     the
               problem-solving practices of expert and novice young players of Civilization III in a game-
               based learning program, and concludes that the problem schemata framework has power and
               utility in analyzing problem-solving in game-based environments.

      Introduction
               Recent research suggests that the medium of video games           are powerful tools for supporting learning
       and academically-valued cognitive practices. (Squire, 2006; Steinkuehler & Chmiel, 2006; Shaffer, 2007). This
       research argues that well-designed games for learning can provide players with the skills needed to survive in an
       information-age economy and a culture of simulation. Because many commercial video games employ well-
       documented principles of learning (Gee, 2003) ­ performance before competence, learning through doing, role-
       related identities and scaffolded cycles of feedback ­ some educators and researchers have taken to using these
       "off-the-shelf" games in educational endeavors (Squire et al., 2005). In particular, many successful video games
       allow players to problem-solve with complex interactive models. While the successful learning outcomes of
       these programs have been documented, little research has focused on the specifics of how players of games for
       learning engage with specific problems as they play. This paper examines at the problem-solving strategies of
       expert and novice participants in a game-based learning program that uses Civilization III to teach conceptual
       history and geography, and argues that players read problems and categorically represent them internally using
       domain-related schemata (Chi et al., 1981).

      Theory
               Chi et al. (1981) looks at the way that expert and novice categorize and represent physics knowledge
       and, drawing   on   prior   research on  problem     schemata,   contends  that in  the early phase     of reading  and
       representing a problem, experts use their declarative knowledge to initially activate and evaluate conceptual
       knowledge structures that could lead to a solution using conditions of applicability. Experts then further test said
       schema  to determine    its appropriateness.  Once    a  correct  schema  is activated, the   expert uses    her or   his
       procedural and declarative knowledge to solve the problem. Novices, on the other hand, can be characterized as
       having enough detailed declarative knowledge to represent the problem, but do not have a sufficient amount of
       abstract procedural knowledge to solve it.

      Method
               Six participants, ages ten to thirteen, in an after-school program for low-income youth were presented
       with a  problem    in a modified  Civilization   III scenario,  a specific instance  of  the  game.  The   three expert
       participants had engaged in more than seventy hours of game play, and the three novices had played the game
       between  six  and  ten  hours prior  to the study.   The novices  were  proficient  enough   with the   game  that  they
       understood the basic game controls and concepts.
               Player were asked to discover how to construct a specific unit in-game. The game scenario had been
       changed so that the construction of the unit now needed a specific additional natural resource to be connected to
       a player's city. The problem was constructed to evaluate how well expert and novice players used the in-game
       visualization tools   and   historic-information resources   to  solve problems     involving changes    in game    play
       mechanics. Prior studies of online communities of expert players had established that seasoned players routinely
       create scenarios   with modified rules   and almost   universally  used said  tools to  keep  track  of each scenario's
       extensive, often user-create, mechanics and rules.
               This study utilized a "think aloud" protocol to try to gain direct feedback regarding the participant's
       thoughts (Ericsson    & Simon, 1980). Participants were first told that their goal was to discover how to build a
       specific game unit, that the normal way to build said unit had been changed and that the in-game tools had been
       updated to reflect    those changes.  In default  scenarios  packaged   with  the   game, construction   of the  unit (a
       swordsman) required players to research two specific civilization advances (bronze working and iron working),
       find a specific natural resource on the game map (iron) and build a road connecting a city to the resource.
       Participants responses were examined using the framework of Discourse analysis (Gee, 1999).

      Results
               A    schema-based    characterization  of  the   differences between    the problem   solving   of  experts and

3-0
novices was generally consistent with the results of this experiment. All experts had represented the problem,
activated accurate  schema   for  the problem  and verbally   described the solution  within  five minutes  of being
given it. In contrast, the novices all struggled with the solution for more than twenty minutes. While the novices
had similar difficulties in creating a problem schema, the experts utilized divergent strategies in categorizing the
problem, building a solution path and solving the problem.
          Two of the three experts actually verbally described the correct procedural solution before they could
enact it in game. Expert 1 initially adopted a solution schema connecting new civilization advances with unit
construction. Within three minutes he confidently challenged researchers on the construction of the problem
scenario, but, while researchers were taking a few seconds formulating a response, he created a more precise
schema that connected unit construction to civilization advances and available resources.       He took three more
minutes   to enact in-game  the   procedural solution that he built based   on his new   schema.   Expert 2 verbally
provided an correct categorization of the problem schema ­ he noted that either the required civilization advance
or natural resources had been changed - and a precise description of the steps he would take with each solution.
However, he declined to enact these steps in game play, as he said he wanted to challenge himself. He then
proceeded to acquire the normally-correct civilization advances needed for the unit and started guessing which
natural resources were needed based upon their position. After connecting four resources to his city over the
course of ten minutes, he found the two needed resources to solve the problem. Expert 3 initially categorized the
problem as one that was primarily about civilization advances and tested in game play two different civilization
advances   that  she thought  would     solved the  problem.   After  these  initial tests  weren't successful,  she
recategorized the problem as one about resources. She then looked up which resources were needed to build the
unit, and successfully built the desired unit after eight minutes. While the three expert pursued varying tracks in
building a problem schema, testing the schema, outlining a procedural solution and executing the solution, they
all successfully represented the problem in terms of conceptual schema and built procedural solutions based on
said schema. In contrast, the novices all had trouble representing and solving the problem.
          The novices had trouble representing the problem in terms of conceptual schema related to the game,
and consequently all failed the problem-solving task. The novices all held conceptualized civilization advances
as enabling unit construction, so their schema for the problem was that they need to find the right civilization
advance. Given this limitation of their conceptual knowledge, they all failed to formulate correct procedural
solutions to the problem. Two of the novices tried researching a civilization advance and then building a unit.
When this test of their solution to the problem failed, they were unable to think of any alternative solutions. The
third novice thought that he needed a "special technology," or civilization advance, for a solution, but lacked the
procedural   knowledge   to describe  how  he  might  go about  doing   so. Such   findings are consistent  with the
characterization of Chi et al regarding the differences in expert and novice problem solving.

Conclusions
          The schema-based framework for describing the relationship between cognition and problem-solving
aptly characterizes the practices of   the expert and novice Civilization III players. This small, pilot study does
not pretend to have provided conclusive evidence that the framework has applicability to the entire range of play
practices in which Civilization III players engage, but it does point to the utility of using the framework for the
analysis of some practices in context. We plan to use this method as a foundation for further describing the
systemic understandings of the game model that players develop. Certainly, much more research is needed to
better describe the problem-solving practices of players of video games.     Moreover, the question of    how to use
scheme-based    analyses in  determining  whether  game-based    models  of  history  connect directly to  academic
practices and   knowledge   still looms. While other  research  has shown   that participants in   programs that use
Civilization III as a curricular resource for history build robust model-based understandings of history, more
research needs to relate these longitudinal studies to the specific problem-solving activities of young people in
these settings.

References
Chi, M. T. H., Feltovich, P., & Glaser, R. (1981). Categorization and representation of physics problems by
          experts and novices. Cognitive Science, 5, 121-152.
Gee, J. P. (2003).   What video games have to teach us about learning and literacy. Palgrave/Macmillan: New
          York, NY.
Gee, J. P. (1999). An Introduction to Discourse Analysis: Theory and Method.       London: Routledge.
Shaffer, D. W. (2007). How computer games help children learn. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Ericsson, K., & Simon, H. (1980). Verbal reports as data. Psychological Review 87 (3): 215­251.
Squire, K.D. (2006). From content to context: Video games as designed experiences. Educational Researcher,
          35(8), 19-29.
Squire, K.D.,   Giovanetto,  L.,  DeVane,  B.  & Durga,    S. (2005). From   users   to designers:  Building a  self-
          organizing game-based learning environment. Technology Trends 49(5), 34-42.

                                                                                                                        3-
       Steinkuehler, C. & Chmiel, M. (2006). Fostering scientific habits of mind in the context of online play. In S.A.
              Barab, K.E. Hay, N.B. Songer, & D.T. Hickey (Eds.), Proceedings of the International Conference of
              the Learning Sciences (pp 723-729). Mahwah NJ: Erlbaum.

3-
