              Enhancing Students' Knowledge of Biodiversity in a Situated
      Mobile Learning Scenario: Using Static and Dynamic Visualizations
                                                         in Field Trips
                     V.D.I. Pfeiffer, S. Gemballa, B. Bizer, University of Tübingen, Department of Zoology,
                       Evolution and Ecology Forum, Auf der Morgenstelle 28, 72076 Tübingen, Germany
                  Email: vanessa.pfeiffer@uni-tuebingen.de, sven.gemballa@uni-tuebingen.de, babsai@gmx.de
                                    H. Jarodzka, B. Imhof, Knowledge Media Research Center,
                                       Konrad-Adenauer-Str. 40, 72072 Tübingen, Germany
                                      Email: h.jarodzka@iwm-kmrc.de, b.imhof@iwm-kmrc.de
                    K. Scheiter, University of Tübingen, Applied Cognitive Psychology and Media Psychology,
                          Konrad-Adenauer-Str. 40, 72072 Tübingen, Germany, k.scheiter@iwm-kmrc.de
              P. Gerjets, Knowledge Media Research Center, Konrad-Adenauer-Str. 40, 72072 Tübingen, Germany
                                   a: Knowledge Media Research Center, p.gerjets@iwm-kmrc.de

                  Abstract: The effectiveness of static versus dynamic learning material was tested using fish
                  biodiversity  as learning  domain.  Eighteen   fish  species were  presented    either as   videos or
                  selected freeze-frames to students. Thereafter, students exercised identifying these species in
                  their natural habitats during snorkeling. Students' knowledge of biodiversity was measured
                  from  test videos   before (posttest   1) and  after (posttest  2) snorkeling   as  the  number    of
                  recognized species. Results showed significant knowledge gains between posttest 1 and 2. For
                  the presentation format (static vs. dynamic) there was no significant main effect. However, a
                  significant interaction showed that the students` knowledge improved from posttest 1 to 2 to a
                  larger extent in the dynamic group. The study was conducted within a university curriculum
                  for which a mobile learning scenario using portable DVD-players was applied for the first
                  time. Overall results indicate a high potential for using mobile devices in informal settings
                  during field trips.

       Introduction
                  Comprehension difficulties in the Natural Sciences often result from the complexity, speed or scale of
         dynamic   contexts  and  the balancing act   between   observing  concrete  object configurations     and   the need  to
         understand the underlying abstract scientific concepts and theories. Computer generated dynamic visualizations
         have the  potential to  support the comprehension     of complex   dynamics    in the Natural     Sciences, because   in
         contrast to static visualizations they deliver information about temporary changes of objects and their positions.
         The successful knowledge acquisition with dynamic visualizations is a resource intensive process (cf. Scheiter,
         Gerjets  & Catrambone,    2006),   which requires  simultaneous   and   optimized availability    of different  learning
         resources. Particularly,  these resources  comprise    different processing    capabilities of  the  cognitive  system,
         functionalities of the applied computer technology and didactically substantiated contents and representations.
         The instructional potential can only be tested, if different learning resources are combined and related to each
         other in a concrete learning scenario. Therefore, there is a need for an interdisciplinary cross-linked perspective
         of Cognitive Science, Computer Science, and Natural Science (in this case biology). This cross-linking was
         realized in the present study for which we chose fish biodiversity as learning domain. One of the crucial aspects
         of competence in biodiversity is the ability to correctly identify species in their natural habitat. This process of
         species identification has to be considered as a complex task: During sometimes brief periods of observation of
         an animal  it has  to be  verified by the  observer  if the  combination    of features  of this  animal  fits  with the
         combination   of features of  any  species   known  to  the observer.  Furthermore,   it has   to be  verified  that the
         combination of features checked is unique, that is, it does not apply to any other species. If this is the case, the
         observer  can assign  the observed   individual  to one  species,  that is, the species  is  identified correctly.   We
         consider this as a complex cognitive challenge. Thus, biodiversity is one adequate field to investigate whether
         dynamic   visualizations  have  a  potential to support  knowledge    acquisition  in   the  Natural  Sciences.   Since
         teaching biodiversity requires teaching in the field, it offers the possibility to study effects linked to the use of
         situated mobile  learning  scenarios. In  this study the  efficiency  of dynamic   versus   static   visualizations  was
         tested, embedded in a mobile learning scenario on fish biodiversity.

       Challenges          in  Learning      about       Biodiversity:      Contributions            from     Didactics       of
       Biology and Psychology
                  Knowledge in biodiversity is one important aspect of education of biologists, especially for those who
         work in areas of organismal biology. One key competence to be developed is the ability to identify species in

2-20
their natural habitat. For example, ecologists depend on this competence if they aim at studying organismic
interactions. Furthermore, any study related to protection and conservation of species, an overall international
goal  acknowledged      by international  conventions      between    many    states (e.g.,   Convention    on    Biological
Diversity), depends on the correct identification of these species in the field. Finally, not only biologists but any
person interested in wildlife will not be able to get any information about the animals they observe in the wild
until they are not able to assign the observed animal to a certain species.
         This study    picks fishes with  nearly  30.000   species  as   an example     of a  diverse group   of  organisms
(Nelson, 2006). More specifically we choose the diversity of coastal fishes of the western Mediterranean as a
learning domain within the field of biodiversity. We consider this choice to be adequate for our purposes for
several  reasons: (1)  the selected  species  are easy  to observe    while   snorkeling   in the upper   5m   of the water
column. (2) Since there is only moderate diversity graduate students have a good chance to acquire substantial
knowledge    within   a short   amount   of   time when    combining      instructional    visualizations  and    real-world
experience (i.e., snorkeling). (3) Mediterranean fish species have a good potential to combine learning about
biodiversity with a mobile learning scenario on the beach. (4) The features needed to distinguish the species are
not  too subtle and   come   from   different areas. In   general,  a combination    of    color patterns, behavioral   and
locomotory aspects, and morphological features provides sufficient information to identify a species. (5) Since
behavioral and locomotory aspects also help to identify the species in real-world situations, the chosen domain
seems adequate to test the potential of dynamic versus static visualizations.
         For  both  of  these  visualization  formats   several    theoretical   benefits  and   drawbacks    are matter of
ongoing discussions (cf. Hoeffler & Leutner, 2007 for a recent review). According to Tversky, Bauer-Morrison
& Bétrancourt (2002) dynamic visualizations not only allow learners to identify the current state of objects; they
also deliver information concerning changes of objects and their positions over time (motion, Bétrancourt, 2005)
as well as information concerning the directions of these changes (trajectory, Rieber, 1990). Therefore, dynamic
visualizations should be especially suited to convey learning contents, which are characterized by motion and
trajectory themselves (congruency principle, Tversky et al., 2002). Since identifying Mediterranean fish species
comprises   not   only  static features but   also dynamic      features,   like behavior     or locomotion    pattern,  the
congruency principle may be applicable to this domain, too. Dynamic visualizations also show the continuity of
the movements. Thus, this continuity has not to be inferred by the learner (supplantation, Salomon, 1979). In
comparison to static visualizations, dynamic visualizations explicitly show the dynamics of an object, an aspect
that is considered to be an advantage of dynamic visualizations over static ones (Hegarty, 1992; Lowe, 1999).
Fish behavior and movement patterns in their natural habitat are complex dynamic processes that can hardly be
inferred from static representations. Thus, dynamic representations might be advantageous in this domain. On
the  other hand,  multiple   static visualizations   facilitate comparisons      between   different  states, positions, or
locations of an object. With static visualizations the internalization of segregated states may be easier, because
they are shown in the external representations. These processes may be helpful to build a mental model of a
dynamic    process  (e.g., a   type  of locomotion).    Concerning       fish  biodiversity   it  is  possible   to observe
morphological characters more detailed in a static than in a dynamic visualization, an argument that might lead
to static material being superior to dynamic material in this domain. Dynamic as well as static visualizations can
lead to  high cognitive    demands   (Sweller, van   Merriënboer,     &  Paas,   1998).   Dynamic    visualizations  can be
difficult to perceive and the important states have to be defined by the learner intuitively when watching the
visualization, whereas static visualizations may have to be mentally animated and thereby can lead to visual
search processes to match the corresponding points of the visualizations (like the edge of a fin, or different
morphological characters).
         The process of fish species identification may solely rely on static features (e.g., a combination of
morphological features and color patterns). However, in addition to these static features, dynamic features such
as behavioral and locomotory aspects (e.g., swimming style, shoaling or interactions) are valuable to identify the
species. When observing fishes in their natural habitat, while diving or snorkeling these, dynamic features are
often more salient than the static ones. But, even if these dynamic aspects are used for identification, they can
never be   used exclusively.   It remains necessary    to  use  at least some    static features  (e.g., color pattern)  for
species identification. Thus, a learner has two options how to spend a given amount of learning time: S/he can
either concentrate on the static features alone or include dynamic aspects and thus reduce the focus on static
features. These two options reflect the two kinds of learning material developed for this study. (1) Static pictures
showing all static features were provided to learners in the static condition for a certain amount of time (approx.
50 sec for each species). (2) The second group spent the same total amount of time but was shown dynamic
(behavioral and locomotory) features most of the time and devoted less time to the static features (approx. 12-20
sec). For option (1) material was developed that consists of one or two freeze-frames of a species. For option (2)
material was developed consisting of the same freeze-frames highlighting the relevant static feature interrupted
by sequences that showed dynamic features. We considered the freeze-frames to be necessary in this condition
since it is impossible to identify a species by dynamic features alone. The dynamic material displays a lot more
features (i.e., dynamic and static) in the same time and thus has to be considered more complex and demanding

                                                                                                                                2-20
        for learners. Thus, it might be considered disadvantageous when compared to the static material. On the other
        hand, our  dynamic     material   has some    characteristics that   have   recently  been    identified  to be   important in
        making dynamic material superior to static material: It much better reflects the real world condition and conveys
        procedural-motor knowledge. Eventually, this is what students are trained and tested for. Thus, we suspect that
        the dynamic material altogether is superior to the static material since it is much closer to the real-world test
        condition. Hence, the first hypothesis states that dynamic learning materials lead to a higher knowledge gain in
        biodiversity  than static learning    material. Any   support    to this hypothesis   would     have an   impact  on  the two
        traditional ways to teach biodiversity, because these ways solely use static material consisting of paper-based
        drawings or photographs.
                 These two ways of teaching biodiversity are formal classroom settings (e.g., fish identification courses)
        or informal   settings (e.g., marine   biology   field  courses).   In the   former   students  study    dead and   preserved
        specimens by using dichotomous identification keys based on verbal description and line drawings. In contrast
        to living specimens such dead and preserved specimens lack most of their very salient color and behavioral
        features. Such classroom settings have the advantage that students can handle the species manually as long as
        they want   and   explore even    subtle morphological     features  in  great detail.   However,    experience    of biology
        instructors with this approach is that the students can hardly ever use the detailed morphological knowledge
        acquired  in  the classroom   for   species   identification  in real-world   situations   in   the field because   these   are
        extremely  different   from   the classroom:    Encounters    in the   field are   brief and  specimens      look much  more
        colorful. In other words in such classrooms settings students are likely to acquire inert knowledge, which can
        hardly be used for real-world experience (Bransford, Sherwood, & Sturdevant, 1987). As a result students will
        be able to pass an exam on identification on dead and preserved specimens but will not be able to identify
        species in a real-world situation.
                 Therefore, an alternative approach is to teach biodiversity in more informal situated-learning settings in
        the field (e.g., field trips to seashores to explore fish biodiversity by snorkeling or diving). In such settings
        students use field guidebooks (i.e., photo identification books) and try to find species that match their real-world
        observations from snorkeling. Thus, this way of conveying knowledge of biodiversity is more informal, non-
        linear and includes greater amounts of free-choice learning. Therefore, learning in informal settings may be
        highly efficient (Falk & Dierking, 2000). In particular, it is considered advantageous that knowledge acquisition
        in situated-learning settings (e.g., in the field) is much closer related to the real-life problems. Resnick (1987)
        claims that in situated learning the often-observed disconnection between formal school settings and real-life
        problems is largely reduced. She explains the escapism of knowledge acquisition in schools by features of the
        tasks performed at school contrary to tasks performed in real-life settings. Tasks in formal school education are
        individual activities, involve    dealing  with  abstract  representations,   symbol     manipulations,   abstract  thinking,
        well-defined  problems,     and   are  subject-bounded.      In   contrast,   real-life  problems    are   characterized    by
        collaborative activities, use of tools, contextualized activities, contextualized thinking, complex problems, and
        are interdisciplinary by nature.
                 The number of arguments favoring learning biodiversity in the field correlate well with the experience
        of biology   instructors that such    settings are  extremely    popular   among    students  and   yield learning  outcomes
        typically not observed in the traditional classroom setting. Thus, in this study the focus is on out-of-classroom
        activities instead of formal classroom settings. However, we believe that the current out-of-classroom approach
        outlined above (i.e., students observing species while snorkeling and trying to find species in a field guide book
        that match their observations) is still not sufficient. The first reason is that the field guide books are designed to
        cover as many species as possible (e.g., all species of marine fishes of whole Europe). For example, the most
        widely used field guidebooks for the Mediterranean contain 368 (Bergbauer & Humberg, 1999) or nearly 600
        species  (Louisy,  2002).  Whereas    high    level experts  are  able   to deal   with  this high  amount    of  information,
        learners will be  overwhelmed      (Zucchi,   2007).  As  a  consequence,    we    designed   a new  learning    scenario that
        focuses on a reduced number of the 18 most commonly observed fish species on the western Mediterranean
        coasts. In this learning scenario students used mobile learning devices (portable DVD players) in a classroom
        and  during  real-world   experience   (i.e.,  snorkeling)   with   either  static or dynamic    learning    material for fish
        identification. Thus, the learning material was available at any time for the students during their work on the
        coast. We are confident that in such situated learning scenarios mobile devices force a more direct interaction
        between learner and learning material. Furthermore, they enable free-choice learning and self-directed learning
        without the help of an expert. Mobile devices are an optimal solution for the demands in the described setting,
        since they allow learners to get immediate access to the same learning material during an initial and more formal
        classroom phase and during the informal field observations. So, they serve as a powerful interface between
        factual  knowledge     and  real-world    experience,    creating    an    augmented,    technically   enriched    real-world
        experience,  which   allows   for a   more  flexible access   to  information.     According    to  Sharples  (2007),  mobile
        learning may  provide    expertise  on   demand,    for instance,   detailed information      about fish  and their   behavior
        within a snorkeling setting. Hence, our second hypothesis is that an enriched real-world experience by mobile
        devices leads to a significant knowledge gain, measured by knowledge tests before and after the experience.

2-20
However,    the question remains  how   both factors   (enriched real-world   experience  and    dynamism    of         the
presentation format) interact with each other. The design of this study allows testing whether one of the two
presentation formats (dynamic vs. static) leads to a significant higher knowledge gain when combined with real-
world experience. So far, such long-term interaction effects between format of learning material and real-world
experience have not yet been addressed in the research on informal learning to our knowing.

Design of the study
Procedure
        The study was conducted over three days (units 1-8, see Table 1 for details). Unit 1 (questionnaire 1)
was necessary to obtain relevant information on parameters that might influence students' performance in the
study (see Material section below). Due to their answers in questionnaire 1 the students were separated in two
equivalent groups for units 4-8. Units 2 and 3 were designed to achieve a level as homogenous as possible in
snorkeling capabilities and fish identification background knowledge of the participants. During unit 4 (learning
phase) the two separated groups of students learnt the features for identification of the 18 most common coastal
fishes of the region using DVDs on a portable DVD player. One group used dynamic video material showing
fishes in their natural habitat, the other used one or two freeze-frames extracted from these videos (see Material
section below). The students of both groups were advised to make notes on preformatted forms (fish species
forms). Right after that we measured students' performance in fish identification by posttest 1 (unit 5) in which
students had to identify fish species from unknown videos (test videos, different from learning material) from
the natural habitat without using their fish species form. All videos were displayed twice to the students. Posttest
1 was the same for both groups. The students of the two groups were not told that they dealt with different
learning material but were not separated over night. The third day started with the real-world experience (unit
6). Students were to identify as many as possible of the 18 fish species introduced to them by the DVD material.
For snorkeling,  dynamic  and  static groups were  separated on   two    remote,  but nearly   equivalent spots        and
changed spots after half the time. During unit 6 students were allowed to verify their fish species observations
by using the DVD material as well as their notes on the fish species form. During their efforts to identify fish
species they were also allowed to collaborate with each other in the water and on the beach. Moreover, experts
helped students  in the  water to find suitable places for fish  observation.    The  experts, however,   were         only
allowed to point out places but not to help with fish identification. Thus, feedback for the students only came
from the DVD material, from the fish species form and from in-group discussions. Right after snorkeling we
tested students' performance again by posttest 2, which was identical to posttest 1 except for the fact that the test
videos were only shown once. For posttest 2 the two groups were kept separated. Finally, the students had to
complete questionnaire 2 (for details see below).

Table 1: Course of the 3-day study conducted at the Mediterranean coast of northern Spain, Costa Brava

unit   time              description                                                  material used
1      day 1, 30 min     students complete questionnaire 1                            questionnaire 1
2      day 1, 90 min     introduction to snorkeling: 30 min oral presentation by
                         expert; 60 min practise in water guided by experts
3      day 2, 15 min     students receive basics on fish identification and technica  PowerPoint presentation
                         instructions (15 min presentation by expert)
4      day 2, 90 min     students learning phase with portable DVD player:            fish identification DVD, fish
                         features of 18 fish species to be observed in the field      species form for notes
5      day 2, 60 min     posttest 1, beamer presentation for test videos              fish identification testDVD
6      day 3, 240 min    real-world experience: fish identification by snorkeling     fish identification DVD on
                         (including rest and change of spot between groups)           portable, form with notes
7      day 3, 45 min     posttest 2, beamer presentation for test videos              fish identification test DVD
8      day 3, 30 min     students complete questionnaire 2                            questionnaire 2
Note: 18 species were presented on the fish identification DVD, each with one video: Parablennius sp., P. gattorugine,
Tripterygion sp., Gobius bucchichi, Mullus sp., Coris julis. Symphodus roissali, S. tinca, S. melanocercus, Serranus cabrilla,
Diplodus vulgaris, D. sargus, Oblada melanura, Sarpa salpa, Chelon sp., Atherina sp., Boops boops, Chromis chromis.

Participants, Design and Setting
        This study was conducted with 35 students of Biology participating in a university field course in
Marine Biology held in Spain, Costa Brava by zoologists of the University of Tuebingen, Germany. Twenty-one
were 3rd year students, twelve 4th year students, and two 5th year students. The main goal of the field course was
to enhance and broaden knowledge on marine biodiversity. The study was conducted on the three initial days of
the course. For part of the study (see Table 1), students were divided into two groups (static and dynamic group;

                                                                                                                                  2-20
         see above). The mean age was 24.18r1.13 years (n= 17) for the static group and 25.00r1.65 years (n=18) for
         the dynamic group. 13 students were male, 22 female. For the snorkeling exercise (Table 1, unit 6) we chose the
         bay of Aiguablava, Costa Brava for its perfect conditions: It is protected from the open sea, the water is easy to
         enter and shallow (0-5m) A variety of habitats such as sandy bottoms, sea grass meadows and rocks covered by
         algae ensures that all of the 18 species in question have good conditions to develop stable local populations. On
         the day of the field study (i.e. students snorkeling to practice fish identification) weather was warm and sunny,
         visibility in the water was perfect (>15m), and the sea was calm with almost no waves. During the snorkeling
         exercise expert ichthyologists monitored the fish species present in the upper 5m. Due to that survey we can be
         sure that all the fish species mentioned in the learning material could in principle be seen on that day.

         Material
                 Central to our study was the development of learning material that either contained dynamic or static
         material of the 18 most common Mediterranean fish species and test material for posttests 1 and 2 that contained
         videos of the same 18 species. Moreover, students had to fill in two questionnaires.
                 Description of learning  material: We  used  two different  DVDs:  One       with dynamic  videos    of  18
         different fish species and one with one or two selected freeze-frames of these species extracted from the video.
         Both DVDs were arranged in the same way with a master slide including instructions and three slides I-III each
         with thumbnail icons for six species that had to be pressed for playing the video of the species. The students
         were free to switch between the videos and slides I-III but could not interrupt a video once started. The fish
         were filmed at Cap Roig, Spain, Costa Brava. At the beginning of each video the name and the size of the
         species was displayed  on a black  screen.  During the video  spoken  text gave      information  about     habitat,
         morphology, behavior of the species, and similar species from the DVD collection. The spoken text focused on
         the information necessary to distinguish the species in the video from the remaining 17 species in the collection;
         hence, it highlighted the features unique for this species. These features could either be behavioral features (e.g.,
         swimming style), habitat information, or morphological features (e.g., color spots or bars on various parts of
         body or head, certain color pattern). Since the unique morphological features of a swimming fish species are
         difficult to perceive we chose one or two images from each real-time video to freeze for a few seconds (7-
         10sec). The features mentioned in the spoken text were superimposed consecutively on the freeze-frames (see
         example in Fig. 1). The dynamic condition displayed these freeze-frames for some seconds only but displayed
         behavioral and swimming aspects for most of the time. In the static condition these labeled freeze-frames were
         presented throughout the whole video of a species. The spoken text and the total presentation time for one
         species (47-53 seconds depending on the species) was the same in both conditions. Each species presentation
         ended with a black screen displaying the name of the species. The DVDs were played on portable 7'' DVD-
         players. Two students shared one player and one DVD.

           Figure 1. Screenshots of the labeled freeze-frames of the video of Symphodus melanocercus. A. Behavioral
            aspect. Translation of German text: "cleaning other fishes" B. Morphological features, swimming style and
          coloration. Translation of German text: "brown color (upper right), white edged black tail (middle), swimming
                                 exclusively with pectoral fins [labriform swimming mode]".

                 During the learning phase (unit 4) students used a preformatted printed paper, the fish species form,
         with equal space reserved for notes on each of the 18 species. Students filled in notes for each species during
         unit 4 and were allowed these notes during the snorkeling exercise (unit 6). Also, they had to mark each species
         identified in the field during snorkeling on the form. They were not allowed to use the form in posttest 1 and 2.
                 Description of posttest material:  To measure  the learning outcomes the      students had to      pass two
         posttests (units 5 and 7, see table 1). The posttest material contained real-time videos of the same 18 species as
         the learning material. However, it was different from the learning material in several respects: The test videos
         showed different individuals of the species in different local environments, were arranged in a different order.
         Moreover, the test videos contained no spoken text and no labels; just a number was given at the beginning. We
         decided to use only videos for the posttest, since this is the qualification that biology students are trained for.

2-20
The posttests simulated fish observations in the field and tested students' performance in fish identification.
During the test students had to assign names of the 18 fish species correctly to a series of 18 unknown videos
(length of each video approximately 40 seconds; no use of fish species forms). In order to facilitate recalling the
exact Latin names the students received a list of 25 Latin fish names including the 18 species in question. For
each correctly identified species the students got one point. If they wrote down nothing, or a description, or the
wrong species name they got no point for this item. Hence the maximum score in one test was 18. Reliability
coefficients (Cronbach´s    ) were calculated for posttest 1 with   = .79 and for posttest 2 with    = .79. Therefore,
test scores were summed up to one posttest score 1 and one score for posttest 2.
        Snorkeling exercise data (unit 6): Most of the students (65.7 %) snorkeled over 90 minutes, 28.6 %
snorkeled between 60 and 90 minutes, 2.9 % snorkeled between 30 and 60 minutes, and 2.9 % of the students
snorkeled less then 30 minutes. Snorkeling duration did not differ between the static and dynamic condition, t
(33) = -.34, p = .74. During the snorkeling exercise students had to mark on the fish species form which species
they had actually observed in the field. Each species seen during snorkeling was scored 1 to find out whether
one of the two groups observed significantly more species than the other.
        Description of questionnaires: Students had to fill in two questionnaires. In questionnaire 1 (unit 1
prior to learning phase) the students were asked for items that might influence their performance in the study,
namely their age, gender, knowledge of Latin and fish, how much they were interested and experienced in fish
and  swimming      and whether  they  had   snorkeled or dived  before. The  more  they   knew,   were interested and
experienced    the higher  was  the  score. This questionnaire  was used  to  parallelize  groups  and to  allow  later
control for confounding factors. Questionnaire 2 (unit 8) was used at the end of the study to extend control
options for confounding factors. In this questionnaire the students were asked how long they had snorkeled and
used the DVD and whether they considered these activities supportive for learning. The longer they snorkeled
and used the DVD and the more they found this helpful the higher was the score in this questionnaire.

Results
        Questionnaire 1 data reveal that both groups did not significantly differ in any of the preconditions
concerning prerequisite knowledge (e.g., snorkeling and diving experience, knowledge in fish anatomy and fish
biodiversity,  knowledge    in Latin,   all ps >  .10).  Students were  asked   to list the  names   and   features of
Mediterranean fish species that they knew prior to the learning phase. However, none of the students listed any
of the 18 species that were part of our learning material. Thus, with respect to the content of the field course
there was no prior knowledge in fish biodiversity.
        Questionnaire     2 data did  not   show any  significant difference  between   the two   groups either. Both
groups did not differ in their assessment of the snorkeling activity, t(33) = -0.43, p = .67. Furthermore, both
groups stated having used the DVD equally often during the snorkeling activity (t(33) = -0.96, p = .34). Each
student from both groups stated that s/he found the DVD helpful for knowledge acquisition.
        From data on fish species forms we have information about the performance in the field. Most fish
species were identified in the field by the participants of both groups, and mostly equally often by both groups.
Exceptions are Tripterygion spec., t(33) = -2.58, p = .01, Serranus cabrilla, t(33) = -4.02, p < .01, Chelon spec.,
t(33) = -2.69, p = .01, and Boops boops, t(33) = -2.69, p = .01; which had all been identified more often during
snorkeling by the group that had received dynamic material. This fact had been taken into account during further
analysis by calculating an ANCOVA including the critical items as covariates. Since the overall results did not
change with this procedure, only results for the ANOVA are presented.
        Results    for the  posttest data   depending on  condition are  displayed  in  figure 2.  An  ANOVA      with
repeated measures showed a main effect for the posttest data, F (1,33) = 213.12, p < .01. Participants performed
better in the second posttest after the snorkeling experience (M = 14.51, SD = 3.21) than in the first posttest (M
= 5.6, SD    = 3.67).  There   were  no differences   between  learners who   had  studied  either dynamic  or   static
visualizations (F < 1). However, a significant interaction between both factors was found, F(1, 33) = 6.72, p =
.01 (Figure 2). From this it follows that the knowledge gains in the group receiving dynamic material exceeded
the knowledge gains in the group receiving static material.

Discussion
        This study adds interesting novel insights to the field of learning with visualizations in the Natural
Sciences. The fact that students had no prior knowledge of the Mediterranian fish species (see questionnaire 1
data) but could identify an average of M = 5.6 species in posttest 1, clearly shows that a considerable increase of
knowledge    took  place  during the  learning  phase (unit 4). However,   at an   overall level, students performed
equally well in both posttests after studying one of the two visualizations formats, so our first hypothesis is
rejected. This result thus mirrors the statement of Tversky et al. (2002) that even in conveying dynamic contents
dynamic visualizations often fail to lead to superior learning results than static visualizations. Possibly higher
processing demands of dynamic learning materials in comparison to static learning materials are the reason for
this result. These   additional  cognitive   demands    may be  caused  by  the  large  quantity  of information,   its

                                                                                                                           2-20
         transientness, as well as by the need to split attention across several relevant aspects (Hegarty, 2004; Lowe,
         1999) and the need to identify and memorize the segregated states in the dynamic visualizations and to make
         comparisons between them (Rieber, 1990). Additional design guidelines based on research about perceptual and
         cognitive processes are needed to tap the full potential of dynamic visualizations (Lowe, 2004). The results of
         the current  study showed,     however,  that  the potential of  dynamic   learning materials could  be tapped   when
         extending   the  instructional  scenario   with   enriched   real-world experiences.   That  is,  combining    dynamic
         visualizations  with a real-world     learning experience   improved   learning to  a larger extent than   using static
         visualizations in this combination. Thus, the potential of a dynamic presentation format seems to unfold only
         after an enriched real-world experience. Even if the dynamic visualizations did not lead to better knowledge
         immediately as would have been reflected in the first posttest, they may have facilitated learning from the real-
         world experience nevertheless. Maybe fish that were observed during snorkeling could be easier linked to the
         observations made while watching the DVD, as behavioral patterns and motions (i.e., aspects not visible in the
         static pictures) could  be used    as  cues  for  memory    access. Moreover,   knowledge    acquired from     dynamic
         visualizations may remain inert, as long as it is not strengthened by real-world experience (cf. Resnick, 1987).
         The current study does not allow deciding on the mechanisms underlying this finding. However, it stresses the
         importance of testing the effectiveness of instructional materials not only in the laboratory, but of assessing their
         impact in situated learning contexts, which may act as moderators for this instructional effectiveness.

                      Figure 2. Average performance in the two posttests as a function of visualization condition.

                            Moreover, the comparison of the posttest results showed that students benefited significantly
         from the enriched real-world experience, thereby confirming the second hypothesis. In this study technology
         was used to support the link between formal and informal learning. The findings have important implications for
         mobile learning. According to Sharples (2007) big issues of mobile learning yet remain unexplored. This study
         addresses several of these identified issues, albeit in an indirect way. One of them is the question of how to
         enhance  the experience   without     interfering with it (Beale, 2007). Even   though   the effectiveness  of using a
         mobile device was not explicitly tested, experienced tutors in biology, who were involved in the implementation
         of this mobile device, were positively surprised. They stated that students were very contented with this new
         teaching  form.  Furthermore,    instructors  stated that  learning outcomes    were  very  high  compared  to   earlier
         courses. Another big issue in mobile learning is to bridge the gap between formal and informal education at
         universities (Sharples, 2007).     In this case   bridging the  gap between   more    formalized, abstract, and  static
         textbook  information   (i.e., the field guide    book) and  the  informal setting  of real  world  observations  (i.e.,
         identifying fish species in their natural environment by snorkeling) seemed to be facilitated by introducing a
         mobile  learning   device very   well.   Furthermore,   this study  is  an example    of mobile   learning  design for
         innovative educational practice as requested by Milrad (2007). So far, solely unhandy books with complex,
         abstract, and static information were used in this scenario. Therefore, this study stands for real innovations in
         biological didactics. Moreover, the usage of mobile devices is integrated into a broader educational scenario as
         Hoppe (2007) calls for. Students, who choose Ichthyology as a major in biology, have to take the here-described
         course. So, the usage of a mobile device was studied within a real university context. It has to be stressed that
         the usage was not a one-time experiment; it was embedding a mobile learning approach within the curriculum at
         a university course. So, this approach has proven its value not in a well-controlled laboratory setting, but even in
         a complex and ill-defined real-world scenario. However, further research is needed, since the study was not
         designed to identify the main factors that account for the huge knowledge gains (e.g., the real-world experience
         itself, or the link of formal and informal setting by technology, or collaborative learning). So far, we can only be

2-20
sure that an instructional scenario during field trips works well if real-world-experience, mobile learning, and
collaborative activities are integrated. Furthermore, it seems that already a rather simple mobile device with
very little  interaction possibilities   like a mobile   DVD-player     has   strong influence   on  learning in informal
settings. Given   that the   potential of mobile    learning has   not  been  exhausted    with this kind of  device, it is
assumed   that   expanding    this approach     to  more  sophisticated    devices   like, for  instance, internet tablets
establishes unforeseen possibilities. Thereby, more fish species may be included and sorted according different
criteria by   means of   the mobile   device.   This  would  facilitate finding  an  observed   species as  they could   be
ordered by systematic, color, area of circulation, and habitat. Then, identifying species by mobile media is not
only interesting for learners, but too an adequate tool for biologists in general. A software and more flexible
hardware     need  to  be    developed    for   these demands      and  therefore,   collaboration   between   biologists,
psychologists, and computer scientists is essential. In this combination we are able to exploit latest research in
three specifications to find modern, more effective, and enjoyable ways in learning about biodiversity.

References
Beale, R. (2007). How to enhance the experience without interfering with it? In M. Sharples (Eds.) Big Issues in
          Mobile Learning: report of a workshop by the Kaleidoscope Network of Excellence Mobile Learning
          Initiative, (pp. 12-16). Nottingham: Learning Science Research Institute.
Bergbauer, M., & Humberg, B. (1999). Was lebt im Mittelmeer?. Stuttgart. Kosmos Verlag
Bétrancourt,   M.  (2005).   The   animation    and  interactivity principles.  In  R. E.  Mayer  (Hrsg.),  Handbook     of
          Multimedia (S. 287-296). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Bransford, J. D., Sherwood, R. D., & Sturdevant, T. (1987). Teaching thinking and problem solving. In J. B.
          Baron   & R.   J. Sternberg    (Eds.) Teaching  thinking    skills: Theory   and  practice (pp. 162-181),   New
          York: Freeman, Times Books, Henry Holt & Co.
Falk, J. H., & Dierking, L. D. (2000). Learning from Museums: Visitor experience and the making of meaning,
          Oxford: AltaMira Press.
Hegarty, M. (1992). Mental animation: Inferring motion from static displays of mechanical systems. Journal of
          Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 18, 1084-1102.
Hegarty, M. (2004). Mechanical reasoning as mental simulation. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 8, 280-285.
Höffler, T. N., Leutner, D. (2007). Instructional animation versus static pictures: A meta-analysis. Learning and
          Instruction, 17, 722-738.
Hoppe, U. (2007). How can we integrate mobile devices with broader educational scenarios? In M. Sharples
          (Eds.) Big Issues in Mobile Learning: report of a workshop by the Kaleidoscope Network of Excellence
          Mobile Learning Initiative, (pp. 32-35). Nottingham: Learning Science Research Institute.
Lowe,     R.  K.  (1999).    Extracting    information    from     an  animation    during   complex    visual   learning.
          European Journal of Psychology of Education, 14, 225-244.
Lowe, R. K. (2004). Animation and learning: Value for money? In R. Atkinson, C. McBeath, D. Jonas-Dwyer
          & R. Phillips (Eds.), Beyond the comfort zone: Proceedings of the 21st ASCILITE Conference (pp. 558-
          561). Perth, 5-8 December.
Louisy, P. (2002). Meeresfische Westeuropas und des Mittelmeeres. Stuttgart: Ulmer Verlag
Nelson, J. S. (2006). Fishes of the World. 4th edition. New York: Wiley.
Milrad, M. (2007). How should learning activities using mobile technologies be designed to support innovative
          educational practices? In M. Sharples (Eds.) Big Issues in Mobile Learning: report of a workshop by
          the Kaleidoscope Network of Excellence Mobile Learning Initiative, (pp. 29-31), Nottingham: Learning
          Science Research Institute.
Resnick, L. D. (1987). Learning in school and out. Educational Researcher, 16, 13-20.
Rieber,   L.  P.  (1990).   Animation    in   computer-based   instruction.    Educational   Technology    Research   and
          Development, 38, 77-86.
Salomon, G. (1979). Interaction of media, action and learning. San-Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Scheiter, K.,  Gerjets,  P., & Catrambone,      R.  (2006).  Making    the abstract  concrete:  Visualizing mathematical
          solution procedures. Computers in Human Behavior, 22, 9-26.
Sharples, M. (2007). Big Issues in Mobile Learning: report of a workshop by the Kaleidoscope Network of
          Excellence Mobile Learning Initiative. Nottingham: Learning Science Research Institute.
Sweller,  J., van Merriënboer,     J. J. G.,  & Paas,  F. G. W.    C.  (1998). Cognitive   architecture and   instructional
          design. Educational Psychology Review, 10, 251-296.
Tversky, B., Bauer-Morrison, J., & Bétrancourt, M. (2002). Animation: Can it facilitate? International Journal
          of Human-Computer Studies, 57, 247-262.
Zucchi, H. (2007). Zur Bedeutung und zum Erwerb von Artenkenntnissen. Unterricht Biologie 324, 44-46

                                                                                                                               2-2
       Acknowledgements
         The current study is part of a larger research project on the "Resource-adaptive design of visualizations for
         supporting the comprehension of complex dynamics in the Natural Sciences" funded by                the Leibniz-
         Gemeinschaft (funding period: 2007-2009). Our thanks go to biologists, psychologists and computer scientists
         from this project, particularly to D. von Staden, J. Staebe, M. Schleiss, J. Edelmann, A. Schilling, T. Kühl, and
         M. Armbruster. Fieldwork was only possible because of generous provision of lab space from the "BiodivA"
         project (funded by the Robert-Bosch-Stiftung). We are grateful to W. Bogner and R. Soriano Manrubia (Hotel
         Hostalillo, Tamariu) who organized lab and Hotel space. Thanks to the expert biologists K. Buhle, C. Dobler, S.
         Hengherr, B. Schelkle, T. Schmidt and D. Sprenger for providing assistance during the field study.

2-22
