            Mapping the learning pathways and processes associated with
                        the development of expertise and learner identities

                   Abstract: This poster session showcases ten examples of expertise development in everyday
                   domains    of  personal   relevance    and  consequence      to  learners.   The   collection   of cases
                   highlighted in the posters stem from ethnographic research studies investigating learning from
                   socio-cultural-historical  perspectives.    In each    poster,  authors   describe  their  ethnographic
                   project, explicate a case of expertise development, and detail the specific learning processes,
                   practices,  and   pathways     associated   with   that expertise      development.    Implications   for
                   understanding    personally    relevant and  consequential      learning  for  the design  of   effective
                   learning environments in K-12 STEM classrooms and beyond will be discussed. Discussion
                   will also  include plans  for  the  design  and    implementation   of  a  data repository, which   will
                   house a broad set of learning cases, such as those detailed in this poster session, with the goals
                   of  supporting    collaborative    theoretical synthesizing     related   to  diverse   learning-related
                   phenomena     and  helping   researchers   and educators    understand    the  details of learning  as  it
                   socially occurs in meaningful ways.

       Conceptualizing Expertise
                   How   we   conceptualize,  document,    and  support    the development      of specific  areas of  expertise  is a
         fundamental    aspect   of "cre8ing    a learning  world,"   as   the conference     theme   challenges   us to   do. Before
         designing  effective  learning   environments     in  so-called  formal   (e.g., schools)  and   informal  (e.g., museums)
         environments, we argue that we need to map the learning processes, practices, and domains people utilize when
         they develop areas of expertise in their everyday lives. We know very little about how learning and expertise
         develop over time scales based on a breadth of idiosyncratic human experience in the social settings people
         routinely  frequent  (Bell, et al., 2006).    Through    the use  of  an  interactive  poster session,  we   engage   in this
         scientific agenda by presenting a range of learning cases from ethnographic research studies.
                   By design, the posters presented in this session highlight expertise development and the navigation of
         learning pathways in social contexts other than the traditional school day and from domains that are personally
         consequential   and  meaningful     to   the learners (although   possibly    not  common     in  school).   We   argue  that
         delineating specific learning processes associated with expertise development in these contexts and domains is
         crucial for understanding consequential learning and may inform the design of effective learning environments
         in K-12 STEM classrooms and beyond. In describing the proposed interactive poster session, a brief review of
         the expertise literature is followed by individual poster descriptions--including the core learning practices and
         processes showcased relative to the highlighted areas of expertise.

        Situating Expertise
                   Most of the expertise literature emphasizes the practices of individual people who already hold the title
         of "expert,"   such  as chess  masters    and  surgeons   (e.g.,  Norman,    Eva,  Brooks,   and  Hamstra,   2006).   Expert
         knowledge, competencies, and performances are often pitted against those of novices in an attempt to determine
         exactly what makes someone an expert versus someone who is attempting to reach expert status or knows little
         about the    domain  in  question.  A    growing  body   of  literature  discusses   the  development   of   expertise (e.g.,
         Ericsson, Charness, Feltovich & Hoffman, 2006) from a variety of theoretical (e.g., psychological, sociological)
         and methodological (e.g., laboratory, historiometric, psychometric, and ethnographic studies) perspectives. A
         central focus of the traditional expertise program of research has been to delineate individual expert knowledge,
         competencies,   and  performances    in  various  domains,    study   the mental   structures   and organization   of expert
         knowledge and related constructs such as efficiency of expert knowledge and the ability of experts to innovate
         within their domain of expertise, and examine issues related to generalizability of expert knowledge, such as the
         reproduction of expert performances within and across domains.
                   Scholars from disciplines such as sociology (e.g., Collins and Evans, 2007), philosophy (e.g., Selinger
         and Crease, 2006), psychology (e.g., Hakkarainen, Polonen, Paavola, and Lehtinen, 2004), cognitive science
         (e.g., Hutchins, 1995), and the learning sciences (e.g., Bell, et al., 2006) have been rethinking the notion of
         expertise  as  mentalist   and individualist;   focusing  instead    on  its social,  cultural,  and historical   influences.
         Hakkarainen et al. (2004) highlight "...the emphasis on the role of cultural-historically developed tools and
         artifacts in human   intelligent activity,   and  the examination     of intelligent activity as  embedded    in  social and
         cultural environments" (p. 6) as a central element of this alternative view of expertise. Collins and Evans (2007)
         note that expertise is not simply attributed by members of a given group, which would imply that no real work is
         done by those who are deemed expert because "all the work is done by the attributors" (p. 3). Instead expertise
         is represented by: "the real and substantive possession of groups of experts and that individuals acquire real and

3-0
substantive expertise through their membership of those groups...expertise is, therefore, a social process ­ a
matter of socialization into the practices of an expert group..." (p. 3).
          Learning is therefore deeply bound up in an account of expertise development because one must learn
what expertise means within the confines of the groups to which he/she belongs, learn what practices and other,
possibly  tacit, understandings   are  associated  with   that expertise,  and  learn which    networks   of people   and
resources are best able to socialize one into these practices and understandings. The posters in this interactive
session  situate themselves   broadly  in a socio-cultural-historical  framework      (e.g., Bruner,  1990;  Cole, 1996;
Lave and Wenger, 1991; Rogoff and Lave, 1984/1999) relative to the development of expertise and the learning
pathways associated with that development by highlighting specific, culturally rooted learning processes and
practices  associated   with  expertise  development    and    explicating  how    people  utilize those  processes   and
practices to participate in expertise development within areas and domains that are personally consequential to
them for a variety of locally maintained reasons.

A    Learning     Cases       Repository      as     Collaborative         Infrastructure        for   the   Learning
Sciences
          Unlike other social science fields, the learning sciences lacks a collective data repository housing a
broad set of learning cases, rendered in theoretical and educational terms, which could be used to advance our
scientific understanding and inform our professional development activities. Open source network technologies
provide a unique platform for such repositories. The Learning in Informal and Formal Environments (LIFE)
Center, a National Science Foundation funded Science of Learning Center in the U.S. is interested in developing
a Learning Cases repository of this kind with scholars who share this interest. The long term goals would be to
support  a deeper   sharing  of interpreted  cases  of learning   across  a breadth   of  social contexts  and  domains,
support our collective theoretical synthesis of learning-related phenomena, and develop a repository that would
help researchers and educators understand the details of learning as it socially occurs in meaningful ways. It is
our intention to unveil this collective data repository of Learning Cases during this ICLS session, using some of
the  work  included  in the  session  as an initial  data  corpus, and   make   it available  for  open  use by  learning
scientists writ large. Details on this effort will be posted on the LIFE Center web site (http://life-slc.org/).

Poster Descriptions
Man of the match: Learning processes associated with becoming a soccer phenomenon

 Leah A. Bricker, Philip Bell, University of Washington, College of Education, Box 353600, 312 Miller Hall,
                                                  Seattle, WA, 98195
                             Email: lbricker@u.washington.edu, pbell@u.washington.edu

          This poster details the learning processes and practices associated with development of expertise in
sport, specifically  in the  domain   of  soccer  (cf, Hodges,   Starkes,   and   MacMahon,      2006).  We  look  at the
composite contributions of practice, imitation, disciplined observation, collaboration, and critique in becoming a
soccer phenomenon. We also examine the role of place (cf, Lave and Wenger, 1991) and border crossing (cf,
Aikenhead,   1996;   Lugones,   2003)    relative to  expertise  development.      We utilize  data   from  ethnographic
observations and interviews. Data sources include video- and audiotape, digital photographs, and fieldnotes. In
this analysis,   we  utilize both etic  and  emic    perspectives  (Harris,   1987;  Pike,   1954)  on  soccer  expertise
development. We argue that emic perspectives are critical to understanding expertise development yet they are
rare in the expertise literature. This analysis is situated in a larger ethnographic project, which documents upper
elementary and middle school students' everyday encounters with science and technology (Bell, Bricker, Lee,
Reeve, Zimmerman, 2006).
          Although the relationships between learning soccer and learning in science, technology, engineering,
and mathematics (STEM) domains might not be readily apparent, we argue that (a) our participants do draw
associations between the two arenas, (b) versions of practice, imitation, disciplined observation, collaboration,
and critique are also utilized in the development of STEM expertise, and (c) issues of place and border crossing
are of critical importance. We argue that to date, many of the STEM related learning environments designed by
learning  scientists do  not  deeply  attend to   the  learning  processes    and  practices  associated  with  expertise
development    in domains    of personal  relevance    and consequence     to learners.  Failure   to do so  is a missed
opportunity to actively engage learners at best and at worst, could seriously undermine their opportunities to
learn. After detailing the learning processes and practices associated with expertise development in one such
personally relevant domain, we discuss implications for design.

                                                                                                                             3-0
        Learning to videogame, both together and alone

            Suzanne Reeve, Philip Bell, University of Washington, College of Education, Box 353600, 312 Miller Hall,
                                                         Seattle, WA, 98195
                                      Email: sreeve@u.washington.edu, pbell@u.washington.edu

                  Many    young    people  today  spend significant  amounts    of time  developing   expertise  in video   and
         computer game play. Such games range widely in genre, structure, and required skills. A deeper understanding
         of everyday    game learning   pathways   can both broaden  our   accounts  of technology   in learning  and help   us
         understand how young people pursue learning in domains that are personally significant.
                  The case described in this poster outlines how two boys (12 years and 11 years old, respectively) are
         developing     expertise at a range  of  video and  computer     games.   Data are  drawn   from a  multi-year   team
         ethnography of children in an urban, multicultural community and their everyday interactions with science and
         technology (Bell, et al., 2006). Methods used include observation, participant observation, and semi-structured
         interviews, with fieldwork extending over a period of 18 months in 2006-07.
                  For both children, learning to videogame has individual and social aspects tightly interwoven together.
         Explicit social interactions include finding out about from and sometimes playing games with peers or extended
         family members. They have also built extended social networks through their online game play, and ask questions
         of other players online when they encounter a snag in game play. In addition, however, they spend considerable
         amounts of time playing games on their own, and they say that they often learn about games just by playing and
         figuring them out. Family structures and homework routines also play into this pattern of solitary play.
                  One contrastive dimension of the two cases relates to the public recognition of the two boys' expertise.
         One of the boys is called on frequently by family members and friends to explicitly take on the role of an expert,
         leading not only to recognition of his expertise, but also to establishing and strengthening his expert role. These
         cases will more   deeply    investigate how  children  come to   learn computer    and video games,   a  domain    that,
         because of its increasing prevalence in contemporary society and children's leisure time, is important for both
         educators and researchers to better understand.

        Mapping the emergence and development of collaborative media production practices

                        Brigid Barron, Nichole Pinkard, Kimberly Gomez, Caitlin Kennedy Martin, Akili Lee
         Stanford University, University of Chicago, University of Illinois at Chicago, Stanford University, University of
                                                                Chicago
                          Stanford University, School of Education, 485 Lasuen Mall, Stanford, CA 94305
                                     University of Chicago, Center for Urban School Improvement
                                            1313 East 60th Street, Chicago, Illinois 60637
               University of Illinois at Chicago, College of Education, 1040 West Harrison, Chicago, Illinois 60607
         Email: barronbj@stanford.edu, soulphd@gmail.com, kpg1321@gmail.com, ckmartin@stanford.edu, alee@usi-
                                                             schools.org

                  Digital technologies offer adolescents rich opportunities to design and create artwork, stories, games,
         animations, interactive robots, and other expressive or documentary artifacts. Surrounding these capacities are
         "cultures of participation" (Jenkins, 2006) where young people share their work, receive feedback, and expand
         their social   networks.  It  has been   suggested that  participation  in these   informal  collectives   nurture the
         development of important 21st century capacities such as the capacity to collaborate, analyze information, and
         direct one's own learning. Although physical access to computing tools is becoming less of an issue, there are
         still stark differences among adolescents in terms of who has access to learning opportunities that will position
         them to develop expertise and identities as creators and accomplished learners.
                  Our research takes place in an environment intentionally designed to encourage creative media work by
         middle school students (Pinkard, Barron, Martin, Gomez, 2007). It provides access to design work with digital
         media including robotics, digital movie making, game design, and music. Mentors were recruited on the basis of
         their artistic expertise, personal portfolios  of work, shared   cultural  history with the  school community,     and
         interest in new media technologies. We are following a cohort of 47 learners across two years of middle school.
         For twelve case study learners, we also construct technobiographies based on accounts provided in interviews
         and through observations in order to chart learning activities and resources across time and setting (Barron,
         2006). The   goal of constructing   detailed  learning histories is to better conceptualize  learning  processes   that
         underlie expertise development. We focus on projects as a unit of analysis and for each project we track the
         number and roles of learning partners involved (Barron, Martin, Takeuchi, Fithian, in review), the duration of
         the project, the origins and evolution of the project, and the learning outcomes reflected in the product and
         process of creation. Field notes and video collected by researchers and teacher/mentors offer additional data.

3-0
         We   will   present   two cases  that reveal  learner's developing     expertise in collaborative  new    media
production. In each case, learners collaboratively created original music and lyrics and used semi-professional
digital media    tools  to develop  and  record  their work.   We   will share   their expertise along   three  lines: 1)
repertoires   of collaborative  practices as   reflected in  their projects  and their  capacity   to explain  phases  of
collaborative media production; 2) growing identities as authors, creators and critiquers; 3) knowledge of the
tools of production and confidence in using them. Our research goal is to better understand learning processes
and outcomes that arise from extended work with digital media projects in order to contribute to theories of
learning and to advance our understanding of how to design programs that sustain learning and motivation.
Leet    noobs:    Expert    World   of   Warcraft   players      relearning     and    adapting    expertise    in  new
contexts

Mark Chen, University of Washington, College of Education, Box 353600, 312 Miller Hall, Seattle, WA, 98195
                                         Email: markchen@u.washington.edu

         World    of Warcraft   (WoW),    like many    other massively   multiplayer    online games    (MMOGs),     can
actually be seen as two different games. The first is the journey of exploring the game world and advancing the
abilities of one's character or avatar either through solo play or in groups of up to five players. This acts as a
proving grounds or gateway for the second stage of WoW--joining a raid group of up to 40 players to kill all the
monsters   in "high-end"    or "endgame"   dungeons    for the treasures  they  guard.  Within   a larger online   games
ethnography (Chen, in review) similar to others that describe player practice and learning (Steinkuehler, 2007,
and Taylor, 2006), I have found that invitation to join an end-game group is contingent on a player's reputation
as an expert of WoW's underlying mechanics and rules. It is also necessary, however, to have proven oneself as
someone who works well with others and understands his or her particular role in a team. Upon joining a raid
group, players soon find that the conditions that determine expertise have changed because the activities and
player  practices   have    changed  to  fit the  local  context,   which    includes  raid-specific   tactics and  new
communication norms. It becomes clear that expertise is specialized for individual roles, depending on character
type, and that to succeed as a raid group, players need to draw on their distributed expertise and knowledge
(Hutchins, 1995), each doing their part while trusting others to do the same, so that collectively they act as a
coordinated whole. Yet the actual skills and abilities an individual player uses are reassessed for how well they
complement other players' resources. Thus, once-expert players become novices or "noobs" to relearn expert or
"leet" gameplay, yet they are not true novices because they already have a good understanding of the game
system. Rather, they are leet noobs who must realign and adapt their expertise for new social structures and
norms   that  emerge    above  the  underlying  game   through   joint venture.  This  poster  highlights  examples    of
learning individual expertise as well as new distributed expertise needed for raid group success.

The development of expertise in animal husbandry and behavior

Heather Toomey Zimmerman, Philip Bell, University of Washington, College of Education, Box 353600, 312
                                          Miller Hall, Seattle, WA, 98195
                            Email: htoomey@u.washington.edu, pbell@u.washington.edu

         Caring for pets is a personally consequential activity for many youth. Children invest time, resources,
and  intellectual energies   into  developing  knowledge     and   practices to ensure  the  healthy  development    and
longevity of their pet. Understanding the learning processes and pathways that lead to pet care expertise will
broaden accounts of everyday biological knowledge and the development of scientific practices. Additionally,
by careful study of youth participating in activities that they consider highly meaningful, we can develop a set of
design principles for crafting engaging learning environments.
         In this poster, we present a case study of the individual, social, and cultural influences on one youth's
animal expertise. We documented Penelope's work with animals over two years through video ethnography,
fieldnotes, and a photo-documentation task. This analysis is part of a larger cross-setting ethnography of science
and technology involving 9-13 year-old children in one urban, multicultural community in the northwestern
USA. In this case, we focus on the development of Penelope's expertise with animals across social settings
including home, community, school, and an afterschool club. Talk and practices related to animals were present
at nearly every research visit with Penelope--especially related to the care of Penelope's hamsters. Penelope
marks her own expertise with hamsters as illustrated when she created a how-to guide for hamster care. Through
this how-to   guide  and   multiple other interactions,  Penelope   showed   the research  team  her   multiple learning
processes  related   to animal  husbandry    practices,  including  developing   social   networks,   participating in  a
community of practice, using print and online resources, conducting observations of animal behavior, and trial
and  error experimentation     with  habitat elements.   This  case  looks   deeply at  how   Penelope   developed     her

                                                                                                                              3-0
         expertise over time and across settings with implications for formal and informal educators interested in science
         learning.

        Documenting         the   social  factors     that  support     youth's  identities    as environmental        change
        agents

         Carrie Tzou, Giovanna Scalone, Philip Bell, University of Washington, College of Education, Box 353600, 312
                                                    Miller Hall, Seattle, WA, 98195
                    Email: tzouct@u.washington.edu, gscalone@u.washington.edu, pbell@u.washington.edu

                   Environmental    education  is  failing to reach  traditionally  underrepresented   groups   of people   even
         though  statistics  show  that these  youth  and   their families disproportionately   live  in urban   areas in  which
         environmental issues affect their daily lives (Lewis & James, 1995; Agyemon, 2003). One reason for this may
         be that environmentalism     and the  design  of  environmental   education  have   largely  been  the  arena  of white
         middle class people who have narrowly defined "environment" in a way that has not included issues relevant to
         urban settings (Taylor, 1996). In this poster, we explore the development of environmental stewardship and
         activism in youth from populations that are underrepresented in STEM. We explore the social factors involved
         in the development     of identities as what  we   are calling "environmental   change   agents",  or  people  who   can
         promote social change through environmental action, and link this identity development to the intersection of
         ethnic, class, gender, and academic identities within the youth themselves. Another way we try to understand
         this identity development is by drawing on literature in critical place-base education (Barton, 2001, Gruenwald,
         2003a & b) and exploring the ways in which youth gain expertise in understanding the relationship between
         physical places and class, ethnicity, and issues of environmental justice.
                   The findings presented in this poster are from a 12-month, cross-setting ethnographic study where we
         observe youth from two settings: an after-school program focused on environmental justice and fifth graders in
         an all-girls' school in which the curriculum is focused on environmental stewardship education. Youth from
         each of these settings were observed both in the more "formal" educational setting (after-school program or
         classroom)  as  well   as in  their  homes   and  other  everyday  settings  of their lives. Methods    used   included
         participant-observation, semi-structured interviews, and photo-documentation. In addition to critical place-based
         education, we draw on critical theory (Harding, 1991), multicultural science education (Cajete, 1994; Stanley
         and Brickhouse, 2001), and education for sustainability (Donehower, et al, 2007) to understand the various ways
         in which youth work within and against their social contexts for environmental change.

        Whose expertise?: Students in the rural Himalayas and their encounters with school and
        indigenous knowledge of sustainability and place

            Christopher Hoadley, Sameer Honwad, Pennsylvania State University, College of Education and College of
         Information Sciences and Technology, 314D Keller Bldg., University Park, PA, 16802 Email: tophe@psu.edu,
                                                            svh106@psu.edu

                   Environmental education is generally thought of as formal education on environmental science topics.
         However, our work with rural villages in the Himalayas shows a disconnect between formal science learning in
         schools and   students'   environmental   learning needs.   In particular, students require  an   understanding   of the
         environment    that is local,  practical, and   actionable, since  environmental    conditions    are tightly linked  to
         individual survival and livelihood. However, no one source of expertise provides this--students must reconcile
         normative,  abstract   school  science,  indigenous  knowledge    and   practices, and detailed   knowledge    of local
         environmental systems, which are rapidly shifting and poorly documented. In this poster, we describe some of
         the locally invented solutions to provide the necessary environmental learning in the Kumaon region in northern
         India  and in  Nepal,  and  how  schools,  communities,     nonprofits, and  students configure   themselves   to build
         expertise. We use field observation (four field visits over one year), interviews, and documents to triangulate
         how three communities have developed ways to support environmental learning, and some of the strategies and
         systems   used to  unify  different  sources of  expertise. These experiences   suggest  that   a web-like rather  than
         hierarchical or linear model of expertise can help students and others meet their learning needs.

        Different strokes: Play, management, and collaboration as three approaches among parents
        to teaching their children how to handle money

                   Véronique Mertl, Laurie McCarthy, Reed Stevens, Sheldon Levias, University of Washington,
                              College of Education, Box 353600, 312 Miller Hall, Seattle, WA, 98195

3-0
           Email: vmertl@u.washington.edu, lsmccarthy@earthlink.net, reedstev@u.washington.edu,
                                             sheldonlevias@comcast.net

         This poster reports on an ethnographic study called Money Matters, which investigates how families
approach  financial  decisions in  their  everyday   lives. Over   18-24   months,   we video-recorded      interviews and
naturally occurring financial activities in the homes of eight families, each with a resident adolescent. Results
suggest  that  learning to  manage    finances   within  these  families   is organized   through  varied   practices  and
resources. Not only did financial realities differ across families, but so did perspectives of what it means to be
financially successful and, thus, what construes expertise. Furthermore, parents across families were found to
share their financial expertise in different ways with their adolescent children.
         We describe three arrangements of expertise sharing --play, management, and collaboration --that
parents employed when communicating financial practices with their children. For example, in the dual income,
upper middle   class  Baker  family,   father  Neil   created   game-like  contexts   for his four   children  to develop
negotiation skills that  he  felt important   for their  future  success.  In  other  instances,  we    noted the children
engaging  similar  playful  bantering  to negotiate   payment    for household    chores. Karen,   a single   middle class
mother, with one adolescent daughter, is a member of a 12-step support group for people in debt through which
Karen  has  developed   a  routine  to keep   track  of  her  finances. With   her   daughter,  Karen    tends to  manage
controlled practices by imposing spending plans and insisting that her daughter pay consequential expenses. We
found that the Bakers' financial flexibility opened a space within which the children were allowed to play and
explore financial responsibilities without the pressure of "failing" and serious consequence. In the families with
fewer slack resources and who inhabited a different cultural relationship to money, the pressure to "succeed" or
do it "right" was predominant and, we argue, limited their inclination and opportunity to explore. These class
and resource-based differences and their link to distinct arrangements for becoming expert with money is our
key finding, from which we also draw educational and design implications.

When do you ask a doctor? Parents of autistic children as expert users of scientific and
medical expertise

       Noah Feinstein, Stanford University, School of Education, 485 Lasuen Mall, Stanford, CA 94305
                                         Email: noah.feinstein@stanford.edu

         Science impinges on our lives in situations as diverse as political protest and personal health crisis
(Epstein, 1996). During such times, scientific expertise alone is often insufficient to satisfy the socially situated
needs  of  protesters or  medical   patients  (Wynne,    1992).    Confronted   with   science-related   controversies  or
uncertain  diagnoses,   they must  first  figure  out if scientific  expertise  is relevant--and     if so, how   (Layton,
Jenkins,  Mcgill and  Davey,   1993).  In this   presentation,  I  examine    how  one group   of laypeople--parents    of
young autistic children--become experienced, even expert users of scientific and medical expertise. Autism is a
complex and controversial disorder. Its characteristic symptoms are well defined, but there is no consensus on
its causes or treatment. Parents of autistic children are encouraged to pursue prompt intervention, but receive
little guidance as to which of the bewildering array of options will be most effective.
         My analysis draws on the findings of a longitudinal interview study in which parents from ten different
families were followed for six months to discover which questions mattered most to them, and which resources
they used to answer those questions. I deliberately juxtapose two different perspectives on expertise: that of
cognitive  psychology,  in   which expertise   is viewed    as  an acquired   characteristic of  individuals,  and that of
sociology,  in which    expertise  is viewed   as  a  relational   quality negotiated   by   groups.    The psychological
dimension of expertise is evident in the evolving sophistication of parents' questions ­ as they frame and re-
frame their concerns, they learn which questions are most likely to get satisfying answers. The sociological
dimension   is revealed  by  parents'  increasing   ability  to target questions   to  appropriate `levels'   of  technical
expert, and to combine multiple expert sources in their resource-gathering and decision-making processes. In
other words,   parents  become    experts at  enacting   and    interpreting  the complex    and  dynamic     relationships
between doctors, scientists and laypeople. In the process, they develop nuanced understandings of when and
how scientific expertise is relevant to them, their children and their families.

Tailored learning in- and out-of-school: Towards an integrated process perspective

  Flávio S. Azevedo, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, Room 105, Furcolo Hall, Amherst, MA 01003
                                           Email: flavio@educ.umass.edu

         This poster explores the nature of individual interests (Hidi, Renninger & Krapp, 2004)--which are
known to cut across many of a person's practices--and the conditions under which students might successfully

                                                                                                                               3-
         bring their interests to classroom learning. Roughly, the premise is that we can begin "cre8ing a learning world"
         by affording people systematic opportunities to forge coherent experiences across sites of learning.
                   I draw on two distinct studies to theorize about processes underlying individuals' interest-based pursuits
         and the development of personally meaningful expertise. The first study is a 3-year-long, ethnographic, grounded
         theoretical investigation of  model   rocketeers  plying  their  trade in multiple  communities     and  sites of practice
         (Azevedo, 2004). Following the open-ended, self-motivated, self-guided nature of hobbies, I show that rocketeers
         develop multiple preferences (goals, values, beliefs, etc) in the practice and these preferences are variably attuned
         to constraints and affordances of practice. It is by differentially engaging these preferences throughout practice
         time that individuals develop a deeply meaningful and multifaceted relationship to the hobby.
                   The  second    study  regards   students' interest-based     pursuits in  computer-based,      scientific image
         processing  activities (Azevedo,    2006).  Beginning    with a  large corpus   of video  records,  I select   episodes in
         which  students  appear   to be  highly   engaged.  Close  inspection  of  these   episodes show    that students   pursue
         proposed  activities  but sporadically    and opportunistically  "bend"   such  activities  (say,  by repurposing    given
         computational tools). These activity "detours," which I call personal excursions, amount to whole new, student-
         initiated activities that bear important relationships to proposed activities.
                   With the basics laid out, I then highlight similarities across the processes' dynamics and dependencies.
         In particular, I show that truly interest-based pursuits imply a high degree of tailored activity, which leads to
         highly tailored learning and the development of pockets of distributed expertise.

       References
         Agyeman, J. (2003). "Under-participation" and ethnocentrism in environmental education research: Developing
                   "culturally sensitive research approaches". Canadian Journal of Environmental Education, 8, pp. 80-94.
         Aikenhead, G.S. (1996). Science education: Border crossing into the subculture of science. Studies in Science
                   Education, 27, pp. 1-52.
         Azevedo, F. S. (2004, June). What does it mean to be interested in a practice? Paper presented as part of the
                   symposium    Design    theories  of  interest, motivation,   and  engagement      for the   learning   sciences,
                   International Conference of the Learning Sciences, Santa Monica.
         Azevedo, F. S. (2006). Personal excursions: Investigating the dynamics of student engagement. International
                   Journal of Computers for Mathematical Learning, 11, 57-98.
         Barron, B.    (2006).  Interest and  self-sustained  learning   as catalysts   of  development:    A  learning  ecologies
                   perspective. Human Development, 49, 193-224.
         Barron,   B., Martin,  C.K.,    Takeuchi,  L., &    Fithian,  R. (in   review).   Parents as learning    partners   in the
                   development of technological fluency.
         Bell, P.,   Bricker,  L.A.,  Lee,   T.R., Reeve,   S., &   Zimmerman,     H.T.    (2006).  Understanding     the  cultural
                   foundations of children's biological knowledge: Insights from everyday cognition research. In S.A.
                   Barab, K.E. Hay, and D.T. Hickey (Eds.), Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference of the
                   Learning Sciences (pp. 1029-1035). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
         Barton, A.C.     (2001).  Science   education  in  urban  settings:  Seeking    new  ways   of  praxis   through    critical
                   ethnography. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 38(8), 899-917.
         Brown,  A.    (1992).  Design   experiments:   Theoretical    and  methodological    challenges    in creating    complex
                   interventions in classroom settings. The Journal of Learning Sciences, 2(2), 141-178.
         Bruner, J. (1990). Acts of meaning. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
         Cajete, G. (1999). Native science. Santa Fe, NM: Clear Light Publishers.
         Chen, M. (in review). Communication, coordination, and camaraderie.
         Cole, M. (1996). Cultural psychology: A once and future discipline. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
         Collins, H., & Evans, R. (2007). Rethinking expertise. Chicago, IL: Chicago University Press.
         Donehower, K., Hogg, C., & Schell, E.E. (2007). Rural literacies. Carbondale, IL: Southern Illinois University
                   Press.
         Epstein, S. (1996). Impure science: AIDS, activism, and the politics of knowledge. Berkeley, CA: University of
                   California Press.
         Ericsson, K.A., Charness, N., Feltovich, P.J. & Hoffman, R.R. (Eds.). (2006). The Cambridge handbook of
                   expertise and expert performance. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
         Gruenewald, D.A. (2003a). Foundations of place: A multidisciplinary framework for place-conscious education.
                   American Educational Research Journal, 40(3), 619-654.
         Gruenewald, D.A. (2003b). The best of both worlds: A critical pedagogy of place. Educational Researcher,
                   32(4), 3-12.
         Hakkarainen,   K.,   Palonen,   T., Paavola,  S., &    Lehtinen,  E.   (2004).  Communities     of networked    expertise:
                   Professional and educational perspectives. Amsterdam, Netherlands: Elsevier.
         Harding, S. (1991). Whose science? Whose knowledge?: Thinking from women's lives. New York, NY: Cornell
                   University Press.

3-
Harris, M. (1987). Cultural anthropology (2nd ed.). New York, NY: Harper & Row Publishers.
Hidi, S., Renninger, K.A., & Krapp, A. (2004). Interests, a motivational variable that combines affective and
        cognitive    functioning.  In D.Y.   Dai &     R.J. Sternberg  (Eds.),   Motivation, emotion,   and   cognition:
        Integrative    perspectives  on   intellectual functioning    and  development  (pp.  89-115).     Mahwah,  NJ:
        Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Hodges, N.J., Starkes, J.L., & MacMahon, C. (2006) Expert performance in sport: A cognitive perspective. In
        K.A. Ericsson, N. Charness, P.J. Feltovich, and R.R. Hoffman (Eds.), The Cambridge handbook of
        expertise and expert performance (pp. 471-488). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Hutchins, E. (1995). Cognition in the wild. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Jenkins, H. (2006). Convergence culture: Where old and new media collide. New York: New York University
        Press.
Lave,  J.,  & Wenger,   E.   (1991).  Situated learning:    Legitimate    peripheral  participation. Cambridge,    UK:
        Cambridge University Press.
Layton, D.,   Jenkins, E., Macgill,   S., & Davey,     A. (1993). Inarticulate   Science?   Perspectives   on the public
        understanding     of science  and   some  implications    for science    education. Leeds,  UK:    University of
        Leeds.
Lewis,  S., &  James,  K.  (1995).  Whose   voice sets    the agenda  for  environmental    education?  Misconceptions
        inhibiting racial and cultural diversity. Journal of Environmental Education, 26(3), 5-12.
Lugones,   M. (2003).  Pilgrimages/peregrinajes:       Theorizing coalition  against  multiple  oppressions.   Lanham,
        MD: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, Inc.
Malaby, T. (2006). Parlaying value: Capital in and beyond virtual worlds. Games & Culture, 1(2), 141-162.
Norman, G., Eva, K., Brooks, L., & Hamstra, S. (2006). Expertise in medicine and surgery. In K.A. Ericsson, N.
        Charness, P.J. Feltovich, & R.R. Hoffman (Eds.), The Cambridge handbook of expertise and expert
        performance (pp. 339-354). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Univ. Press.
Pike, K.L. (1954). Language in relation to a unified theory of the structure of human behavior. Ann Arbor, MI:
        Braun-Brumfield, Inc.
Pinkard, N., Barron, B., Martin, C.K., & Gomez, K. (2007). Digital youth network: Fusing school and after-
        school contexts to develop youth's new media literacies. Unpublished manuscript.
Rogoff, B.,   & Lave,  J.  (1984/1999).   Everyday     cognition: Development     in social context. Cambridge,    MA:
        Harvard University Press.
Selinger, E., & Crease, R.P. (Eds.). (2006). The philosophy of expertise. New York, NY: Columbia University
        Press.
Stanley, W.B. & Brickhouse, N.W. (2001). Teaching sciences: The multicultural question revisited. Science
        Education, 85, 35-49.
Steinkuehler, C. (2007). Massively multiplayer online gaming as a constellation of literacy practices. eLearning,
        4(3), 297-318.
Taylor, D.E. (1996). Making multicultural environmental education a reality. Race, Poverty & the Environment,
        6(2&3), 3-6.
Taylor, T. L. (2006). Play between worlds: Exploring online game culture. The MIT Press.
Wynne,  B.   (1992). Misunderstood    misunderstandings:      Social  identities and public  uptake  of science.  Public
        Understanding of Science, 1(3), 281-304.

Acknowledgements
The researchers   would    like to   acknowledge   the    substantial  and  generous   involvement      of the research
participants  involved in  the ethnographic  studies   described  in  this session,  without whom    these  accounts  of
expertise development would not have been possible.

                                                                                                                            3-3
