 Epistemological Sensitisation Causes Deeper Elaboration during
                                          Self-Regulated Learning
Stephanie Pieschl, Rainer Bromme, Torsten Porsch, University of Muenster, Fliednerstraße 21, 48149 Muenster
            Email: pieschl@uni-muenster.de, bromme@uni-muenster.de, t.porsch@uni-muenster.de
Elmar Stahl, University of Education Freiburg, Kartäuserstr. 61b, 79104 Freiburg, elmar.stahl@ph-freiburg.de

          Abstract:  Previous   research    indicates  that   students' adaptation    to  task  complexity    in  the
          planning stages of self-regulated learning are related to their epistemological beliefs (Stahl,
          Pieschl, &  Bromme,     2006),   but  it is  an open  issue   if  students  enact similar    strategies in
          subsequent  stages.  Based    on  the  COPES-model        (Winne   &   Hadwin,    1998)    the  impact  of
          epistemological beliefs on learning is tested here experimentally. In this study, students (21
          humanities  students,  14   biology   students)   had  to   solve five   tasks of different    complexity
          (Anderson  et  al., 2001)   with  a  hypertext  on  "genetic   fingerprinting".   Results   indicate   that
          students adapted their concurrent thoughts and concurrent actions to task complexity in this
          enactment   stage.   An   epistemological     sensitisation   was  administered       that elicited more
          "sophisticated" beliefs and caused more elaborate learning processes. For example, students
          with this sensitisation employed more metacognitive planning, especially for more complex
          tasks. Additionally, effects of prior domain knowledge were investigated.

Introduction
Epistemological Beliefs and Learning
          Research on epistemological beliefs, i.e. learners' beliefs about the nature of knowledge and knowing,
has expanded considerably in recent years (see, for overviews, Buehl & Alexander, 2001; Hofer & Pintrich,
1997). One important theoretical assumption in this field of research is that learners' epistemological beliefs
develop   from more   "naive"   views   (knowledge     is absolute;   knowledge    is an  accumulation     of facts)  to more
"sophisticated" beliefs (knowledge is relative and contextual, knowledge is a complex network). Additionally,
an increasing number of empirical studies shows that such sophisticated beliefs are related to more adequate
learning strategies and better learning outcomes. To give some examples from traditional classrooms: College
students'  epistemological    beliefs were     related to their  processing     of information    and   their monitoring    of
comprehension (Schommer, 1990), their academic performance (Schommer, 1993), conceptual change (Mason
& Boscolo, 2004), and further cognitive processes during learning (Kardash & Howell, 2000). There are fewer
studies concerning computer-based learning environments, but their results are encouraging as well. Concerning
learning with hypertext, Jacobson and Spiro (1995) found that learners with more sophisticated epistemological
beliefs were more able to learn and apply their knowledge after using a hypertext system than students with
simpler   epistemological   beliefs.  Bendixen     and  Hartley  (2003)     also found   that   epistemological   beliefs   are
associated with learning outcomes in learning with hypertexts. And Bartholomé, Stahl, Pieschl, and Bromme
(2006)  found  that  students  with   more  sophisticated     beliefs showed     a more   adequate    help-seeking    behavior
within an interactive learning environment. There is also evidence that epistemological beliefs are related to
students' information retrieval from the Internet (Hofer, 2004).
          Despite  these   positive empirical   results some   open   issues    remain:  First, the  exact  relation  between
epistemological    beliefs and  learning    is still  unclear on a    theoretical  level. Some    researchers    assume    that
epistemological    beliefs are somehow      part   of  metacognitions   (Hofer,    2004;  Kitchener,   1983;   Kuhn,   2000).
However, their models do not specify the functional relationship between epistemological beliefs and learning in
detail. Second, most empirical results concerning this relationship are correlative in nature. Thus, it is unclear if
sophisticated beliefs cause better learning or if students with better learning strategies automatically develop
more   sophisticated  beliefs.  In    order to   determine    causality,    experimental    studies   are   needed    that  test
interventions changing students' epistemological beliefs.

COPES-Model of Self-Regulated Learning
          The  COPES-model      (Winne    &    Hadwin,  1998)   provides    an  encouraging     theoretical background     that
helps to  specify  a functional  relationship,   assumes    causality,  and  incorporates   epistemological    beliefs   as an
important condition for the whole learning process. This model is well established in recent research (Greene &
Azevedo, 2007). According to this model, self-regulated learning occurs in four weakly sequenced and recursive
stages: (1) task definition, (2) goal setting and planning, (3) enactment and (4) adaptation. In the task definition
stage (1),  a student  generates    her own     perception  about   what    the  studying task   is  (about   constraints  and
resources). Based    on  this  definition   the student   generates   idiosyncratic   goal(s)   and   constructs  a   plan  for
addressing that study task (2). In the enactment stage (3) the previously created plan of study tactics is carried

                                                                                                                                   2-2
         out. The optional adaptation stage (4) pertains to fine-tuning of strategies within the actual learning task as well
         as to long-term adaptations based on the study experience. All four stages are embedded in the same general
         cognitive  architecture   that can   be  described  by   five  constituents  whose    acronym     gave   the   model  its name:
         conditions (C), operations (O), products (P), evaluations (E) and standards (S). Conditions pertain to external
         task conditions (e.g., task complexity) as well as to internal cognitive conditions (e.g., prior domain knowledge,
         epistemological    beliefs).  Conditions     influence   the  whole   learning    process,   especially   the   operations   and
         standards.  Operations    include  all cognitive   processes   (e.g., tactics, strategies)   that learners   utilize  to  solve a
         learning  task. In   each  learning  stage,   these operations  create   products     (e.g., an  essay).  Students'   goals   are
         represented as multivariate profile of standards. Standards can be described as a profile of different criteria that
         a  students sets for  the  learning    task. Evaluations   occur  during   the    whole learning     process   when   a   student
         metacognitively    monitors    her   learning   process. These  evaluations      are  based   on  comparisons      between    the
         intermediate products on the one hand and her standards on the other. When she notices discrepancies she is
         able to perform metacognitive control by executing fix-up operations.
                  Based   on   the  COPES-model       we    hypothesize  that  epistemological     beliefs  as   well   as prior   domain
         knowledge   influence    all stages   of  self-regulated  learning    within   a  hypermedia    learning    system,   especially
         students'  adaptation   to external    conditions   like task  complexity.     Epistemological    beliefs   and   prior   domain
         knowledge were selected because of their crucial importance for learning as indicated by the COPES-model.
         We explicitly focused on students' adaptation to task complexity as an approach to scrutinize affordances of
         learning, especially those given by the content. To illustrate this for epistemological beliefs imagine a learner
         with  a "naïve"  belief  that  knowledge     is simple   and  stable. As   epistemological      beliefs directly  influence   the
         standards,  the  learner  might   probably    set  quite superficial  goals   ("The   goal   is achieved    if I  can recall  all
         important   facts.") compared   to   a  more  "sophisticated"   learner  who     believes  that  knowledge     is complex    and
         relative. Epistemological beliefs also directly influence the operations, thus a more "naïve" learner might enact
         rather  superficial  operations  like   memorizing    compared   to   a more     "sophisticated"   learner   who   might   enact
         strategies of deeper elaboration. These differences might be negligible for very simple tasks because learners
         enact similar strategies but might become more pronounced for complex tasks. Consequently, we hypothesize,
         that learners with more "sophisticated" beliefs should be better in calibrating to task complexity. Within series
         of coordinated studies we have already tested this hypothesis for the preparatory stages of learning (i.e., task
         definition, goal setting and planning) and found positive effects (Stahl, Pieschl, & Bromme, 2006). However,
         because students frequently don't do what they say they do, for example indicated by the lack of congruence
         between   self-report questionnaires     and  online  measurements      of self-regulated     learning   strategies  (Jamieson-
         Noel & Winne, 2003), it could not be taken for granted that students would execute their plans in real learning
         scenarios  as indicated   by   their goal setting   and  planning.  Thus,  it  is an  open   issue   if similar   effects can be
         detected in the enactment and adaptation stages. Therefore, the same research questions will be investigated in
         these stages: (1) Do learners adapt their learning process to task complexity? (2) Are these adaptation processes
         impacted by epistemological beliefs and prior domain knowledge? And (3) does adaptation impact the learning
         outcome?

       Method
        Procedure
                  This study consists of two sessions: During the first session all students filled in online-questionnaires
         about their domain-related epistemological beliefs. Based on their responses and their prior domain knowledge,
         students  were   sorted   into  two    matched     sub-samples   that   received   two  versions     of  the   epistemological
         sensitisation implemented to change students' epistemological beliefs in the second session. Re-administering
         the   epistemological  beliefs  questionnaires     as a  treatment-check     validated  the     success  of  this  intervention.
         Subsequently,   students   were  introduced     to navigational options    and   the  structure   of a  hierarchical  hypertext
         about "genetic fingerprinting". In the main part of the study, students had one hour to solve five learning tasks
         that systematically differed in complexity with this hypertext. Students' whole self-regulated learning process
         was captured during this learning phase by multiple measures: Students were prompted in fixed time intervals to
         elaborate on their concurrent thoughts. Furthermore, detailed logfiles were automatically collected to capture
         students'  concurrent   navigation    in the  hypertext.  Additionally,    as  measures      of learning  outcome,    students'
         answers to the tasks were analysed.

        Participants
                  Students were selectively recruited to ensure two levels of prior domain knowledge. Fourteen advanced
         students of biology (4 males and 10 females, mean age 24 years SD = 2.46) took part in this study as discipline
         experts (Rouet, Favart, Britt, & Perfetti, 1997). Their high level of prior knowledge was confirmed by the results
         of  a short knowledge     test (8  points maximum;       M   = 7.57,  SD   =   0.65). Twenty-one      students    of humanities
         (1 male, 20 females, mean age 21 years SD = 1.34) scored lower in the knowledge test (8 points maximum;
         M = 2.52, SD = 1.78) and can be considered novices (Chi, 2006). The difference between both sub-samples in

2-2
the knowledge test was significant: t (33) = 10.14, p < .001. Therefore, these quasi-experimental groups will be
included as independent variable tapping prior domain knowledge in all subsequent analyses with regard to the
impact of internal conditions.

Materials
Epistemological Beliefs Questionnaires
           The  success  of  the epistemological     sensitisation     was determined     by administering     two   domain-
dependent    questionnaires    before    and   after   this    intervention.    The   CAEB    (Connotative     Aspects     of
Epistemological    Beliefs;  Stahl  &   Bromme,   in   press)  consists  of  two  scales  of connotative   adjective    pairs:
CAEB-texture     measures    beliefs about  the  structure  and     accuracy  of knowledge    on  10   items (sample    item:
"structured  ­  unstructured")   and  exhibited  satisfactory    reliability pre-instructionally  (Cronbach's      = .84)  as
well  as post-instructionally  (Cronbach's      = .85).   CAEB-variability      measures  beliefs  about   the stability  and
dynamics of knowledge on 7 items (sample item: "dynamic ­ static") and exhibited satisfactory reliability pre-
instructionally (Cronbach's  = .74) as well as post-instructionally (Cronbach's  = .90). The GCBS (General
Certainty Beliefs Scale; Trautwein & Lüdke, in press) is a 7-item instrument that captures declarative beliefs
about   the certainty   and  attainability  of scientific  knowledge     (sample    item: "Scientific  laws    are universal
truths."). This scale   also exhibited  satisfactory   reliability  pre-instructionally   (Cronbach's   = .72)    as well  as
post-instructionally (Cronbach's  = .83).

Epistemological Sensitisation
           Assumptions of the COPES-Model are related to more and less sophisticated epistemological beliefs
(see  above).   To consider   these  claims  experimentally      it is necessary  to  manipulate   epistemological    beliefs
systematically: Two versions of an introduction to "genetic fingerprinting" were administered to two matched
sub-samples of students as an instructional intervention that we termed epistemological sensitisation. One sub-
sample received an introduction which was neutral because it was purely factual. The other sub-sample received
an epistemological instruction that was enriched with comments about the epistemological nature of selected
facts (e.g.,   detailing scientific   controversies)   and  thus     should  elicit  more   "sophisticated"    evaluativistic
epistemological beliefs.
           The  results  show    that   the two   sub-samples       were   adequately    matched   with    regard    to  their
epistemological beliefs (no significant pre-instructional differences could be detected: CAEB-texture: F (1,33)
= 1.38,  p = .248;  CAEB-variability:    F   (1,33)  = .01,    p =  .937;  GCBS-certainty:    F  (1,33)  <   .01,  p=   .965).
Additionally,   consistent  effects  of the epistemological      sensitisation  could be  detected in  a repeated-measure
analysis: A significant multivariate interaction (F (1,31) = 4.73, p = .008) was replicated univariately on the two
CAEB     scales (CAEB-texture:     F (1,33)  = 13.02,  p = .001;    CAEB-variability:     F (1,33) =   7.95, p=    .008). For
GCBS-certainty, this interaction was not significant. Furthermore, significant univariate main effects for the
repeated-measure factor emerged for the two CAEB scales (CAEB-texture: F (1,33) = 6.41, p = .016; CAEB-
variability: F (1,33) = 6.81, p = .014). The main effects indicate that all students became more "sophisticated"
after reading   the introductions.    The   interactions  demonstrate      that  students who    read  the epistemological
introduction became significantly more "sophisticated" than the students who read the neutral introduction. The
effects  point  in the   same direction    for GCBS-certainty       but were    not significant, potentially   because    this
instrument captures more denotative aspects of epistemological beliefs that are not assumed to change easily.
           For our research questions it is not important if this change is a fundamental and lasting modification of
epistemological beliefs or a temporal effect on context-dependent epistemological resources (Hammer & Elby,
2003). We hereby acknowledge that our epistemological sensitisation might only have changed epistemological
beliefs during the learning process (in situ). To conclude, the epistemological sensitisation can be considered a
success and these experimental groups will be included as independent variable tapping epistemological beliefs
in all subsequent analyses with regard to the impact of internal conditions.

Tasks of Different Complexity
           Bloom's  revised  taxonomy    (Anderson     et al., 2001)   distinguishes  between    tasks affording   cognitive
processes of different complexity (in order of ascending complexity): (1) remember, (2) understand, (3) apply,
(4) analyze, (5) evaluate, and (6) create. In this study only tasks from selected categories were used: Students
first had to solve two tasks of the simplest Bloom-category remember (factual multiple-choice questions). These
were followed by a very complex evaluate task (that required students to judge the adequacy of multiple DNA
analysis methods for paternity testing), a quite simple understand task (which required an open answer) and
another remember task. By this order of tasks it was possible to investigate if students enhanced their depth of
processing if confronted with more complex tasks, but also if they were able to decrease their processing again
if simple tasks required superficial strategies. The subsequent analyses will include task complexity as defined
by these tasks as repeated-measure factor.

                                                                                                                                 2-2
                   Additionally, students' answers to these tasks will be analysed as dependent variables tapping their
         learning  outcome.   For the   simple  remember    tasks only  correctness   of  answers   will  be  determined.   For  the
         complex evaluate task on the other hand the open answers will not only be analyzed with regard to correctness
         of the final answer,    but also with  regard   to multiple   qualitative sub-scores   (e.g., quality  of argumentation,
         correctness of the evaluation of single DNA analysis methods, correctness of the final conclusion, and overall
         sum score made by adding up all sub-scores).

        The Hypertext on Genetic Fingerprinting
                   Tasks were    solved  with a hierarchical    hypertext on  genetic  fingerprinting   that was   implemented   in
         MetaLinks (Murray, 2003). This hypertext encompasses 106 nodes that belong to three thematic hierarchically
         structured  chapters (i.e., about  mtDNA     analysis,  STR   analysis, and   Y-STR    analysis)  and   appendices   about
         further biological background, examples, and nodes about potential problems. During students' learning phase
         all concurrent navigational actions were automatically recorded. From these logfiles, two scores were computed
         that were used as repeated-measure dependent variables in all subsequent analyses. Time for task completion
         (TTC) contains the exact time a student needed to complete each single task. And the number of accessed nodes
         (NAN) explicates how many nodes a student accessed for each task.

        Students' Concurrent Thoughts
                   Students'  concurrent  thoughts  were    captured   by prompting    them  with   the   question "What   are  you
         currently  thinking  about?"  in fixed time   intervals  (approximately    every  2 minutes).    Students'  answers   were
         coded  as  either indicating  their  planning   (PL),  their enactment  (EN),   or  their  reflection or  revision (REV)
         processes. Two raters blindly coded the protocols of a sub-sample of 12 students (34 % of the total sample). For
         73.4 % of the prompts (n = 259) the two raters assigned the same category. All differences were resolved by
         discussion.  Subsequently,   one  of  the two   raters coded   the remaining  protocols.   Thus,   the  numbers   of  these
         processes per task were used as repeated-measure dependent variable in all subsequent analyses.

       Results
                   Because of the qualitative and explorative character of the study p < .05 was defined as significant and
         p < .10 as marginally significant. Because most students (i.e., n = 29, that corresponds to 82.8 % of the sample)
         finished all five tasks, statistical analyses will be performed across all five tasks. All students solved at least
         three tasks.

        Do students adapt their learning process to task complexity?
                   This question was investigated with a methodology transferred from the calibration paradigm (Nelson
         & Dunlosky, 1991): First, it was determined if students learning processes significantly differed between tasks
         of different  complexity    by  repeated-measure     analyses  (discrimination).    Second,   a  systematic   relationship
         between   students'  learning   processes  and   task   complexity   was   determined     by  computing     within-subject
         Goodman-Kruskal Gamma correlations (G) between the dependent variables and the Bloom-Categories (n = 5,
         for the 5 tasks). These were subsequently Z-transformed into calibration indices.
                   A within-subject repeated-measure MANOVA across all five tasks was calculated for the variables
         capturing students' concurrent actions (TTC = time for task completion and NAN = number of accessed nodes)
         to determine   discrimination.  A   significant multivariate  main  effect  for the repeated-measure      factor task  was
         detected  (F (8,20)  =  10.20,   p < .001) that  was   replicated  univariately  on  both  dependent    variables  (NAN:
         F (4,108) = 43.67, p < .001; TTC: F (4,108) = 32.11, p < .001). For both dependent variables the calibration
         graphs indicate a "peak" for the complex evaluate task. For example, students spent on average between 5 - 10
         minutes on remember and understand tasks and they spent on average approximately 20 minutes on the evaluate
         task (TTC).   This  picture  is corroborated  by   calibration indices  of  large effect   size: For  example,   the mean
         calibration  index  for the  number    of accessed    nodes  (NAN)   corresponds    to   a correlation  of  G =   .90  and
         significantly differs from zero (t (34) = 6.55, p < .001). This positive association indicates that students accessed
         few nodes for simple tasks and accessed an ascending number of nodes with increasing task complexity. A
         similar picture was found for TTC (G = .94, t (34) = 8.04, p < .001).
                   A  within-subject  repeated-measure      MANOVA        across all five   tasks   was   calculated  for variables
         capturing students' concurrent thoughts (PL = planning, EN = enactment, and REV = reflection / revision) to
         determine    discrimination. A   significant  multivariate   main  effect  of the   repeated-measure      factor task  was
         detected (F (12,23) = 27.55, p < .001) that was replicated univariately on all dependent variables (PL: F (4,136)
         =  24.47, p  < .001; EN:    F (4,136)  =  30.46,   p <  .001;  REV:  F (4,136)    = 25.53,   p < .001).  For all  kinds of
         concurrent thoughts, the overall picture was similar: Students gave more answers for the complex evaluate task
         than for the simpler remember and understand tasks, indicated by a "peak" in the calibration graphs. This picture
         is corroborated by calibration indices of large effect size (PL: G = .88, t (34) = 4.83, p < .001; EN: G = .97,
         t (34) = 9.42, p < .001; REV: G = .93, t (34) = 5.91, p < .001).

2-2
          Students' learning outcome is captured by their answers to the tasks. The number of written words was
compared between the two open answer tasks to determine discrimination: Students wrote significantly more for
the complex evaluate task (about 120 words) than for the simpler understand task (about 60 words; t (31) = 5.89,
p < .001). Task difficulty (the percentage of correct answers in this sample) was compared between all five tasks
in  a repeated-measure  ANOVA.        All  tasks  were   solved correctly   by more   than 60  %    of the students. No
significant differences of the repeated-measure factor task could be detected (F (4,25) = 1.92, p = .138). Because
of the lack of discrimination for task difficulty no calibration indices were computed for this variable.

Are these adaptation processes impacted by epistemological beliefs and prior domain
knowledge?
          In order to answer     this question    the quasi-experimental    prior domain   knowledge     groups  (biology
students  versus  humanities  students)    as well as  the experimental   groups   of the epistemological   sensitisation
(epistemological introduction versus neutral introduction) were included as dichotomous factors in the repeated-
measure discrimination analyses. And the calibration indices were compared between groups.

Prior Domain Knowledge
          The MANOVA for students' concurrent actions (NAN = number of accessed nodes and TTC = time
for task completion) revealed a marginally significant multivariate main effect (F (2,23) = 3.23, p = .052) and
marginally significant interaction with the repeated-measure factor task (F (8,17) = 2.43, p = .059). Univariately
these effects were only significant for TTC (main effect: F (1,24) = 6.83, p = .015; interaction: F (4,96) = 2.52,
p = .046). The corresponding calibration graph indicates that humanities students spent more time on all tasks
(main effect) but one (interaction): For the last remember task, humanities students were faster.
          The MANOVA         for students'    concurrent  thoughts (PL    = planning,   EN =   enactment,  and   REV  =
reflection / revision) revealed a significant multivariate main effect (F (3,30) = 4.64, p = .009) and a significant
multivariate interaction with the repeated-measure factor task (F (12,21) = 2.61, p = .026). Univariately these
effects were  only significant   for  PL   (main  effect: F (1,32) = 9.90,   p =  .004; interaction:   F (4,128) = 3.16,
p = .016). The corresponding calibration graph indicates that humanities students engaged more frequently in
planning processes across all tasks (main effect) and that this effect was especially pronounced for the complex
evaluate task (interaction).
          The ANOVA     for  the  learning    outcome   (task difficulty) revealed  a  significant  interaction with the
repeated-measure factor task (F (4,23) = 3.32, p = .028): The corresponding calibration graph indicates that
humanities students in general were less successful at solving tasks correctly, but solved the second remember
task better than the biology students did. To get an even more detailed insight, an additional MANOVA was
calculated for all sub-scores for the complex evaluate task. Results indicate two effects: A significant effect for
giving correct evaluations (F (1,25) = 4.52, p = .044) and a marginally significant effect for the overall sum
score (F (1,25) = 3.01, p = .095). In both cases, biology students outperformed humanities students.
          Additionally, one effect on students' calibration was detected: Humanities students tended to calibrate
their number   of accessed   nodes    (NAN)   stronger  to task complexity    than biology students    (F (1,31) = 3.82,
p = .060; biology  students:  G   =   .74, humanities   students: G = .95).   This indicates,  that humanities   students
accessed more nodes for the understand task than for the remember tasks and more nodes for the evaluate task
than for the understand task. For biology students this rank order was not as pronounced.

Epistemological Sensitisation
          The MANOVA for students' concurrent actions (NAN = number of accessed nodes and TTC = time
for task  completion) revealed    a   significant univariate  interaction for  TTC  (F  (4,96) = 3.41,   p = .012).  The
corresponding calibration graph (Figure 1, left) indicates that students who read the epistemological introduction
spent less time on simple remember tasks, but significantly more time on the complex evaluate task than their
counterparts who read the neutral introduction.
          The MANOVA         for students'    concurrent  thoughts (PL    = planning,   EN =   enactment,  and   REV  =
reflection / revision) revealed a marginally significant multivariate main effect (F (3,30) = 2.72, p = .062), but a
univariately significant main effect and a univariately significant interaction for PL (main effect: F (1,32) =
7.62, p = .009; interaction: F (4,128) = 3.61, p = .008). The corresponding calibration graph (Figure 1, right)
indicates that students who read the epistemological introduction more often engaged in "planning" processes
across all tasks (main effect), and that this effect was especially pronounced for the complex evaluate task, still
detectable for the understand task, but almost invisible for the remember tasks (interaction).
          T-test for the learning outcome (number of written words) revealed a marginally significant main effect
(F (1,28) = 3.29, p = .081): Students who read the epistemological introduction wrote significantly more words
in both tasks with open answers. The ANOVA for task difficulty revealed a significant main effect (F (1,26) =
4.53, p = .043). The corresponding calibration graph indicates that students who received the epistemological
introduction performed worse across all tasks than the students who received a neutral introduction. To get an

                                                                                                                            2-2
         even more detailed insight, an additional MANOVA was calculated for all sub-scores for the complex evaluate
         task   (see above).   Results  indicate   effects for  quality of  argumentation     (F  (1,25) = 7.19,   p =    .013) and for
         correctness   of    the final  conclusion  (F (1,25)   =  7.60,  p  = .011).    While   students  with  the epistemological
         introduction outperformed students with the neutral introduction on the quality of argumentation, the picture
         was reversed for correctness of the final conclusion.
                   Additionally,      one   effect  on   students'  calibration     was   detected:   Students   who      received  the
         epistemological      introduction  tended   to   calibrate their   time    for task  completion   (TTC)     stronger   to task
         complexity than students who received the neutral introduction (F (1,31) = 3.02, p = .092; neutral introduction:
         G = .88, epistemological introduction: G = .97). This indicates that the epistemological introduction led to a
         rank   order of     tasks with  regard to  processing    time  analogous    to   the Bloom-Categories     (i.e., remember   <
         understand < evaluate) while this was not as strongly the case for the neutral introduction.

           Figure 1. This Figure visualizes the effects of the epistemological sensitisation for time for task completion
                                                   (TTC; left) and for planning (PL, right).

        Does Adaptation Impact the Learning Outcome?
                   An overall learning outcome score was computed by summing up the number of correctly solved tasks
         (i.e., thus this    score ranged  from  0  to 5  points).  On  average,    students  scored 4.03  points  (SD    = .82) which
         corresponds      to 81  %.   The  impact  of  internal condition    (i.e., students'  prior  domain   knowledge     and   their
         epistemological beliefs) was already extensively investigated in the previous analyses. But the predictive power
         of further learning process variables was tested: First, variables capturing students' concurrent learning process
         that were interpreted as dependent variables before were used as predictors and were correlated with this score:
         the overall number of accessed nodes (NAN), the overall time for task completion (TTC), the overall number of
         concurrent   thoughts     categorized  as  "planning"    (PL),   "enactment"     (EN) and   "reflection / revision"    (REV).
         Second, the calibration indices for these five variables were also used as predictors. Results indicate only one
         significant correlation: The calibration indices for the time for task completion (TTC) were negatively correlated
         with the overall learning outcome score (r = -.52, p = .004, n = 29). Students who better adapted their time for
         task completion to the complexity of the learning tasks solved fewer tasks correctly.

       Discussion
                   With regard to students' adaptation to task complexity, students demonstrated their ability sufficiently:
         Repeated-measure (M)ANOVAs across all tasks consistently indicate significant discrimination and calibration
         indices  of  large    effect  size consistently   indicate  significant    calibration.  The  logfiles  capturing    students'
         concurrent actions reveal that students spent significantly more time and accessed more nodes for more complex
         tasks. Students' concurrent thoughts point in the same direction: They show an increase in all processes for
         more    complex     tasks.   This finding  may    seem   trivial at first  glance    because more    time   spent  on   a task
         automatically    leads    to more  prompts   per  task which   elicit more     concurrent thoughts.  Nonetheless     students'
         could have only increased their superficial enactment without increasing their metacognitive involvement like
         planning    (cf. Stahl,   Bromme,   Stadtler, &   Jaron,  2006).  Thus,    these results show   that students    increase their
         concurrent cognitive as well as their concurrent metacognitive processing for more complex tasks. Additionally,
         this adaptation is also visible in students' answers (learning outcome): They write more for complex tasks. The
         fact that almost all tasks were solved equally well (lack of discrimination effect for task difficulty) on the other

2-2
hand supports the success of students' adaptations: The superficial processing of simple tasks and the elaborate
processing of more complex tasks both led to almost equal success.
          With regard to prior domain knowledge, the effects are mostly consistent: Results indicate that biology
students were faster (also cf. Lawless, Brown, Mills, & Mayall, 2003) and needed to employ less overt planning
during the  task  solution   process   (also cf.  Winne  &   Hadwin,     1998),  but  still outperformed    the  humanities
students (also cf. Ford & Chen, 2003). Consistently, calibration results indicate that biology students did not
calibrate their  number     of accessed  nodes    during  their  self-regulated    learning  process  as  strongly  to   task
complexity as the humanities students (also cf. Glenberg & Epstein, 1987). Most likely, humanities students
needed more time because they did not understand all technical terms and they might have needed to access
more nodes and engage in more metacognitions to compensate for their lack of knowledge. Because especially
the complex task afforded reading multiple nodes, this might have resulted in a higher calibration for humanities
students. However, despite humanities students' apparently deeper processing their strategy was not enough to
compensate for biology students' initial advantage (cf. learning outcome).
          With regard to epistemological beliefs, the epistemological sensitisation also elicited consistent effects:
Students  who   read  the   epistemological   introduction   were    faster  on simpler    tasks but  spent more    time on
complex   tasks.  Consistently,   calibration results  indicate  that students   with  the   epistemological   introduction
calibrated their time for task completion during their self-regulated learning process stronger to task complexity
than students with the neutral introduction. Furthermore, students who read the epistemological introduction
employed more metacognitive planning during the task solution process (Bendixen & Hartley, 2003; Kardash &
Howell, 2000), especially for the complex evaluate task. Therefore, this intervention seemed to have triggered
more   flexible epistemologies    and  learning   strategies (Elby   &   Hammer,     2002).  With   regard  to the  learning
outcome,   reading   the epistemological     introduction  was   associated     with more    written  words    and  superior
argumentation    (Mason     &  Boscolo,  2004),    but seemed    to  be  detrimental   for   overall  success   in terms  of
correctness. Most likely, the epistemological introduction triggered an awareness of the complexity, uncertainty,
and variability of knowledge. This awareness might have elicited standards of deeper learning and thus a more
elaborate self-regulated learning process including better adaptation to task complexity. Additionally, students
might have tried to convey their new insights by writing adequately complex answers. However, this increased
awareness might also have made it more difficult for students to finally decide on one single correct answer:
Some   comments    in the   epistemological   introduction   stressed    the multiplicity   of possible   opinions  and  the
difficulty to find final truths.
          With  regard   to  the  learning   outcome,  results   are counterintuitive:   The   COPES-model       (Winne   &
Hadwin,   1998)   clearly   predicted  that   better adaptation   to  external   conditions    (here:  calibration  to   task
complexity) should also be beneficial for the learning outcome while the reverse effect was detected in this
study. One    viable  explanation     concerns   the task    specificity of   this effect.  If   learning  outcome   is  not
operationalised   as correctness   of  answers   but instead  by measures     also considering    the quality   of students'
answers, this effect disappears.
          These results demonstrate that students not only adapt their learning to task complexity in the planning
stages of learning   (i.e., task definition,  goal setting   and planning    according   to  the COPES-model)      and   that
epistemological beliefs do not only impact these planning processes, but that similar effects can be detected in
subsequent    stages of  learning  where     students' actively  have    to  solve   tasks  of different  complexity    (i.e.,
enactment  and   adaptation    according to   the COPES-model).       Additionally,  these   results  demonstrate   that the
theoretically assumed    causality  between   epistemological    beliefs  and   learning processes    can also  be  detected
empirically:  "Sophisticated"    beliefs cause   more  elaborate  learning    processes    and not  vice  versa. Therefore,
implementing explicit discourse about epistemological questions in a learning setting (like the epistemological
sensitisation) might be an adequate instructional intervention to scaffold adequate learning.

References
Anderson, L. W., Krathwohl, D. R., Airasian, P. W., Cruikshank, K. A., Mayer, R. E., Pintrich, P. R., et al.
          (2001). A   taxonomy     for learning,   teaching,   and   assessing.    A revision    of Bloom's    taxonomy   of
          educational objectives. New York, Longman.
Bendixen, L. D. & Hartley, K. (2003). Successful learning with hypermedia: The role of epistemological beliefs
          and metacognitive awareness. Journal of Educational Computing Research, 28(1): 15-30.
Buehl, M. M. & Alexander, P. A. (2001). Beliefs about academic knowledge. Educational Psychology Review,
          13(4): 385-418.
Elby, A. & Hammer, D. (2001). On the substance of a sophisticated epistemology. Science Education, 85(5):
          554-567.
Ford, N. & Chen, S. Y. (2000). Individual differences, hypermedia navigation and learning: an empirical study.
          Journal of Educational Multimedia and Hypermedia, 9(4): 281-311.
Glenberg, A. M. & Epstein, W. (1987). Inexpert calibration of comprehension. Memory & Cognition, 15(1): 84-
          93.

                                                                                                                                 2-2
         Greene, J. A. & Azevedo, R. (2007). A Theoretical Review of Winne and Hadwin's Model of Self-Regulated
                  Learning: New Perspectives and Directions. Review of Educational Research, 77(3): 334-372.
         Hammer, D. & Elby, A. (2003). Tapping epistemological resources for learning physics. The Journal of the
                  Learning Sciences, 12 (1), 53-90.
         Hofer, B. K. (2004). Epistemological understanding as a metacognitive process: thinking aloud during online-
                  searching. Educational Psychologist, 39(1): 43-55.
         Hofer, B. K. & Pintrich, P. R. (1997). The development of epistemological theories: beliefs about knowledge
                  and knowing and their relation to learning. Review of Educational Research, 67(1): 88-140.
         Jacobson, M. J. & Spiro, R. J. (1995). Hypertext learning environments, cognitive flexibility, and the transfer of
                  complex knowledge: An empirical investigation. Journal of Educational Computing Research, 12(4):
                  301-333.
         Jamieson-Noel,   D.   &   Winne,    P.  H.  (2003).    Comparing    self-reports to  traces  of  studying   behavior  as
                  representations   of   students' studying    and achievement.   Zeitschrift für  Pädagogische      Psychologie,
                  17(3/4): 159-171.
         Kardash,   C. M.  &   Howell,    K. L.  (2000).   Effects of  epistemological    beliefs and   topic-specific beliefs on
                  undergraduates'     cognitive  and strategic  processing   of dual-positional   text. Journal   of Educational
                  Psychology, 92(3): 524-535.
         Kitchener, K. S. (1983). Cognition, metacognition, and epistemic cognition: A three-level model of cognitive
                  processing. Human Development, 26: 106-116.
         Kuhn, D. (2000). Metacognitive development. Current Directions in Psychological Sciences, 9(5): 178-181.
         Lawless, K. A., Brown, S. W., Mills, R. & Mayall, H. J. (2003). Knowledge, interest, recall and navigation: A
                  look at hypertext processing. Journal of Literacy Research, 35(3): 911-934.
         Mason,   L.   &  Boscolo,    P. (2004).   Role    of epistemological   understanding  and    interest in interpreting  a
                  controversy and in topic-specific belief change. Contemporary Educational Psychology, 29: 103-128.
         Murray,  T.   (2003). MetaLinks:     Authoring    and  affordances   for conceptual  and   narrative  flow  in  adaptive
                  hyperbooks. Journal of Artificial Intelligence and Education, Vol. 13 (Special Issue on Adaptive and
                  Intelligent Web-Based Systems).
         Nelson, T. O. & J. Dunlosky (1991). When people's judgements of learning (JOLs) are extremely accurate at
                  predicting subsequent recall: the delayed-JOL effect. Psychological Science, 2(4): 267-270.
         Rouet, J.-F., M. Favart, Britt, M. A. & Perfetti, C. A. (1997). Studying and using multiple documents in history:
                  effects of discipline expertise. Cognition and Instruction, 15(1): 85-106.
         Schommer,     M. (1990).   Effects   of   beliefs about   the nature of  knowledge    on   comprehension.     Journal of
                  Educational Psychology, 82(3): 498-504.
         Schommer,   M.   (1993).  Epistemological    development      and academic  performance    among    secondary  students.
                  Journal of Educational Psychology, 85(3): 406-411.
         Stahl, E. and R. Bromme (in press). CAEB. An instrument to measure connotative aspects of epistemological
                  beliefs. Learning and Instruction.
         Stahl, E., Bromme R., Stadtler, M. & Jaron, R. (2006). Learning by hypertext writing: effects of considering a
                  single audience versus multiple audiences on knowledge acquisition. Recent developments in writing
                  process research. In D. Galbraith, L. van Waes and M. Torrance. Dordrecht, Kluwer. 2: Methods and
                  applications: 307-321.
         Stahl, E.,  Pieschl   S., Bromme     R.   (2006).    Task complexity,    epistemological    beliefs and  metacognitive
                  calibration: An exploratory study. Journal of Educational Computing Research, 35(4): 319-338.
         Trautwein, U. & O. Lüdke (in press). Predicting global and topic-specific certaint beliefs: Domain-specificity
                  and the role of academic environment. British Journal of Educational Psychology.
         Winne, P. H. & A. F. Hadwin (1998). Studying as self-regulated learning. Metacognition in educational theory
                  and  practice.   In D.  J. Hacker,  J.   Dunlosky    and A. C.  Graesser.  Mahwah,    NJ,  Lawrence   Erlbaum
                  Associates: 277-304.

2-220
