       Seeing and Supporting Identity Development in Science Education

                        Heidi Carlone, The University of North Carolina at Greensboro, School of Education,
                                    346 Curry Building, Greensboro, NC 27402, hbcarlon@uncg.edu
                                        Melissa Cook, Jacqueline Wong, William A. Sandoval
                        University of California at Los Angeles, 2339 Moore Hall, Los Angeles, CA 90095
                           Email: cook.ucla@gmail.com, writejackie@gmail.com, sandoval@gseis.ucla.edu
          Angela Calabrese Barton, Edna Tan, Michigan State University, 116E Erickson Hall, East Lansing, MI 48824
                                                  Email: acb@msu.edu, tane@msu.edu
                   Nancy Brickhouse, University of Delaware, School of Education, College of Human Services,
                   Education and Public Policy, University of Delaware, Newark, DE 19716, nbrick@udel.edu

                   Abstract: The primary objective of this session is to highlight ways in which identity can be
                   construed   and  studied  within   science    education, and   to advance    a discussion    about how
                   science  education    can  embrace     its civic   responsibility   toward    students   to  help  them
                   appropriate science as a meaningful tool in their lives beyond school. The four papers reflect a
                   range   of  perspectives   on   the  construct   of   identity and   approaches     to   its study  and
                   development. Each presentation will focus on the authors' conceptualization of identity and
                   identity development and their approaches to characterizing expressions of identity or identity
                   change  through   student  talk and/or   participation   in particular contexts   of  science   learning.
                   Presenters will discuss their own goals for identity development within science education, and
                   the implications from their work for approaches to supporting positive identity development
                   through science learning.

       Overview of the Session and Session Objectives
                   A recent trend in science education is the concern that students develop identities in relation to science.
         This focus  on    identity is especially  directed   to students   who  belong   to groups   who   are  historically  under-
         represented in science: girls, ethnic minorities, and the poor (e.g., Calabrese Barton, 1998; Brown, Reveles, &
         Kelly, 2005; Carlone, 2004; Kozoll & Osborne, 2004). What it means to have a "science identity" can vary, of
         course, as individuals could potentially come to identify as scientists, or as consumers of science, or critics of
         science, and so on. Concurrent with this interest in identity construction, or development, as an outcome from
         "Science for All" reforms, an alternative to the traditional psychological construct of identity has emerged from
         new literacy studies (Gee, 2001), which view discourse as a medium for the development and expression of
         identity, and  sociocultural   theories   of  development    more   generally  that    view identity   as one  of   the core
         outcomes of human development (Wenger, 1998). On this view, all learning entails a change in identity, as the
         meaning   that  individuals   make  of  their place  within   the  communities    of   practice in which    they participate
         changes their view of themselves. This sociocultural view of identity also asserts that identities are socially
         constrained,   in the sense   that individuals   cannot  really   assume    identities that are  not   recognized   within a
         community (e.g., poor urban students of color not being able to assume identities as good students).
                   Yet, in  "opening    up"  the  construct   of identity   to acknowledge      and  try to account   for  its social
         dimension,   the  sociocultural    notion of  identity   raises several  issues.  A    key  change     from the  traditional
         psychological construct is that sociocultural views see identity as enacted through one's participation in activity
         and  discourse,   as  opposed   to a set  of  psychological     beliefs  that can   be  interrogated   through   surveys   or
         interviews. For example, Carlone and Johnson (2007) recently argues that someone who has a science identity
         demonstrates competent performance in relevant scientific practices and deep and meaningful knowledge and
         understanding of science, and recognizes herself and gets recognized by others as a "science person". In other
         words, identity construction requires the participation of others. To be a particular kind of person (i.e., to enact a
         particular identity) requires that we talk, think, use tools, value, act, and interact in ways that render who we are
         and what we are doing recognizable to others (Gee, 2001). Thus, this stance on the role of identity in learning
         has implications for not only how we fashion learning but also how we seek to unpack the outcomes of learning
         methodologically.
                   Opening up the construct of identity also calls into question how issues of power and positioning frame
         opportunities  and   outcomes   of  learning  as well.   For  example,   Brickhouse     and Potter   (2001)  show   us  how
         complex the relationship between identity and success in school and in peer groups can be for urban girls. Their
         work reveals that through the experiences of marginalization in the science classroom and even in peer groups,
         urban girls learn that membership in a school science community is often impossible or undesirable. Having a
         science or technology related identity does not mean that one will necessarily succeed in school, if that science
         related identity does not also reflect the values of school-mediated engagement or if students do not have access
         to the resources they need to do science well. However, successful participation in school science or technology,

3-
despite a lack of resources in the home environment, can be better facilitated when students have a science
related identity they can draw upon.
         The questions that frame this session emerge from opening up the construct of identity. They include:
How do individuals develop identities with respect to "learning" science? How can identity development be
measured and traced over time? Also, as identity change becomes an outcome of interest for science education,
other questions arise. What does it mean to have a "science identity"? What kinds of identity would we like
students to develop ­ should everyone develop an identity as a scientist? Why or why not? How do we support
identity development in science classrooms, however we define them? Finally, from an equity standpoint, how
do we help students in retaining identities that is desirable to them in their home communities while supporting
them in crossing the boundaries of race, class and gender, in order to get access to a science culture that too
often resides only in more privileged communities?
         The   presentations  in  this session attempt    to  answer  these questions   related  to  seeing identity and
supporting identity development in science classrooms. Yet while each paper draws upon rich data sources in
order to bring to light critical issues and findings with respect to identity and science learning, each paper also
brings into focus critical conceptual and methodological issues that shape identity-based research in learning.
The  presenters  bring a    range of perspectives    on  the  construct of  identity and  approaches   to  its study and
development.     Each  presentation    will  focus   on   the authors'   conceptualization    of identity   and   identity
development and their approaches to characterizing expressions of identity or identity change through student
talk and/or participation in particular contexts of science learning. Presenters will discuss their own goals for
identity development   within     science   education,   and  the implications  from    their work   for  approaches  to
supporting positive identity development through science learning.

Session Structure
         The   primary objective   of  this session   is to highlight ways  in which    identity can  be  construed  and
studied within science education, and to advance a discussion about how science education can embrace its civic
responsibility toward  students   to   help them appropriate    science  as a  meaningful   tool  in their  lives beyond
school. Opening remarks from the session chair will be kept to a minimum, less than five minutes. Each of the 4
presenters will   have approximately      15  minutes    to  make  their remarks,    in the   same  order   as the paper
descriptions provided below. As is evident by the paper descriptions, there is a coherent story line regarding
identity research and learning to emerge from paper set and its particular organization. The first paper, while
grounded   in  a multiyear   national  study, focuses    more  intently  on specific    conceptual  and  methodological
concerns related to identity research. By leading with this paper we hope to set out particular parameters in
terms of the issues and challenges of research on identity and learning. Papers 2 and 3 examine specific identity
related questions within the context of science learning environments and use their findings to sharpen the focus
on  conceptual    and  methodological       identity research  dilemmas.    Finally   paper   4  crystallizes   particular
methodological concerns related to identity research evident in each of the previous three papers. Presenters will
streamline the presentation of their individual studies in order to focus on critical conceptual and methodological
issues in conducting research on identity and science learning and its implications for what we can learn about
identity and for science learning. The discussant will have 10 minutes to speak to the key themes that cut across
the papers  and   to  raise questions   for discussion.   Audience    question and   answer   with   the presenters  and
discussant will occupy the final 20 minutes of the session.

Session Presentations
         Page length descriptions of the five papers included in this symposium are provided below.

Paper 1: Science learning as identity-transformation: Attending to theoretical and
methodological challenges
         I present three inter-related challenges to studying science learning as identity-transformation: (1) the
definitional problem; (2) the situated vs. enduring identity problem; and (3) the structure vs. agency problem.
These challenges demand ongoing attention in my own work and, more importantly, I see them as persistent
challenges for sociocultural research as a field. Using examples from my current work studying connections
between science pedagogy and 9-10 year-olds' science identity development (NSF, REC #0546078), I propose
ways to address these challenges.

The definitional problem
         Operationalizing "science identity" is an obvious challenge because it is not reducible to a set of core
defining characteristics. The model of science identity I developed with a colleague (Carlone & Johnson, 2007)
provides a way to recognize multiple dimensions (competence, performance, recognition of self/by others) of
"being a science person" in local science learning contexts. The model was based on a 6-year longitudinal study
of the ways successful women of color in science persisted in undergraduate science majors and science-related

                                                                                                                             3-
         careers. In creating this grounded model, we documented the importance of "recognition by meaningful others"
         in these women's ongoing science identity development. Further, the model was flexible enough to account for
         multiple   science  identity  trajectories.   The  shortcoming   of   this  work,  however,     was our   inattention to  the
         "performance"    dimension    of science    identity. Because   our   study  drew  on  interview  data   only, we   had  little
         evidence of their performances of science selves (the ways they took up, resisted, and/or transformed normative
         uses of physical tools, representational technologies, and talk) and the ways, in moment-to-moment interactions,
         those performances were recognized (or not) as legitimate.

        The situational vs. enduring identity problem; The definitional problem, continued
                  A central argument in my work is that science education's measure of "effective" pedagogy is too
         narrowly construed. Instead of measuring pedagogical effectiveness by what students know and can do in the
         short term,  a focus  on  learning   as   identity transformation   forces   attention to  whether    and how    students see
         science, in the long term, as a useful way to understand the world and view themselves as learners and doers of
         science. While I recognize that identities get formed in practice, I also acknowledge that, over time, people's
         performance, participation patterns, and expectations become patterned and habitual (Elmesky & Seiler, 2007;
         Roth, 2006).
                  Currently,   my   research  team     and  I study   4th-grade students'   science   identity development     in four
         standards-based science classrooms. We apply multiple units of analysis to understand students' science identity
         in practice  and   over   time. First, we    use  ethnographic   methods     to identify  the   taken-for-granted   scientific
         practices and social norms that come to define what counts as a legitimate science person in the setting. This
         analysis   loosely based  on   work  by   Cobb,    Gresalfi, &  Hodge    (in press),  yields  information  about    promoted
         science identities.
                  Next, we turn the analytic lens on individuals, examining the ways they perform their science selves
         (the ways they take up, resist, and/or transform normative scientific practices and identities). Here, the main
         dimensions   of  analysis  are  uses   of physical    tools, representational   technologies,   and talk, as   each of   these
         represent important disciplinary and identity resources. We are developing a mapping technique based loosely
         on Gresalfi's  (under   review)  study    of  students'  trajectories of participation  in mathematics    classrooms.    This
         allows  us  to  track individual     students'    performances   in   these  dimensions,   over  space    and  time,  and  in
         comparison with the normative scientific practices, so that we can characterize their identities in practice and
         over time.
                  We also consider students' perceptions of themselves as learners and doers of science. A critical aspect
         of science  identity  is  not   only performance      of  self that is recognizable    to  meaningful    others, but  also a
         recognition  of  self as  science    person.    A  survey   and interviews   enable   us  to  evaluate   students'  scientific
         dispositions (Cobb, et al., in press; Cobb, Hodge, Visnovska, & Zhao, 2004), perceptions of possible selves in
         science  (Holland,   et  al., 1998),   feelings   of  belonging  in   school science,   outside-of-school    science-related
         activities (diSessa,  2001)    and understandings       and  valuations  of  their class's normative     scientific practices
         (Cobb, et al., in press).

        The Structure/Agency Problem
                  Those who attend to social and cultural processes of learning face the ongoing tension of competing
         foci of structure and agency. Recent critiques of sociocultural theory have focused on the lack of attention to
         macro-level (institutional, political, economic) contexts that shape learning and identities (Lewis & Moje, 2004;
         Nasir &    Hand,   2006). And,   while    the construct   of identity  has  been   touted as  a way   to  attend to both  the
         individual and her/his social context (Wenger, 1998), much of the sociocultural literature tends to focus on how
         individuals shape and get shaped by the relatively local social contexts (O'Connor, 2001). On the other hand,
         straying too far towards the macro-level treats individuals as if they are simply passive recipients of oppressive
         structures. Brandt & Clinton (2002) put the dilemma thus: "[W]e are stuck either working at the interactive level
         where people seem to be calling their own shots or else gesturing to hegemonic forces... that impose themselves
         in some undefined way on human actors" (p. 346).
                  Lewis   &  Moje   (2004),   in   their call for  sociocultural  theories  to take up   more  critical perspectives,
         mention    cultural studies,    poststructural    theory, and   discourse    analysis  as  potentially    robust  theoretical
         orientations to account for systems of power that shape and are shaped by participants in local contexts. Nasir &
         Hand (2006) argue a similar point, calling for sociocultural theorists to more carefully consider multiple levels
         of culture, power, and social structure. Interestingly, neither piece of work mentions practice theory as a way to
         attend to tensions between the micro- and macro-level contexts. My study of students' identities is undergirded
         by practice  theory,  which     recognizes    implicit, taken-for-granted    practices at  the  micro  level  shape  and  are
         shaped by more macro contexts of science and schooling (Carlone, 2004, Eisenhart & Finkel, 1998). In the
         paper, I present the ways practice theory helps me characterize the mutuality of micro-/macro-contexts that is
         under-examined in many existing sociocultural studies of identity.

3-
Paper      2:    "We're        going     to  be     doing    actual        science":       Teachers'      and      students'
positioning moves in inquiry-oriented science classrooms
          One of the motivations for current inquiry-oriented reforms is that engaging in scientific tasks has the
potential  to change     students'  ideas about  science    and how     it is  done,   and thus to  provide  opportunities  for
students to develop identities as scientists. However, these opportunities are not automatically available anytime
a teacher uses inquiry-oriented reforms. In order to develop science-related identities, students must recognize
the tasks  in which      they  are engaged   as legitimately   scientific   and   they  need  the  opportunity  to  inhabit the
scientific roles    and  norms   associated    with those   tasks. The  appropriation      of these roles and   norms  enables
identity   change     to happen    (Gee,  2001).     The  extent   to   which     inquiry  activities actually  provide    these
opportunities    for  science   identity development     is mediated    by    the classroom   discourse   surrounding   inquiry
curricula. Within this discourse, key social positioning moves may make the difference between activities being
seen as scientific or not by students.
          Social positioning takes place through discourse when someone is offered or afforded a particular sort
of subject position, such "at-risk student" or "scientist" which they are called upon to occupy and which they
may either accept or attempt to modify or resist (Holland & Leander, 2004). Positioning moves in classroom
lessons  have    significant   learning  consequences    not only   because    of  how   they  affect the moment-to-moment
participation    of students    and teachers,   but  because   positioning     can have    a  cumulative  effect   on  students'
identities if many instances of being positioned in a certain way build upon one another and are accepted to
some degree by students. (Wortham, 2004; Holland et al., 1998). Repeated opportunities to accept the position
of "scientist" in classroom discourse may be a prerequisite for the kind of learning and motivational benefits
many researchers believe will accrue to students if they develop positive identities within science.
          This study examined differences in how teachers positioned students during inquiry science activities
and in how students accepted and resisted those positions. Our focus was on whether classroom talk positioned
students as "doing school" or as "doing science." We used videotaped lessons from two classrooms in different
schools with different teachers who were both using the same three-week inquiry unit in which students worked
with data from a network of sensors in a local mountain range to construct arguments about how plants adapt to
different microclimates. We developed a coding scheme to identify when and how teachers positioned students
in relation to school roles, norms, or tasks, or in relation to science norms, roles, and tasks. We then examined
how students accepted or resisted these offered positions. Drawing both on fine-grained analysis of science role
positioning statements and overall differences in the frequency and timing of positioning moves across lessons,
we developed a picture of the nature of positioning in each classroom: one teacher operated around the idea of
students   "pretending"    to  be  scientists, while   another  tried to   organized   students   for "doing   actual  science."
Students in both classrooms accepted and resisted these positions in interesting ways. We discuss the discursive
patterns of each classroom in terms of the differences between each setting, including the teachers, students, and
the communities the schools are in. From these analyses, we draw implications for the design of instruction that
can support discursive environments that give students the opportunity to take the position of scientists, setting
the stage for exploring new science-related identities.

Paper      3: "We        be    burnin'!"    Student       science       identity       development        through      digital
counter-story telling
          This paper reports on the counter narratives that middle school youth construct about their role and
identities in science through the use of digital "counter-storytelling" (Delgado, 1995). We use the context of an
intensive  field-based    summer    program     that   focused on   "green     energy"  issues  for   youth, ages  11-13,  in a
midsized   Midwest       city. Our  research   questions  include:    What     salient identities do  students  draw   upon   in
producing a series of science documentaries? How do these identities influence and shape the production of
student documentaries including: (a) the documentary content-story line, and (b) the production, meaning, and
role of science? How are students' identity development with science transformed through digital counter story-
telling?
          Science education researchers (e.g. Brickhouse, Lowery & Schultz, 2000; Kozoll & Osborne, 2004)
have begun to highlight the importance of identity formation in relation to how students engage in science.
Some  argue      that identity   formation  is  especially   pertinent     for minority    students and   girls who    regularly
participate   in "cultural     border crossing"     in order to    gain access     to  and succeed    in school    science (e.g.
Aikenhead, 1996). Costa (1995) has categorized a range of student types, from "Potential scientists" who make
easy transitions given the congruence of their life-worlds and science, to "Outsiders" for whom science and
indigenous life-worlds are mutually exclusive. Students with varying degrees of success are labeled as "Other
Smart Kids,   "I    Don't  Know"    students,   and    "Inside-Outsiders".     Not surprising,  the   majority  of the students
identified as "Potential Scientists" are white, male students.
          Yet, identity is not as static or self-imposed a construct as Costa's work might imply. Identities are
constructed socially within communities of practice. As Lave and Wenger propose, upon entering a community-
of-practice such as the science classroom, students develop identities through engaging with the practices and

                                                                                                                                    3-
         tasks of the science class. Learning science becomes "a process of coming to be, of forging identities in activity"
         (Lave & Wenger, 1991, p. 3). These identities are fluid and dependent on environmental factors inherent to that
         community-of-practice.
                  The science learning community, as a community-of-practice, offers many different spaces, or figured
         worlds, where students can author identities. These spaces include whole class settings, small group work, and
         individual locations, among others. Drawing from Bakhtin, Vygotsky and Bourdieu, Holland and her colleagues
         (1998) posit a framework for the development of an identity-in-practice carved out in figured worlds. Figured
         worlds are socially situated, and are "peopled by the figures, characters, and types who carry out its tasks and
         who also have styles of interacting within, distinguishable perspectives on, and orientations towards it" (p.51).
         Individuals  have  the   proclivity to be    drawn into  certain  figured  worlds   to shape  and  be   shaped   by them   in
         authoring an identity. The act of authoring an identity is necessitated via a constant state of dialogism where
         "sentient beings exist in a state of being `addressed' and in the process of `answering'" (p. 169).
                  We want to highlight that integral to science learning are the discourses that youth draw upon in their
         everyday   and    academic  lives.  Discourses,  in addition   to talking,  are   ways  of   knowing,   doing,  interacting,
         valuing, thinking, believing, reading, writing and representing oneself that are social, produced and reproduced
         in social and cultural practices and interactions (Gee, 2001). Drawing on the interconnectedness of youths'
         cultures and the discourses they draw upon to make sense of their worlds, discourses can also be understood as
         reflections of youths' identities (Gee, 1999). If the discourses that youth, or in our case girls, draw upon in their
         lives can  be  understood    as reflections   of  their  identities, then  their  knowledges,   behaviors,   conventions,
         activities and beliefs   are constantly   shaping   how    and why   science  is  done.    A focus on   youths'   identities,
         particularly on how and why they draw on particular discourses when interacting with science, is essential to
         understanding how youth engage in science because it allows for important connections to be made between
         the contexts of their lives and how and why they do science. Youths' identities may change depending on the
         context within which they are doing science, depending on who they are with, where they are, and what is
         motivating them to engage in a certain practice at a particular moment.
                  Finally we call attention to how students are positioned in the learning classroom affects the process of
         identity development. Students are not only positioned as novices, they are also positioned as the "loud and
         dramatic   girl", the "field-trip  girl"  or the "generous   girl"   based on  their identities in  other  worlds   that   are
         brought to bear in science class. These positions imbue students with relative power and status in the science
         classroom. Official student positioning by the science teacher assigning group roles such as "group leader" or
         "reporter" also accords students power which can transform learning experiences and affect identity formation
         in science class.
                  We bring this framework for identity and learning to bear on making sense of youth learning in an
         intensive, five-week summer program called Get City (Green Energy Technology City) conducted at a local
         community    club   that serves    low-income    minority   children.  Drawing     upon    ethnographic   case   study,  data
         generation  techniques   included:  daily    participant observation   and  fieldnotes,    videotaping  of several  lessons,
         individual  and   group  interviews    with   a  subset  of  ten  youth,   and    artifact collection.  We   used   constant
         comparative   analysis   (Glasser   &  Strauss,  1967;   Strauss, 1987;   Strauss  &   Corbin,  1990)   in the   tradition of
         grounded theory for data analysis, guided by our research questions.
                  The GET City program served 20 youth during the summer, all of whom were either African American
         or Latino. Technology was a focal point in this program where students use laptops extensively for gathering
         and analyzing data and communicating results to others. Lessons were adapted to promote and capitalize on
         student interest and funds of knowledge. The urban heat island phenomenon was explored during the five week
         unit, which culminated in a set of student directed mini science documentaries, each of which was intended to
         answer  the  question,   Is  [your  city] an  urban  heat  island?   These  mini   documentaries       featured the students
         investigating the urban heat island phenomenon in the downtown area of their city with temperature sensors,
         laser tape measuring devices, observations, and interviews they conducted with members of the community. The
         documentaries also incorporated other data generated during the five week unit (i.e., images, figures, and graphs
         produced   from   experiments   conducted)    as well   as youth  culture  (i.e., music    selections, discourse, etc.). The
         videos were subsequently previewed at the local state university and also used as part of a presentation in the
         community club's efforts to successfully solicit funds from a local organization.
                  In their videos, the youth frame the heat island issue on their own terms, seek out and interview various
         community members and recruit nontraditional funds of knowledge linked to their identities in other figured
         words, such as hip hop music and dramatization infused with youth genre to produce an educational video on a
         somber scientific topic. By carefully analyzing what the say with respect to urban heat islands and how they say
         it (i.e., how they represent their ideas through talk, music, imagery, and storyline), their videos tacitly call into
         question such issues as to who can do science, what science looks like, and who are the authorities in science in
         their community as well as the nature of epistemic authority. Each one of these points is taken up in detail and
         discussed  drawing    upon   analysis  of the  video production    as well  as    supporting  interview  and    observational
         notes. By viewing their video production on heat islands as a counter-story, we examine the intersections of

3-
place and  identity  with   what it  means   to be  knowledgeable     citizens on   energy-related issues.   We   discuss
implications that digital counter stories have for how we frame the relationship between socioscientific issues
and scientifically literate citizens in urban communities.

Paper 4: Identities that Matter
         In the situated cognition literature, learning is described as a process of coming to be a particular kind
of person (Lave, 1988). Your affiliations with other communities happen as you develop ways of acting, talking,
believing, valuing that make you a part of that community (Gee, 1999). I have found this to be a particularly
powerful  way   of  understanding    learning   perhaps  in   part because   of my   interest  in understanding    girls'
relationships with scientific communities (Brickhouse, Lowery & Schultz, 2000; Brickhouse & Potter, 2001).
Learning, in this articulation of it, is something quite significant in the life of a person. Learning changes who
you are.
         Moje (in Moje, Tucker-Raymond, Varelas & Pappas, in press) reports her observation that identity has
become a ubiquitous construct in education research. Some researchers refer to changes in identity as taking
place when students in classrooms learn practices that move them closer to authentic scientific practices. But is
the acquisition of the practices of scientists the only way to take on a scientific identity? And how do we know
that these changes effected in classrooms are changes in identities that matter? Perhaps these changes are just a
"blip" in the life of a child and of no real consequence in the long run (see Lee, Brown, Brickhouse, Lottero-
Perdue, Tobin & Roth, in press). Is it really possible to study identity in classrooms? After all, most of what
happens in science classrooms is so scripted that the extent to which students adopt particular practices may be
more a measure of compliance to school than of developing a relationship with scientific communities.
         In this paper, I will argue that to make a claim that classroom instruction has made a significant impact
on the identity of  a child,   our  data collection and  analyses    must   be multi-contextual   and   /or longitudinal.
Identities that matter travel across time and space ­ and we should work toward making our research capable of
capturing this. For  girls, in  particular, we  should  examine    not  only school  settings  where  many    are  highly
successful in appropriating school-based practices, but also in contexts where there is greater freedom of choice.
These contexts of choice may be far more telling about identity than the heavily prescribed work that takes place
in school. Furthermore, in freer choice environments, girls can perform identities that are often unavailable at
school. On the other hand, some may also feel more pressure to conform to gender stereotypes when acting
without a script. We need to know more about girls who choose to do science when it is not required and the
ways in which our interventions in classrooms might influence the choices girls make.
      Secondly, I will argue that there should be multiple ways of enacting scientific identities ­ but not so many
that the construct of scientific identity loses meaning. Four types of scientific identities that can be discerned
from the literature include:
   x     Student/scientist identity. This type of scientific identity can be detected by examining how closely
         students acquire the skills that we associate with scientific practice. This is perhaps the most commonly
         researched type of scientific identity, although it is not commonly found in practice. While this form of
         scientific identity is  not the  same   as that of   a conventionally    good student,   there is  likely to be
         considerable overlap since much of what the student is doing is that which is deemed desirable by the
         teacher/curriculum developer.
   x     Community-based scientist/activist. This type of scientific identity is oriented toward the use of science
         to solve local problems. In many cases these are environmental problems. But the main characteristic
         of this identity is its orientation toward acquiring useful knowledge and taking action.
   x     Personal   decision-maker.  Like   the community-based      activist, this scientific identity is  also oriented
         toward  the  uses   of science.  The   difference  is  that rather  than focusing on    communal     matters of
         significance, these individuals are more focused on personal decision making that influence themselves
         and close friends/family.
   x     Teacher/communicator.      This type   of scientific  identity is focused  on developing   the  competence   to
         teach science to others.
         These types will be discussed in conceptual and methodological terms. What does one look for in order
to study them? What enduring patterns of participation might be important to document and analyze?

References
Aikenhead, G. S. (1996). Science education: Border crossing into the subculture of science. Studies in Science
         Education, 27, 1-52.
Brandt, D., & Clinton, K. (2002). Limits of the local: Expanding perspectives on literacy as a social practice.
         Journal of Literacy Research, 34, 337-356.
Brickhouse, N. W., & Potter, J. T. (2001). Young women's scientific identity formation in an urban context.
         Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 38, 965-980.

                                                                                                                            3-
         Brickhouse, N. W., Lowery, P., & Schultz, K. (2000). What kind of a Girl Does Science? The Construction of
                 School Science Identities. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 37(5), 441-458.
         Brown, B. A., Reveles, J. M., & Kelly, G. J. (2005). Scientific literacy and discursive identity: A theoretical
                 framework for understanding science learning. Science Education, 89, 779-802.
         Calabrese Barton, A. (1998). Teaching science with homeless children: pedagogy, representation, and identity.
                 Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 35(4), 379-394.
         Carlone, H. B. (2004). The cultural production of science in reform-based physics: Girls' access, participation,
                 and resistance. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 41(4), 392-414.
         Carlone, H.B. & Johnson, A. (2007). Understanding the science experiences of successful women of color:
                 Science identity as an analytic lens. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 44(8), 1187-1218.
         Cobb,   P., Gresalfi, M.,  &   Hodge,  L.L. (in press). An interpretive scheme   for  analyzing   the identities that
                 students develop in mathematics classrooms. Journal of Research in Mathematics Education.
         Cobb, P., Hodge, L.L., Visnovska, J., & Zhao, Q. (April, 2004). An initial contribution to the development of a
                 design theory of mathematical interests: The case of statistical data analysis. Paper presented at the
                 annual meeting of the American Educational Research Association, San Diego, CA.
         Costa, V. (1995). When Science is 'another world': Relationship between worlds of Family, Friends, School and
                 Science. Science Education, 79(3), 313-333.
         Delgado, R. (1995). Critical race theory: The cutting edge. Philadelphia, PA: Temple University Press.
         diSessa, A. (2001). Changing minds: Computers, learning, and literacy. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
         Eisenhart, M., & Finkel, E. (1998). Women's science: Learning and succeeding from the margins. Chicago, IL:
                 University of Chicago Press.
         Elmesky, R., & Selier, G. (2007). Movement expressiveness, solidarity and the (re)shaping of African American
                 students' scientific identities. Cultural Studies of Science Education, 2(1), 73-103.
         Gee, J. (1999). An introduction to discourse analysis. New York: Routledge.
         Gee, J. P. (2001). Identity as an analytic lens for research in education. Review of Research in Education, 25,
                 99-125.
         Glaser, B.   G., &    Strauss,  A. L. (1967). The   discovery of  grounded   theory.  Chicago:  Aldine   Publishing
                 Company.
         Gresalfi, M.S. (under review). [title blinded to protect anonymity of her work for this audience].
         Holland, D., & Leander, K. M. (2004). Ethnographic studies of positioning and subjectivity: An introduction.
                 Ethos, 32, 127­139.
         Holland, D., Lachiotte, W., Skinner, D., & Cain, C. (1998). Identity and agency in cultural worlds. Cambridge,
                 MA: Harvard University Press.
         Kozoll, R.   H., & Osborne,     M. D. (2004). Finding   meaning  in science: lifeworld, identity, and  self. Science
                 Education, 88, 157-181.
         Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge: Cambridge
                 University Press.
         Lee, Yew-Jon, Brown, B., Brickhouse, N., Lottero-Perdue, P., Tobin, K. & Roth, W-M (in press). Metalogue on
                 the discursive construction of identity. Cultural Studies in Science Education.
         Lewis, C., & Moje, E. B. (2004). Sociocultural perspectives meets critical theory: Producing knowledge through
                 multiple frameworks. The International Journal of Learning, 10.
         Moje, E. B., Tucker-Raymond, E., Varelas, M. & Pappas, C. (in press). Forum: Giving oneself over to science:
                 exploring     the roles of subjectivities and identities in learning science. Cultural  Studies  in  Science
                 Education.
         Moll, L. C., Amanti, C., Neff, D., & Gonzalez, N. (Spring 1992). Funds of Knowledge for Teaching: Using a
                 Qualitative Approach to Connect Homes and Classrooms. Theory Into Practice, XXXI(2), 132-141.
         Nasir, N.S., & Hand, V.M. (2006). Exploring sociocultural perspectives on race, culture, and learning. Review of
                 Educational Research, 76(4), 449-475.
         O'Connor, K. (2001). Contextualization and the negotiation of social identities in a geographically distributed
                 situated learning project. Linguistics and education, 12, 285-308.
         Roth, W.-M. (2006). Making and remaking of self in urban schooling: Identity as dialectic. In J. L. Kinceloe &
                 K. Hayes & K. Rose & P. M. Anderson (Eds.), The Praeger handbook of urban education (pp. 143-
                 153). Westport, CT: Greenwood.
         Strauss, A. (1987). Qualitative analysis for social scientists. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
         Strauss, A., & Corbin, J. (1990). Basis of qualitative research: Grounded theory procedures and techniques.
                 Newbury Park, CA: Sage
         Wenger,     E. (1998). Communities     of practice:   Learning,  meaning, and   identity. New     York: Cambridge
                 University Press.
         Wortham, S. (2004). From Good Student to Outcast: The Emergence of a Classroom Identity. Ethos, 32(2),
                 164­187.

3-0
