        Establishing Collaborations in Design-based Research Projects:
                           Insights from the Origins of the MMAP Project

                 Randi A. Engle, University of California at Berkeley, 4641 Tolman Hall, Berkeley, CA 94720
                                                       RAEngle@berkeley.edu

                 Abstract:     The  success  of design-based   research   projects depends   on the  quality  of their
                 collaborative teams. In this paper, I use a set of principles for fostering productive engagement
                 to explain how the Middle-school Mathematics through Applications Project (MMAP) got its
                 team of researchers, teachers, and curriculum developers off to a good start. First, MMAP
                 fostered problematizing around MMAP goals by recruiting participants whose goals partially
                 overlapped    with   MMAP's,   and   by demonstrating    the importance  of  core  goals like equity.
                 Second, the project supported teacher authority by selecting staff already inclined to respect
                 teachers,   by   showing    teachers  that their  contributions    were  desired,   and  by   setting
                 expectations that teachers would have the ultimate authority for how curricula would be used.
                 Finally, MMAP fostered accountability by recruiting participants with varied expertise, setting
                 expectations that teachers would change their teaching practices, and encouraging everyone to
                 begin engaging in focused discussions with each other.

       Introduction
                  The   success    of  design-based   research  projects   is crucially  dependent   on   the  quality   of  the
         collaborations projects   can forge  between    teachers, researchers,   curriculum  developers,  and   other   relevant
         stakeholders on their teams (e.g., Collins, Joseph & Bielaczyc, 2004; Design-based Research Collective, 2003).
         However, previous research has highlighted many challenges involved in forming such collaborations. Many
         participants engage in collaborations on top of many other commitments, so simply finding times and places for
         groups to make focused progress together can pose significant challenges (e.g. Hindin et al., 2007).            Also, as
         collaboration  is not  a  primary   feature  of either teachers'     or researchers' work,  establishing    norms   for
         collaborating  effectively   can be  a  major   undertaking  (e.g.,  Cobb   et al.,  1990;  Grossman,   Wineburg     &
         Woolworth, 2001; Lieberman & Grolnick, 1996).          Finally, participants often differ markedly in terms of their
         goals, values, backgrounds, and external accountabilities, which makes is difficult to make progress on both
         joint and individual goals (e.g., Cochran-Smith & Lytle, 1999; Grossman et al., 2001; Wood, 2007).
                 How might projects go about establishing collaborative communities that can address these and other
         challenges?   This paper   contributes  to a growing   literature on  how  design-based    research  projects organize
         themselves to support effective collaborations (e.g., Cobb, et al., 1990; D'Amico, 2005; Greeno et al., 1998;
         Grossman et al., 1999; Palincsar et al., 1999).  Specifically, I summarize selected findings from a larger study of
         how  collaborations   between    a diverse   group  of teachers,   researchers,  curriculum  developers,    and   other
         stakeholders were supported over a decade within the Middle-School Mathematics through Applications Project
         or MMAP (Engle, 2006).       MMAP, which was funded from 1990 to 2002, was a design-based research project
         that designed and researched innovative technology-intensive middle-school mathematics curricula (Greeno et
         al., 1999). The curricula embedded mathematics within extended real-world scenarios in hopes of engaging a
         much wider range of students in math (see Goldman & Knudsen, 2004; Goldman, Knudsen & Latvala, 1998).
                 Here, I analyze how the project got started, focusing on how productive collaborations later on were
         supported by the decisions MMAP made about how to assemble its initial team and run its first orientation.          My
         goal is both to share specific ideas that other projects can adapt from when initiating their own efforts while also
         contributing  to  the development    of general  theories  about    how   productive  collaborations   among    diverse
         stakeholders can be supported.

       Theoretical Framework:                 Principles for Supporting Productive Collaboration
                 I   organize  my   explanation  of  how  MMAP      initiated  productive collaborations   among     its diverse
         stakeholders by adapting four principles my colleagues and I originally developed from existing literature and
         empirical work to explain productive engagement in classrooms (Engle & Conant, 2002; Engle & Faux, 2006):
             1.  Problematizing     together:   The   group  finds  joint  problems  to  work   on  that  all members     of the
                 collaboration are committed to working on together, problems that are considered to be sufficiently
                 unsolved, important, and accessible to all (e.g., Cobb, et al., 1990; Greeno et al., 1999; Lieberman &
                 Grolnick, 1996; Stein, Smith & Silver, 1998).
             2.  Respecting    everyone's   authority:   Participants are  truly  given  the  agency to   contribute their   own
                 perspective on the joint problems (e.g., Cobb et al., 1990; Lieberman & Grolnick, 1996); in doing that
                 they become true contributors (Palincsar et al., 2001; Grossman et al., 2001; Thomas et al., 1998) and

1-1
         in some cases even authors of joint products (Hindin et al., 2007; Lieberman & Grolnick, 1996); and
         through their ongoing participation they may become oriented to as local authorities about particular
         aspects of the work (e.g., Greeno et al., 1999; Stein et al., 1998).

     3.  Engendering a dynamic internal accountability to others and to shared norms and goals:               In the process
         of working together, participants are held responsible for accounting for how they are addressing what
         others have done (Greeno et al., 1999; Grossman et al., 2001; Lieberman & Grolnick, 1996) as well as
         agreed-upon norms and goals for their enterprise (e.g., Palincsar et al., 1999; Wood, 2007).(1)

     4.  Having   access   to  sufficient  resources   to  make  all   of the above    possible:     Resources     may  be  as
         seemingly   straightforward    as  having  sufficient  time   or money   (e.g.,   Hindin  et al.,  2007)   to  having
         access to specialists who can share relevant tools and means of addressing problems (e.g., Cobb et al.,
         1990; Stein et al., 1998).     Some resources, like these, support productive collaboration directly while
         others  support   the embodiment     of   the other  three  principles   as when   one   assembles      a team  with
         different perspectives on a key issue to encourage it to be problematized (e.g., Grossman et al., 2001).

         The   basic idea  behind    these principles  is  that problematizing    provides  worthwhile      joint  productive
activities for design-based    research  groups  to  collaborate    on (Stein  et al., 1998;  Tharp     et  al., 2000)  while
embodying authority provides opportunities for everyone to become engaged in them in increasingly deep ways
(Cobb, et al., 1990; Palincsar et al., 2001; Stein et al., 1998).    Accountability provides a check on untrammeled
authority (Cobb et al., 1990; Grossman et al., 2001; Wood, 2007).            A dynamic balance between authority and
accountability helps form collaborative communities that: are supportive but challenging, in which relationships
are built while productive work gets done, and in which ideas are incorporated from both inside and outside the
community, only being ignored with justification (e.g., Borko, 2004; Grossman et al., 2001; McDonald & Klein,
2003).  Finally, resources make productive engagement possible while supporting the realization of new norms
around problematizing, authority, and accountability (e.g., Lieberman & Grolnick, 1996; Grossman et al., 2001).
         Although    these four   principles  were  originally   derived   from   the  literature  on   effective  classroom
learning environments, as the citations above indicate, they also parallel findings from prior research on factors
found to support productive engagement in teacher and teacher-researcher communities.                   Perhaps this is not
surprising given that many design-based researchers, including MMAP's directors, seek to consistently embody
their ideas about how to support effective learning communities in both classroom settings and their interactions
with the teachers and other educational professionals with whom they collaborate (e.g., Cobb, Yackel & Wood,
1990; D'Amico, 2005; Greeno et al., 1999; Grossman et al., 2001; Palincsar et al., 2001).                   In fact, the four
principles above arose through collaborative work Faith Conant and I were doing in another project directed by
MMAP     co-PI  Jim  Greeno    (see  Engle, Conant   &     Greeno,  2007). In addition,    several   ideas underlying    them
appear  in  MMAP's    own     effort to  understand    its collaborative   processes   (Greeno    et  al., 1999),   and  were
spontaneously mentioned again in my interviews with participants in the project.

Data Collection and Analysis
         The   findings I  report   are based   on 20  interviews   with   a diverse   set of MMAP         participants and a
videotape the project made of its first orientation in May 1992.       The interviews, which were conducted in 2003-
2005 after the project had ended, included seven with former MMAP teachers, eight with former MMAP staff
who served in a wide range of roles, and a long series of interviews, phone conversations, and email exchanges
with primary   PI Shelley   Goldman     and  project   manager   Jennifer    Knudsen.    In  order   to glean    participants'
perspectives, most interviews were organized in the form of narratives about each person's experiences on the
project (Linde, 1993).    I supplemented these data with transcripts of 1996 interviews with many of the same
teachers collected as part of MMAP's own paper about its collaborative processes (Greeno et al., 1999) and
project documents provided by project members (see Engle, 2006, pp. 9-11, 90-93 for methodological details).
Because of space considerations, I do not cite every interview or other data source supporting each finding, but
most are supported by multiple data sources that are cited in the original report (see especially ibid., pp. 15-23).

Evidence for the Quality of the Collaborations in MMAP
         Although interviewees disagreed about many things, they were unanimous on the high quality of the
collaborations around curriculum design that they had experienced during the project. Teachers talked about
there being "a lot of teacher buy-in" and "really feeling valued in a professional sense," something most had not
experienced in the rest of their teaching careers before or after. They appreciated being exposed to innovative
ideas, developing new instructional skills, being able to talk with others around curriculum issues, and learning
how  to  design  curricula for  their   own  and   others'  use. Two   teachers   even   said that   MMAP        was the best
professional   development    they   had   ever participated    in. These    results were   corroborated     in   an external
evaluation of MMAP that concluded, "teachers felt professionally respected in MMAP in ways some had never

                                                                                                                                 1-1
         before experienced.   Those who participated consistently spoke of MMAP not merely enthusiastically, but with
         a fervor that bordered on the evangelical" (Lichtenstein, Wiessglass & Ercikan-Alper, 1998, p. 50).
                  Staff members had similar perspectives on collaborations in the project.         For instance, one programmer
         noted that, "This was truly a place where I felt like the whole was better than the sum of the parts, like the team
         worked as a team."    Similarly, one graduate student and longtime staff member commented, "For me, I always
         felt unbelievably fortunate to have stumbled in there, and once I was there I never wanted to leave.... I was in
         heaven."    The  quotes  could go on   and   on.    Although   to some     extent these  statements    can be  considered
         examples of what Greeno et al. (1999, p. 320) in their own analysis of MMAP's collaborations referred to as
         "how members of one mathematics learning and teaching community sing the community song that enables all
         those involved to work together," it is important to note that my interviews were conducted long after the project
         was over, with interviewees orienting to me as either an interested outsider or former peripheral member of the
         project  with whom    they were very   comfortable    complaining      to about other    issues.  So there was probably
         romanticization in these interviews, but perhaps not to the same extent as one might otherwise expect.
                  In  addition to self-reports  from  the interviews,    the productivity   of MMAP's       collaborations  can be
         assessed objectively by what was achieved by the project as a whole.        In just over six years, the team designed a
         full middle-school   mathematics  curriculum     that was  later  designated    as  a "promising"    curriculum    by two
         separate Department of Education panels, one on mathematics curricula and the other on technology curricula.
         An   outside  evaluation also  found  that  MMAP      met  its  equity    goal of having     "a  broad range  of students
         (regardless of gender, ethnicity, or ability level) [be] motivated by MMAP materials" (Lichtenstein et al., 1998,
         p. iv). At the same time, the project produced over 50 publications addressed to a wide range of audiences (see
         Engle, 2006, pp. 77-78, 94-99), with 6 being cited well over 20 times.

       Explaining How MMAP Initially Supported Collaborations on the Project
                  In this account, we focus on how MMAP chose its initial set of participants and conducted its first
         orientation, as these activities are common elements of starting a design-based research collaboration.

        1. Assembling a Team Ready to Collaborate
                  MMAP's project leaders began setting the stage for fostering productive collaborations between the
         wide  variety of  stakeholders that it wished    to engage   in its work    by  carefully  assembling   one  of  the  most
         important resources for the project's collaborative work, its initial team of staff and collaborating teachers. I will
         show how MMAP specifically sought people for the project who were likely to serve as resources for realizing
         the problematizing, authority, and accountability principles.

        Partial overlap in goals as a resource for problematizing
                  In recruiting MMAP's initial team of participants, attention was paid to determining whether there was
         some overlap in goals and interests between the project and them. Having some overlap in place from the start
         helped make it easier for the project to find relevant problems that participants would want to engage in, a
         resource for problematizing (cf. Lieberman & Grolnick, 1996; Stein, et al., 1998).           Specifically, MMAP looked
         for math teachers who were interested in experimenting in their classroom while each teacher talked about one
         or more aspects of MMAP's initial vision that had appealed to them. Similarly, graduate students at Stanford
         were invited to consider joining the project when they expressed some overlapping research interests with the
         project.  The overlap between the goals of particular participants and those of the project did not need to be
         extensive, nor did their goals need to be the same as those of any other participants.        Instead each person's goal
         needed to be large enough to present rich enough problems to engage in with at least some others on the project.

        Diversity in expertise as a resource for accountability and problematizing
                  At the same time, however, that the project sought to have a certain level of shared goals and values
         among its members, it otherwise emphasized the importance of having a diverse pool of expertise, perspectives,
         and  values   to draw upon.    This  was   a key    resource that   it drew    upon   in its work   for embodying     both
         accountability and problematizing.    For example, having different types of expertise represented in the project
         meant that when MMAP's participants held themselves accountable to the ideas of other participants, this in
         effect held their ideas accountable to the expertise and professional communities from which those people were
         drawn.   In addition, diversity among MMAP's participants often led to productive problematizing of issues as
         not everyone immediately agreed with each other, so differences would be negotiated, strengthening solutions.
                  The  Stanford   dorm  in   which   Goldman    and   co-PI     McDermott    served   as   faculty  fellows was  a
         particularly helpful source for recruiting staff with a range of expertise and perspectives related to MMAP's
         work.   Students there were pursuing a variety of majors and extracurricular activities, all of which Goldman and
         McDermott became intimately familiar with while living with them.              For example, during its first summer the
         project  was  able to recruit  from  the dorm    a  gifted physics     student  who   was    also an excellent  tutor and

1-1
programmer.    He successfully taught mathematics to the teachers, and in a single weekend programmed the first
version  of  what   became   the  project's   population   biology  modeling   program,  HABITECH.         Similarly, two
students from the dorm who had won awards for their writing later became curriculum writers on the project,
with  one   helping  invaluably  with  organizational    issues  and the other  providing   "sparky   writing that  spoke
directly to kids" (Knudsen interview 3/20/03).        Because many of these people were not typically focused on
mathematics education or even education, they provided expertise to the project that it might not have had were
it to have recruited more narrowly within the school of education.
         That there was such a range of skills and interests in the project also helped attract and retain both staff
and teachers.    In numerous interviews, participants told me about how getting to work with such cool, friendly,
talented, and creative people was a key element that attracted them to and kept them engaged with the project.
Participants also especially appreciated their interactions with MMAP's founders, with one of the writers from
the dorm commenting, "people were drawn to them--they believed in their ideas, they're open-minded, they're
successful, they're interesting, and they make things happen."       Many people--both teachers and MMAP staff--
also found the larger environment at the Institute for Research on Learning in which MMAP was situated to be
incredibly stimulating to them, noting that it was a place in which cutting edge ideas could be explored, again
further supporting problematizing within the project.

Respect for teachers by staff as a resource for supporting teachers' authority
         One shared norm the project specifically selected for in its staff was people who already respected
teachers and children.  As PI Goldman explained:

         We didn't want anyone on the project ever who wasn't going to be collaborative with
         the  teachers    or  had  put-down     attitudes    about  teachers  or kids.   You   could    not   be
         thinking the problem with education was either the teachers or the kids and hope to get
         a  job on the project.   (Goldman interview 10/27/04)

For  example,    one programmer    hired  on   the   project described an   interview in which     he felt he was   being
carefully screened for his ability to be respectful of other people, especially teachers (something confirmed by
Goldman and Knudsen).       He was asked to meet many different people from the project, and got the sense that he
was being watched for the extent to which he could listen as well as talk to make sure that "I wasn't, for lack of
better words,    one of those  kind   of  arrogant   engineers."   Thus, in endeavoring   to select   staff who  already
respected teachers, MMAP stacked the deck with people who would be more likely to treat teachers as having
authority, thus using the resource of MMAP's staff to promote this principle vis-à-vis the teachers.
         At the same time, several of the initial set of MMAP teachers noticed and were attracted by the fact
that this looked to be a project in which they actually would have some authority over what they would be
doing.   For  example,    two teachers    noticed  that  the project was  offering opportunities   for  them  to be   true
contributors to the effort, with one seeing it fitting his own practices of designing project-based curricula and the
other  intrigued  by  the  chance  to  make   something      new with  a "consortium"    of  teachers, researchers,   and
scientists. However,   initially others   did not  know    what  to expect  and  were pleasantly   surprised  when    they
discovered that the project actually respected them and their contributions.

Fundamental resources allowing and encouraging people to participate
         None of the above people could have participated in the project, however, without the fundamental
resources of money and time that supported the work.         A generous NSF grant provided for staff positions and
research assistantships so that researchers and curriculum developers would dedicate their time to the project.
Teacher' participation in the project's three to six week summer institutes and once a month workdays was
made possible and encouraged because the grant paid both the teachers as consultants (at NSF's maximum
allowable rate) and their schools for the necessary substitute teachers. As a few teachers noted, it also did not
hurt that they were "lavished with gifts," including a programmable calculator, an email account (unheard of in
those days), and access to loaner computers and technical support with them for their classrooms.

2.  Getting the Collaboration Off the Ground: MMAP's First Orientation
         When    MMAP's      directors got  its project  underway,   they   hoped  to create a community      that would
design and research innovative curricula, but would be characterized by respect for different people's authority
and  the marshalling   of  diverse expertise    that the project as  a whole  would   hold  itself accountable   to (e.g.,
Greeno et al., 1999). To do that, MMAP worked to create its own norms that included more respect for teachers'
authority   than is  often practiced   as well  as   lived expectations  that  everyone  would     be making   important
substantive contributions to joint design work.       One key example of how the project began developing these
norms was in how it conducted its first orientation in the spring of 1992 (MMAP orientation video, 5/1/92).            In

                                                                                                                             1-1
         particular, I will show how the principles of problematizing, authority, and accountability were embodied in
         remarks from MMAP PI's Goldman and Greeno as well as in an ice-breaking activity.

        Problematizing using classroom design issues with practical and theoretical implications
                  In  remarks   from  PIs at the orientation,    MMAP    problematized    the    classroom  design   work  everyone
         would be doing as addressing important practical and theoretical issues.         Coincidentally the orientation was held
         the day after the Los Angeles riots, and Greeno's introductory remarks made reference to them, which he used
         to vividly illustrate why the problems they would be working on together were important:

                  Today particularly, we've got reason to want, very badly, to change the world so that some
                  people who are left out, ...who are kept away from a society's resources can get it so that
                  separation, some of those blocks get a little less strong.      And that frankly has been the lead
                  paragraph    on this  project since  the first time  we started  talking    about  it.   There are many
                  people in this society for whom the experiences that happen in school, and the rest of their
                  lives, lead them to a belief that...the understanding of mathematics and science simply are not
                  available  to  them.... So the    experiment   that we  are engaged     in, which  from    my  academic
                  standpoint is an experiment to help us understand the nature of learning better, is also this very
                  important social experiment. (Greeno remarks, MMAP orientation video 5/1/92)

         It was   implied   here  and  elsewhere    that working   together   to  create  models     to  engage   more   students  in
         mathematics had the prospect of addressing larger equity issues in society like gaps in school achievement and
         economic standing that occur in part because of the gatekeeping role of mathematics.              At the same time, Greeno
         emphasized that these equity goals would be achieved through a "different kind of research" that they would be
         doing together.    He said that his job was to "get a little bit more information, a little bit more insight, a little
         clearer theories about the processes that you all cause to happen everyday when you're in the classroom, getting
         kids to learn things," which is an "academic problem, but a lot more than that of course."          Thus the idea was that
         making progress on theories of learning and on equity issues in mathematics instruction would go hand in hand.
                  How    mathematics    instruction is   usually  conducted   was then    further  problematized     during the  ice-
         breaking activity in which the group became a class of students learning a new procedure for the first time,
         except the procedure was learning how to write shorthand. IRL's office manager instructed the group using the
         demonstrate-then-practice methods typical in U.S. mathematics classrooms.            In the discussion that followed, the
         group reflected on their and others' experiences as students in such lessons, which led to ideas about how and
         why  lessons   like these might   not  fully support    middle-school   students'    engagement    in  mathematics.    This
         discussion, then, supported Goldman's earlier invitation that the group jointly develop a "new vision and a new
         practice for   kids learning  mathematics    in our schools."    Thus,   in  its orientation,     MMAP's    activities were
         problematized     around addressing  important    issues of  equity  by  rethinking   standard    instructional practices in
         ways to foster more student engagement with mathematics while leading to better educational theories.

        Establishing expectations around teachers' authority
                  Many of the remarks by the PI's at the orientation were filled with language like "jointly develop"
         (Goldman)    and  "our   shared  activity" (Greeno)   that   presumed   that teachers    would    function  as  equal-status
         participants   in the  project  along  with   curriculum     developers, educational     researchers,   and  collaborating
         scientists (MMAP orientation video 5/1/92).       Consistent with this, Goldman talked about being eager to "make
         use of everyone's knowledge, and energy, and good ideas" (ibid.)          This statement implied that all participants,
         including teachers,    would   have some     knowledge    that they  could   contribute     and   that they were   not  just
         authorized, but encouraged, to do that.      Later, when one teacher explicitly asked about the relative power of
         teachers versus   researchers  and  expressed   concern  that  the  project  could   become     a heavily  top-down    thing,
         Goldman made it clear that "we're trying not to have it be that way" and that "the spirit is of full participation
         and equal rights to planning something or suggesting something" (ibid.).

             Later Goldman embodied the desire to support teacher authority in by specifically inviting teachers to share
         their ideas about real-world applications that could serve as anchors for the mathematics units, noting that "your
         idea for a project is as good as anybody else's" and therefore just as worth thinking through and considering.            So
         in general, teachers were authorized and encouraged to share their ideas to the same degree as other participants.
         And  in  fact, in  the discussion  that followed   the   shorthand   lesson, five    of the six   teachers  made   extended
         comments to the whole group about what they had learned.             The fact that everyone in the room was new to
         shorthand may also have helped level the playing field of presumed expertise among the participants, making it
         easier for the teachers to contribute what they thought.     In general, this began to create a pattern in the project in
         which diverse stakeholders were not just told that they were welcome to contribute to it, but were frequently
         given opportunities in which they could do just that and in which their contributions were taken seriously.

1-0
      However, with respect to one specific issue, MMAP's PIs made it clear at the orientation that they expected
teachers to function as the primary authorities within the project.   As Greeno explained to the teachers:

         This is very definitively NOT a situation where the science of learning has a bunch of results
         that we are now going to explain to all of you, so that you can go into the classroom and use
         them.... [Instead we will] work with you...on the problem of figuring out how your teaching
         can make use of the resources that will get built.... How are you going to make use of that?
         What will be YOUR interaction with it? ... You're gonna find that we are going to treat this as
         YOUR problem more than ours. (Greeno remarks in MMAP orientation video 5/1/92)

Thus,  the  teachers were    positioned as   the ultimate    authorities for deciding    whether    and  how    to use  the
curriculum materials in their classrooms.    From the project's perspective, this made sense given teachers were
the ones who both knew their classroom situations the best and would be affected most directly by how well
lessons went (Greeno et al., 1999; cf. Cobb et al., 1990).     And in fact over the lifetime of the project, MMAP's
teachers continued to hold the ultimate authority for making instructional decisions (Engle, 2006).

Encouraging accountability to others
         In addition to supporting teachers' authority, during the orientation the project also set the stage for
MMAP's participants to hold themselves accountable to each other. On several occasions the PI's mentioned the
importance for the later productivity of the project of everyone getting to know each other and "the places that
we're  working   from"  (Goldman,    MMAP     orientation   video  5/1/92).   Co-PI McDermott commented that the
project consisted of "four chunks of people [from schools, labs, universities, and R&D firms] who don't talk to
each other a lot, or get paid off by institutions to talk to each other in particular ways" and that the goal was to
get   everyone's ideas  and  concerns   "on  the table   as much   as possible"   to be  able   to eventually   develop  a
consensus about some ideas for mathematics units (ibid.).        To get started on this process, the schedule for the
orientation and the first summer institute included time for various participants to introduce themselves and their
contexts  in greater depth.    This  then  provided    a  stronger basis  for  participants  to   account   for how    their
suggestions related to what other members of the project cared about or had already contributed.

Encouraging accountability for teachers to change their practices
         At the same time, it was made clear during the orientation that although teachers were the ultimate
authorities  for deciding  what  would  happen    in  their  classrooms,  they were   expected     to be  accountable   for
somehow changing their teaching practices as a result of participating in the project. The clearest statement to
this effect was made by Greeno in his initial remarks to the teachers:

         We're assuming that this is going to involve a change on your part.         That you get some new
         [curricular] resources...it's going to change what you do.       We hope.   That is we hope they're
         useful in a way that will make that happen.... Because you have some [new] things to work
         with, or just because of whatever else goes on.        Maybe the conversations we'll have about
         these   things will be  interesting and  bring   about  some    changes.  (MMAP        orientation video
         5/1/92)

Later, Goldman talked about how the upcoming summer institute would result in the creation of initial materials
teachers could then try out in some way during the fall (ibid.).         Thus she provided some specific parameters
about when and how teachers would begin experimenting with their teaching practices in the project.

Informality as an additional resource supporting problematizing, authority, and accountability
         Finally, the orientation began a pattern that would grow in the project of using informal tones and
activity structures to  support  collaboration   (cf. Lieberman    &  Grolnick,   1996).    Within its first orientation,
MMAP participants laughed at the first of many community-building jokes by McDermott and participated in a
catered  lunch,  small  group brainstorming     sessions,  and  several  occasions   for informal   chatting.   MMAP's
participants later highlighted   the importance  of   time  to socialize and  talk informally    as   being important   for
supporting collaborations by keeping everyone aware of what everyone else was doing, facilitating the sharing
of  new  ideas,  providing  non-threatening  ways     to get feedback,   and  helping    to develop   the   kinds  of close
personal relationships that helped keep everyone working well together on the challenging tasks to come.

Discussion
         What MMAP did in assembling its collaborative team and orienting them to the work ahead during that
first orientation  was   crucial for  what   it  was   able  to  achieve   later. First,    the project  began     fostering

                                                                                                                               1-1
         problematizing around MMAP's goals by inviting to the project potential participants whose own goals already
         overlapped with them, and by demonstrating to the project as a whole the importance of core MMAP goals like
         enhancing equity and developing new models of mathematics instruction.              Second, the project began supporting
         teachers' authority by selecting staff already inclined to respect teachers and their contributions, by both telling
         and showing teachers that their contributions were desired, and by setting expectations that teachers would have
         the ultimate  authority  for how  MMAP     materials would   be used       in  their classrooms.     Third, MMAP began
         fostering accountability by telling teachers they would be expected to make changes in their teaching practices;
         by selecting a diverse set of participants with various types of expertise; and by encouraging them to begin both
         getting to know each and engaging in focused conversations about their joint work.               Finally, collaborations on
         MMAP were crucially supported by the fundamental resources of time and money as well as by an informal
         tone that made realizing problematizing, authority, and accountability easier.
                   These general patterns continued over the lifetime of the project.          As the goals and contexts of the
         project shifted and new challenges arose, MMAP devised new ways of embodying problematizing, authority,
         accountability and resources, supporting productive collaborations among its team throughout its history (Engle,
         2006).  For example, it encouraged teachers to change their own practices in sought after directions without
         undercutting their authority by selectively but regularly asking them to account for why they were doing what
         they were doing (cf. Cobb et al., 1990).   When those with relevant expertise were unwilling to respect teachers,
         the project draw on their expertise in a mediated way as when it had teachers shadow math-using professionals
         at their workplaces to identify the math they were using rather than having professionals on the design team.
                   Although much more could be said about MMAP's methods for fostering collaboration (see Engle,
         2006, especially pp. 24-33), more relevant here are the lessons the case provides for other new design-based
         research projects as well as for general theory about initiating productive collaborations.           I do believe that all
         four principles must be embodied together for a design-based research collaboration to be successful, but how
         they are embodied and how easily can differ depending on the particular contexts within which projects arise.
         Because MMAP was founded during the height of experimentation with math instruction in California in the
         early 1990s, this facilitated its ability to support problematizing and teacher authority.            In contexts in which
         teachers are not given license to experiment in their classrooms, projects will need to spend extra effort to create
         new  environments     or transform  existing ones so it  can occur.        Still many  practices    can be   applied across
         projects. Projects can recruit broadly to include diverse perspectives and expertise while ensuring overlap in
         crucial goals and values. They can be upfront about their expectations.          In their orientations, they can also allow
         participants to begin    experiencing what the  project will be like       with  activities that problematize  key   issues,
         include the full range of participants, and ask them to account for and thus learn about how their ideas compare
         with those   of other participants.   Finally, projects can  combine        a  real  push   for continually  improving  on
         educational designs with a safe environment in which many different possibilities can be explored.

       Endnote
          (1) Here I expand Engle & Conant's (2002) notion of "disciplinary norms" to encompass efforts like MMAP in which
              disciplinary work is only one part of what people are doing together. What matters is that participants hold themselves
              accountable to those shared norms important for their type of enterprise.

       References
         Borko,  H.   (2004).     Professional development    and  teacher  learning:        Mapping     the terrain.   Educational
                   Researcher, 33(8), 3-15.
         Cobb, P., Wood, T. & Yackel, E. (1990). Classrooms as learning environments for teachers and researchers. In
                   R. B. Davis,   C.  A.  Maher  &  N.  Noddings   (Eds.), Constructivist       views    on  teaching and learning
                   mathematics (Journal for Research in Mathematics Education Monograph No. 4, pp. 125-146). Reston,
                   VA: National Council of Teachers of Mathematics.
         Cochran-Smith,     M. &   Lytle, S. L. (1999).   Relationships  of knowledge         and    practice: Teacher  learning in
                   communities.   Review of Research in Education, 24, 249-305.
         Collins, A., Joseph, D. & Bielaczyc, K. (2004).    Design research: Theoretical and methodological issues.             The
                   Journal of the Learning Sciences, 13(1), 15-42.
         Design-based    Research   Collective  (2003).  Design-based   research:        An  emerging     paradigm  for educational
                   inquiry. Educational Researcher, 32(1), 5­9.
         D'Amico, L. (2005). The Center for Learning Technologies in Urban Schools: A case of design-based research
                   in education.  Technical report for the MacArthur and Spencer Foundation Meta-study on projects that
                   sought to reconfigure the usual relationships between research and practice.           Pittsburgh, PA: Learning
                   Research       &      Development       Center,     Univ.            of     Pittsburgh.            Found      at:
                   http://www.lrdc.pitt.edu/metastudy/PDF/LeTUS_Final2006.pdf
         Engle, R. A. (2006).   Engaging diverse stakeholders in innovative curriculum design and research: The case of
                   the Middle-school Mathematics through Applications Project (1990-2002).                Technical report for the

1-
        MacArthur    and  Spencer     Foundation   Meta-study   on  projects  that sought   to  reconfigure the  usual
        relationships  between   research  and   practice.   Pittsburgh,  PA: Learning      Research &    Development
        Center, Univ. of Pittsburgh.   Found at: http://www.lrdc.pitt.edu/metastudy/PDF/MMAPCase0706.pdf
Engle, R. A. & Conant, F. R.      (2002). Guiding principles for fostering productive disciplinary engagement:
        Explaining an emergent argument in a community of learners classroom.               Cognition and Instruction,
        20(4), 399-483.
Engle, R. A., Conant, F. R. & Greeno, J. G. (2007).      Progressive refinement of hypotheses in video-supported
        research.   In R. Goldman,     R.  Pea, B.  Barron   &  S. J. Derry  (Eds.), Video   research  in the learning
        sciences (pp. 239-254).   Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Engle, R. A. & Faux, R. B. (2006).      Towards productive disciplinary engagement of prospective teachers in
        educational  psychology:   Comparing     two  methods    of case-based instruction.     Teaching Educational
        Psychology, 1(2).
Goldman, S. & Knudsen, J. (2004).         Principles for making    middle school   math  more   equitable.  Classroom
        Leadership, 7(6).    Found at: http://www.acsd.org/publications/class_lead/200403/goldman.html.
Goldman,   S., Knudsen   J., &   Latvala,  M.   (1998).  Engaging     middle  schoolers  in  and  through   real-world
        mathematics. In L. Leutzinger (Ed.), Mathematics in the middle (pp. 129-140). Reston, VA: NCTM.
Greeno, J. G., McDermott,    R., Cole,  K., Engle,   R.  A., Goldman,   S.,  Knudsen,   J., Lauman,  B.,  & Linde,  C.
        (1999).   Research,  reform,   and aims  in  education:  Modes    of action  in search  of each   other. In E.
        Lagemann & L. Shulman (Eds.), Issues in education research: Problems and possibilities (pp. 299-
        335). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Grossman,  P., Wineburg,   S.,  & Woolworth,     S.  (2002).    Toward a theory of teacher community.         Teachers
        College Record, 103(6), 942-1012.
Hindin, A., Morocco, C.C., Mott, E.A., & Aguilar, C.M. (2007).        More than just a group: Teacher collaboration
        and learning in the workplace.    Teachers and Teaching: Theory and Practice, 13(4), 349-376.
Lichtenstein,  G., Weissglass,    J., &   Ercikan-Alper,     K. (1998).  Final  evaluation     report: Middle-school
        Mathematics through Applications Project, MMAP II (1994-1998). Denver, CO: Quality Evaluation
        Designs.
Lieberman, A. & Grolnick, M. (1996).      Networks and reform in American education.        Teachers College Record,
        98, 7-45.
Linde, C. (1993).  Life stories: The creation of coherence.   New York: Oxford University Press.
McDonald, J. P. & Klein, E. J. (2003).     Networking for teacher learning: Toward a theory of effective design.
        Teachers College Record, 105(8), 1606-1621.
Palincsar, A., Magnussen, S. J., Marano, N., Ford, D. & Brown, N. (2001).      Designing a community of practice:
        Principles and practices of the GIsML community.        Teaching and Teacher Education, 14(1), 5-19.
Stein, M. K., Silver, E. A. & Smith, M. S. (1998).   Mathematics reform and teacher development: A community
        of practice perspective.  In J. G. Greeno & S. V. Goldman (Eds.), Thinking practices in mathematics
        and science learning (pp. 17-52).    Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Tharp, R. G., Estrada, P., Dalton, S. S. & Yamauchi, L. (2000).        Teaching transofmred: Achieving excellence,
        fairness, inclusion, and harmony.    Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
Thomas, G., Wineburg, S., Grossman, P., Myhre, O. & Woolworth, S. (1998).             In the company of colleagues:
        An interim report on the development of a community of teacher learners.               Teaching and Teacher
        Education, 14(1), 21-32.
Wood, D. (2007). Teachers' learning communities: Catalyst for change or a new infrastructure for the status
        quo?   Teachers College Record, 109(3), 699-739.

Acknowledgments
This research  was  funded   by grants  from  the  MacArthur    and   Spencer Foundations    to Mary   Kay  Stein and
Cynthia Coburn.    I appreciate the many hours MMAP participants spent helping me understand their project as
well as the very helpful comments provided by the three anonymous reviewers of this paper for ICLS.

                                                                                                                         1-
