                  History Learning with Textual or Visual Tasks:
                                           Student Dialogue

         Maaike E. Prangsma, CINOP Expertisecentrum, P.O. Box 1585, 5200 BP `s-Hertogenbosch,
                                                 mprangsma@xs4all.nl
               Carla A. M. van Boxtel, University of Amsterdam, ILO, c.a.m.vanboxtel@uva.nl
      Gellof Kanselaar, Paul A. Kirschner, Utrecht University, Research Centre Learning in Interaction
                                   Email: g.kanselaar@uu.nl, p.a.kirschner@uu.nl

       Abstract:     Multimodal    representations  are  representations    containing a combination   of  text
       and schemas and/or pictures. According to the Cognitive Theory of Multimedia Learning such
       representations    can  be   powerful  learning   tools. The  study   described  here approaches    this
       theory  from    the   domain  of history  in co-construction   tasks.  In an  experimental   study, the
       dialogues     of  pupils   who   co-constructed    either    textual representations   or  multimodal
       representations integrated in a timeline were compared. The participants were 12 to 14-year-
       old pupils in pre-vocational secondary education who worked in dyads on a series of four
       history  tasks.   Dialogue   protocols of  the taped student   conversations    for one of these  tasks
       were   analysed.   The  results  show  that  integrated   multimodal   representations  do   ­ to some
       extent ­ lead to more discussion about domain content as well as about procedural issues than
       working with textual representations.

Theoretical framework
       Multimodal representations combine two or more modes of representation, for example, a verbal text
with one or more types of visualisation (i.e., schematic and/or depictive). While there has been a fair amount of
research on the effects of learning with multimodal representations ­ in particular visualisations presented with
texts ­ there has been less research on the learning processes that occur when using multimodal representations
in tasks. This study sheds light on differences in the learning process between multimodal and verbal tasks at the
level of task content.
       There   is  a   large body   of research  on learning    with multimodal   representations   (Ainsworth,   1999;
Larkin & Simon, 1987; Mayer & Chandler, 2001; Schnotz, 1993). In these studies multimodal representations
are seen as cognitive thinking tools ­ tools for remembering, thinking, and problem solving (Jonassen, Reeves,
Hong, Harvey, & Peters, 1997) ­ and the focus is primarily on the learning outcomes that these representations
produce. These outcomes are explained by Dual Coding Theory (Paivio, 1991), Cognitive Theory of Multimedia
Learning (Mayer, 2001) and/or Cognitive Load Theory (Kirschner, 2002; Sweller, Van Merriënboer & Paas,
1998). In recent research, two topics related to learning with multimodal representations have gained attention,
namely: 1) the effects of constructing different forms of multimodal representations on learning processes and
outcomes, and 2) the learning and interaction processes that are provoked and supported by the construction of
multimodal representations by the learners themselves. We will first elaborate on these topics below.
       Cox    (1999)   argues  that constructing  external  representations   can be   beneficial for learners. Several
studies have shown positive learning effects for one specific type of task in which a multimodal representation is
constructed, namely    a concept    map   (e.g., Horton,   McConney,     Gallo,   Woods,    Senn,  &   Hamelin,   1993;
O'Donnell,   Dansereau,  &   Hall,  2002; Van    Boxtel, Van    der Linden,  &  Kanselaar,   2000). Concept  maps   are
diagrams that  indicate  interrelationships   between    concepts   and represent   conceptual    frameworks    within a
specific domain of knowledge (Novak, 1990). In order to construct a concept map, students have to think about
and describe  both concepts    that are instrumental  to  a specific  situation  and the   relationships between  those
concepts. By doing this, concept mapping helps students focus on the macrostructure of the content, stimulates
elaboration and can provide multiple retrieval paths for accessing knowledge.
       The higher level of activity required from students in construction of representations leads to different
learning processes. According to Bodemer, Ploetzner, Bruchmüller, and Häcker (2005), students often remain
rather passive when they only have to look at a multimodal representation. The researchers argue that active
integration of textual and pictorial information by the students themselves is essential for successful learning.
They conducted an experimental study in which the students had to relate textual and pictorial information about
the working of a tire pump by actively dragging and dropping captions into a drawing of a tire pump on a
computer screen. This active integration significantly improved learning. Van Meter and Garner (2005) give
examples of tasks in which students construct visual representations, such as organizing or sequencing, given
component pieces of a representation.
       These ideas about the level of activity and active integration of representations led to an experimental
study that was conducted to assess the value of active construction of multimodal representations of historical

                                                                                                                           2-22
         phenomena     (Prangsma,    Van    Boxtel,  &   Kanselaar,    2008).  Students   constructed   or completed    multimodal
         representations for different historical phenomena and developments in the Early Middle Ages along with a
         coordinating timeline. Then, the learning outcomes of pupils who co-constructed textual representations were
         compared   with    learning outcomes     of pupils   who  co-constructed     multimodal   representations   integrated  in a
         timeline. Results   showed    that working    on  multimodal     representations integrated  in a  timeline   led to higher
         learning outcomes than co-constructing textual representations. The differences in the content of the discourse
         of collaborating students in these two conditions were assumed to have contributed to this outcome.
                   Studies  on   the construction    of    multimodal   representations   in collaborative    settings  that include
         discourse analysis give some insights into the learning processes with multimodal tasks (Bodemer, Ploetzner,
         Bruchmüller, & Häcker, 2005; Suthers & Hundhausen, 2003; Van Boxtel, Van der Linden, Roelofs, & Erkens,
         2002). These studies showed that multimodal representations can facilitate discourse ­ or articulation ­ at the
         content   level, thus  encouraging     the  use   of domain-specific   language,    and  ultimately  knowledge    building.
         Discourse analysis in these studies has focused on the communicative functions (Suthers & Hundhausen), on the
         activities in the software (Bodemer et al.), on procedures and task management (Erkens, Jaspers, Prangsma, &
         Kanselaar, 2005), and on topic content (Fischer, Bruhn, Gräsel, & Mandl, 2002; Roth & Roychoudhury, 1994;
         Van Boxtel, Van der Linden, & Kanselaar, 2000; Van Drie, Van Boxtel, Jaspers, & Kanselaar, 2005).

        Problem Definition
                   This study examines whether collaborative construction and completion of multimodal representations
         can   encourage  students   to  describe   and  explain historical  phenomena      using  historical concepts. It   looks  at
         student dialogues and concentrates primarily on what actually occurs at the content-related level, as this is where
         pupils most obviously work on acquiring the building blocks of a domain. Through verbalisation of the thought
         processes, light can be shed on the processes involved in learning with multimodal representations.
                   The    main question    is: What   are  the  effects  of the  collaborative   completion    and  construction    of
         integrated multimodal representations versus textual representations on the content of the student dialogue? The
         study compares the learning processes of pupils who co-constructed either textual representations or multimodal
         representations    integrated  in  a  timeline.   The  multimodal     representations   used joined   historical  concepts,
         phenomena and relations (i.e., the components of a chronological-conceptual frame of reference).
                   On the basis of the literature one would expect the student dialogues to be different for different types
         of tasks (i.e., textual versus integrated multimodal) in several ways. The pupils who co-construct integrated
         multimodal representations that combine pictures, diagrams and text in a timeline should elaborate more on the
         (domain-specific)     content  of  the  tasks   than  pupils  who  co-construct    textual  representations,   because   the
         information in the visual elements needs to be verbalised and then related to the verbal information given to
         them   (Teasley  &  Roschelle,    1993). In  turn,   verbalising knowledge    and   information about   abstract  historical
         phenomena    and   the  relations  between    them    should  be easier when     learners  can make    use  of multimodal
         representations because it gives learners a common referent: They can point out parts of the representation they
         are constructing to indicate what they are referring to, and the task product provides a joint workspace that
         visualises what knowledge has already been co-constructed.

       Method
        Participants
                   The participants in this study were pupils (aged 12 to 14) from six different first-year classes in three
         different pre-vocational    secondary   schools,  with  one   history teacher  for  each  school. The  majority   of Dutch
         pupils in secondary school (some 60%) attend this school type. The language proficiency of these pupils is
         relatively low. History as a school subject is part of the compulsory curriculum for only the first two years for
         these pupils, so there is little time for developing a chronological frame of reference.
                   Twenty   dyads    (40 participants)   were   selected  from   the  total  sample  (N = 143)   for   the discourse
         analyses: 10 from the Text condition, and 10 from the Timeline condition. The dyads were randomly selected
         from all dyads from the final sample for which a full set of recordings was available.

        Setting and procedure ­ experimental tasks
                   All participants in both the Text and the Timeline condition were given an individual knowledge pre-
         test. The test   consisted  of three  parts that  were  administered   separately.  Part  1  asked   pupils to write  down
         everything they knew about the Early Middle Ages in a concept map. Part 2 consisted of 8 open items, including
         both textual and multimodal questions. Part 3 consisted of 18 multiple-choice items. Interrater reliability for the
         open   items on    74 randomly     chosen   tests was  .89    (Cohen's kappa).  Low   prior  knowledge     resulted  in low
         homogeneity (Cronbach's alpha = .31) of the pre-test. Scores for the multiple-choice section were used to divide
         the   participants into dyads   with   contiguous     ability ranges  (i.e., low+intermediate,    intermediate+high)    and
         intermediate dyads to ensure both sufficient symmetry to enhance relations, and asymmetry to keep the dialogue

2-222
going. The pre-test scores of the two conditions were very similar. The Text condition scored 12.13 (SD = 2.56;
N = 30), whilst the Timeline group scored 11.79 (SD = 3.32; N = 24). A t-test indicated that the conditions did
not differ significantly from each other (t(52) = .43, p = .67).
        Working in pairs, participants carried out four tasks on the Early Middle Ages (the period of 500 to
1000 AD in Western European history) during three consecutive history lessons. In each task, the participants
started out by reading a short text (i.e., circa two pages with important historical concepts, such as `Roman
Empire' and `manorialism', printed in a bold typeface. Dyads were encouraged to use the main concepts in their
answers. The texts remained available throughout all tasks. The texts (of which there were four, see further)
included appropriate illustrations that were not actively used in the construction task that followed, but were
provided to improve basic understanding of the text for both conditions.
        The tasks in the Text condition consisted of open questions, fill-in-the-blanks and ordering sentences.
The tasks in the Timeline condition involved text, diagrams, and pictures, and the separate task products had to
be integrated in a timeline   the size of  two sheets of flip    chart paper (approximately 60 cm x 140 cm).   The
representation forms of the Timeline tasks were matched to the task-specific content based on the taxonomy by
Lohse, Biolsi, Walker, and Rueter (1994): (1) process diagram (decline of the Roman Empire), (2) network
chart (effects of the fall of the Roman Empire), (3) structure diagram (manorialism), and (4) cartogram (spread
of Christianity and Islam)..
        The tasks used in the Timeline condition were designed according to Mayer's (2003) principles for
multimedia learning. According to these principles students learn more when words and pictures are combined
(multimedia effect), when    extraneous material is  excluded    (coherence),  and when   words are  placed near  a
corresponding picture (spatial contiguity). Figure 1 shows an example of Task 2 in the Timeline condition. This
is the task for which the dialogue analyses are reported on in this paper.

Figure 1. Example of a completed task sheet for Task 2 in the Timeline condition.

Dialogue Analysis
        The   analyses of  differences  between  the  dialogues   in   the two conditions focused on a  single task
(Task 2). This task ­ about the effects of the fall of the Roman Empire ­ was chosen because the participants
had had one task to get used to working together and to get accustomed to the type of task and setting. For each
of the 20 dyads  selected,   the dialogues were transcribed,  coded    and  analysed with utterances as the unit of
analysis. All tasks consisted of two phases: an initial reading phase and a production phase. The initial reading
phase was the same for all conditions. Dyads were given the text and instructed to read it out to each other to
ensure they actually read the text. After reading the text, the dyads were given the task assignment, which was
the starting point for the second phase. The dialogue of the first phase was excluded from the analyses.

                                                                                                                       2-22
                  Participant dialogues were    recorded,  transcribed, coded  and analyzed   in several   steps, taking the
         utterance as the unit of analysis. First, the utterances were coded for their basic topic: Content, Procedural,
         Social or Other (see Table 1). Passages read out from the text, the instructions, or the answer sheet were coded
         as `Read out'. The category Other included utterances by others (e.g., the teacher) and unintelligible utterances.
         The analyses focused on the domain-specific content of the discourse. A distinction was made between core and
         auxiliary Content utterances. Core content coding was based on an exhaustive list of phenomena and relations
         (historical propositions) based on the task text. Auxiliary content coding was assigned to utterances referring to
         task content, but without an explicit description or reasoning. In addition, the total number of concepts and the
         total number of different concepts were tabulated.

         Table 1: Examples of the dialogue coding categories.

         Code                        Examples                                   Description/Explanation
         Procedural utterances       "It's your turn now."                      E.g., collaboration, partner behavior,
                                     "Do you have sticky tape?"                    spelling
         Social utterances           "Are you going to the party on Friday?"    Utterances irrelevant to the task
                                     "You know who called last night?"
                                     "Who did she kiss?"
         Content utterances by
         subtype:
         Core content                "There was little trade"                   Statement about historical phenomenon,
                                     "When the Romans left, bridges                or relating phenomena to each other
                                     collapsed"
         Auxiliary content           "Trade"                                    Reference to content without explicit
                                     "Viking boats are cool"                       description or reasoning
         Read out content            "What happened here?"                      Statement that is read out from the text or
                                                                                   answer sheet
         Read out procedural         "Look at the five pictures"                Statement that is read out from the
                                                                                   instructions

                  Interrater reliabilities between two coders were calculated for four randomly chosen dialogue protocols
         (two from  each   condition, totalling  1060   utterances). Cohen's  kappa was   .74  for coding   the   main topic
         (Procedural, Social, Content, Read out) whilst agreement was 82.80 %. For the Content coding level (Core vs.
         Auxiliary) agreement was 86.40 %, and Cohen's kappa was .76. Agreement for counting the total number of
         concepts was 82.40 %, and Cohen's kappa was .78.

       Results
        Differences Between Text and Timeline in Task 2 Dialogue Utterances
                  Task 2 student dialogues in the Text condition were compared to those in the Timeline condition. In the
         Text condition the mean duration of the analysed dialogues was 19.43 minutes (SD = 8.90) and in the Timeline
         condition  19.42  (SD = 5.79). The     durations did not  differ significantly between  conditions    (t(17) = .004,
         p = .997 (two-tailed)). Hence, all dialogue results report frequencies of utterance categories.
                  Table 2 shows the means and standard deviations for the dialogue frequencies in both conditions. On
         the whole, the  Timeline   group   talked significantly more than the Text group,  as   shown   by an  independent
         samples t-test for the total number of utterances. This difference seems to be attributable to all three main topics
         ­ procedural,  social, and content  utterances ­  though  only procedural utterances  and social   utterances show
         significantly higher   frequencies for Timeline  condition  than for the Text  condition. There    is no significant
         difference for the number of content utterances.

2-22
Table 2: Means and standard deviations for the frequencies of the dialogue variables in Task 2: Comparison
between conditions.

                                  Mean                   SD                      t           df        p
                                  Text      Timeline     Text       Timeline
Total number of utterances **     85.00     160.60       45.05      68.22        -2.92       15.60     .00
Procedural utterances        **   18.80     54.90        13.36      28.44        -3.63       18        .00
Social utterances            *    17.20     40.30        18.64      33.12        -1.92       14.18     .04
Content utterances                49.00     65.40        22.16      26.23        -1.51       18        .07
Core content                      17.20     16.70        9.77       10.22
Auxiliary content            *    25.70     43.80        11.35      24.02        -2.15       12.83     .03
Read out content                  6.10      4.90         3.78       2.81
Read out procedural          **   1.00      3.00         1.70       1.70         -2.63       18        .01
Core content  utterances   +  auxiliary content utterances  +  read out   content  = content  utterances. Read  out
procedural utterances are a subset of procedural utterances.
Text: N = 10 dyads. Timeline: N = 10 dyads.
*: Timeline > Text at p < .05; **: Timeline > Text at p < .01.

          Taking a closer look at the content utterances shows that the two conditions have elicited roughly the
same number of core content utterances, and similar amounts of content were read out from the task text and
task sheet. Yet, even though there was no significant difference between the two conditions for the number of
content   utterances, the Timeline   condition  shows   a significantly   higher  frequency  for auxiliary  content
utterances. This suggests that the multimodal representations do encourage content talk, but not to name things
or refer to them very specifically. Table 3 shows a typical example of pupils discussing what text should be
written on the task sheet to describe a picture of Viking raids in Task 2 in the Timeline condition. The columns
show the alternation between the two pupils in the dyad (Speaker), a translation of the utterances, the main topic
(procedural, social utterances or content), and the subtopic (read out, core content, or auxiliary content). A clear
example of an auxiliary utterance in this excerpt is "No, the bottom one, the village", in which the pupil refers to
a picture  without  being explicit. The  auxiliary utterances in this excerpt,  such as `What   does that  say' and
`That's   because', seem  to lead up to more   explicit statements (i.e., core content utterances)  about historical
phenomena described in the task text. The auxiliary utterances often include deictic expressions, such as `that'
and `it'.

Table 3: Excerpt from a dialogue on Task 2 in the Timeline condition.

Speaker     Utterance                                                                  Topic          Subtopic
1           "Here, that's finished, Wesley, well done"                                 Procedural
2           "Now you do another sentence"                                              Procedural
1           "Oh, let me think"                                                         Procedural
2           "No, write"                                                                Procedural
1           "What does that say?"                                                      Content        Auxiliary
2           "Just that the Vikings travelled around"                                   Content        Core
1           "No, the bottom one, that village"                                         Content        Auxiliary
2           "That's because"                                                           Content        Auxiliary
1           "Um, OK but it needs something after it"                                   Content        Auxiliary
1           "The Vikings plundered"                                                    Content        Core
1           "With fifteen exclamation marks after it"                                  Social
2           "Oh yeah"                                                                  Social
1           "That makes the sentence a bit longer, that's a question mark idiot"       Social
2           "Like this"                                                                Social

          The Timeline group also read out significantly more procedural information from the task sheet and
instructions. This is not surprising, as the instructions for the Text condition were more concise.

Concept use in the two conditions
          Analysis of the use of historical concepts used within the content-related utterances (core and auxiliary)
showed no differences between the Text and Timeline conditions in the total number of concepts used, nor for
the number of different concepts. Closer inspection of the data did not reveal differences between conditions in
the choice of specific concepts. Table 4 shows the results for the concept use in the dialogue.

                                                                                                                        2-22
         Table 4: Means and standard deviations for the concept scores of the dialogues in Task 2: Comparison between
         conditions.

                                                                        Mean                       SD
                                                                        Text     Timeline          Text     Timeline
         Total number of concepts                                       27.70    24.00             16.57    10.74
         Total number of different concepts                             9.00     7.30              2.26     2.36

       Conclusions and implications
                   The effects of multimodal representation tasks in a timeline (Timeline) and of textual tasks (Text) in a
         collaborative setting were examined. It was assumed that working with multimodal representations in a timeline
         would result in different dialogues and learning outcomes than working with textual representations would. In
         addition, the study explored whether different types of multimodal tasks resulted in differences in the dialogues.
                   The first research question investigated the effects of the collaborative completion and construction of
         integrated  multimodal representations versus  textual representations  on the  (domain-specific)   content   of the
         student dialogue. The results of the dialogue analysis of one out of four tasks showed that the multimodal group
         (Timeline) talked more in general, and produced more procedural utterances in particular than the textual group
         (Text). This is not surprising since the multimodal timeline task required more organisation and coordination
         compared to the textual task. Whilst the textual version of the task involved fill-in-the-blank sentences, ordering
         sentences, and answering a summary question, the multimodal timeline version of the task ­ completing a causal
         network chart ­ required choosing relevant pictures and discarding irrelevant ones, adding concepts and captions
         to the pictures chosen, relating visual and textual information, linking the elements to the previous task on the
         timeline, as well as answering the summary question. Van Boxtel, Van der Linden, and Kanselaar (1997) found
         a comparable difference between tasks. They compared a concept mapping task on electricity concepts with a
         poster task in which students had to use the same concepts to explain the working of an electric flashlight. In
         their study, the concept mapping task elicited significantly more talk about the concepts than the poster task did.
         Their explanation  ­ that  the poster task elicited more writing  and   drawing  activities ­ is in line with    the
         suggestion by Bennett and Dunne (1991) that tasks that require more physical activities are more likely to elicit
         less abstract talk: "for tasks which combine both action with abstract demands, talk related to action continues to
         dominate" (p. 113). Still, in the study presented here, the tasks with multiple representations asked for more
         physical activities, such as selecting and gluing pictures, which resulted in more procedural utterances, but not
         in fewer   content utterances  ­ about abstract  historical phenomena    and  the relations  between   them   ­   in
         comparison with the less physical tasks with only textual representations.
                   The Timeline group also talked more about topics not related to the task (social utterances). The nature
         of the multimodal timeline task ­ which involved more physical activity than its textual counterpart ­ might
         have made working in the classroom more turbulent, making it harder for pupils to concentrate on the task, thus
         eliciting more distraction and  the tendency for more   social utterances. This  did not, however,   detract  from
         content related discussion. Also, pupil concentration may have been influenced by the fact that for many dyads
         this particular task was spread out over two non-consecutive lessons, and by the fact that these pupils are not
         used to working in groups for an entire lesson ­ although these circumstances were the same for the pupils in the
         textual condition. Restarting their work could require a certain amount of coordination (i.e., catching up on what
         has intervened) which could be achieved through social talk. The value of social talk in group work has been
         confirmed by Chen, Lee, Chu, Wang, and Jiang (2005), although it has to be noted that their research was done
         in a different cultural setting (Asian as opposed to Western European).
                   On the whole, the results do not strongly support the idea that the extra step of visualisation in the
         multimodal   condition provokes  and  supports more   extensive discussion   of core content  than  in the  textual
         condition. Co-constructing a multimodal representation in a timeline did not seem to invite more core content
         utterances, nor did it elicit the use of more or more different concepts. However, the results do indicate that
         auxiliary talk about the content ­ i.e., talking about content without making clear statements ­ was encouraged
         by the multimodal timeline task. It seems that learners often describe pictures in very general terms in auxiliary
         utterances ­ including non-specific referents such as `this' and `that' ­ because there is a tangible common point
         of reference, so they can afford to be less explicit. From that point of view, the multimodal representations have
         a deictic role (i.e., pointing to a picture or schema or to a part of it; see Suthers, Girardeau, & Hundhausen,
         2003) that does not occur in the textual condition. At the same time, it might also be difficult for learners ­
         considering their educational level ­ at this level to use abstract concepts to describe concrete pictures, and as a
         result the learners keep using everyday instead of domain-specific language.
                   If referring to visual elements and talking about core concepts is so important, then future research
         should focus on how we can encourage learners to perform these activities. In addition, future research could
         focus on the role of deictic properties of multimodal representations in face-to-face collaborative learning.

2-22
References
Ainsworth, S. (1999). The functions of multiple representations. Computers & Education, 33, 131-152.
Bennett, N., & Dunne, E. (1991). The nature and quality of talk in co-operative classroom groups. Learning and
         Instruction, 1, 103-118.
Bodemer,   D.,  Ploetzner,  R.,  Bruchmüller,    K.,  &  Häcker,   S.  (2005). Supporting     learning with   interactive
         multimedia through active integration of representations. Instructional Science, 33, 73-95.
Chen, F.-C., Lee, Y.-W., Chu, H. C., Wang, H. R., & Jiang, H.-M. (2005). Effective discussions, social talks and
         learning: A paradox on learning in discussion forums. In T. Koschmann, D. D. Suthers, & T.-W. Chan
         (Eds.),  Computer   supported    collaborative   learning   2005:   The next  10   years!  Proceedings   of  the
         international conference on computer supported collaborative learning 2005 (pp. 33-42). Mahwah, NJ:
         Lawrence Erlbaum.
Cox, R. (1999). Representation construction, externalised cognition and individual differences. Learning and
         Instruction, 9, 343-363.
Erkens, G., Jaspers, J., Prangsma, M., & Kanselaar, G. (2005). Coordination processes in computer supported
         collaborative writing. Computers in Human Behavior, 21, 463-486.
Fischer, F., Bruhn, J., Gräsel, C., & Mandl, H. (2002). Fostering collaborative knowledge construction with
         visualization tools. Learning and Instruction, 12, 213-232.
Horton, P. B., McConney, A. A., Gallo, M., Woods, A. L., Senn, G. J., & Hamelin, D. (1993). An investigation
         of the effectiveness of concept mapping as an instructional tool. Science Education, 77, 95-111.
Jonassen, D.    H., Reeves, T.  C., Hong,    N., Harvey,   D., &  Peters,  K. (1997). Concept     mapping    as cognitive
         learning and assessment tools. Journal of Interactive Learning Research, 8, 289-308.
Kirschner, P. A. (2002). Cognitive load theory: Implications of cognitive load theory on the design of learning.
         Learning and Instruction, 12, 1-10.
Larkin,  J. H., &   Simon, H. A.   (1987).   Why   a diagram   is (sometimes)  worth  ten   thousand   words.   Cognitive
         Science, 11(1), 65-99.
Lohse,  G. L.,  Biolsi, K., Walker,    N.,   &   Rueter, H. H.    (1994). A  classification of  visual  representations.
         Communications of the ACM, 37(12), 36-49.
Mayer, R. E. (2001). Multimedia learning. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Mayer, R. E. (2003). The promise of multimedia learning: using the same instructional design methods across
         different media. Learning and Instruction, 13, 125-139.
Mayer, R. E., & Chandler, P. (2001). When learning is just a click away: Does simple user interaction foster
         deeper understanding of multimedia messages? Journal of Educational Psychology, 93, 390-397.
Munneke,   L.,  Andriessen,  J., Kanselaar,    G., &  Kirschner,   P. (2007).  Supporting   interactive argumentation:
         Influence of representational tools on discussing a wicked problem. Computers in Human Behavior,
         23, 1072-1088.
Novak,   J. D.  (1990). Concept    maps   and    Vee  diagrams:   Two  metacognitive   tools   to facilitate  meaningful
         learning. Instructional science, 19, 29-52.
O'Donnell,   A. M.,   Dansereau,   D. F.,    & Hall,  R. H. (2002).   Knowledge    maps     as scaffolds for    cognitive
         processing. Educational Psychology Review, 14, 71-86.
Paivio, A. (1991). Images in mind: The evolution of a theory. London: Harvester Wheatsheaf.
Prangsma,    M.  E., Van   Boxtel,  C. A.    M., &   Kanselaar,   G. (2008).  Developing    a  `big picture': Effects of
         collaborative construction of multimodal representations in history. Instructional Science 36, 117-136.
Roth, W.-M.,    &   Roychoudhury,   A.  (1994).    Science discourse  through  collaborative   concept  mapping:    New
         perspectives for the teacher. International Journal of Science Education, 6, 437-455.
Schnotz, W. (1993). On the relation of dual coding and mental models in graphics comprehension. Learning and
         Instruction, 3, 247-249.
Suthers, D. D., & Hundhausen, C. D. (2003). An empirical study of the effects of representational guidance on
         collaborative learning. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 12, 183-219.
Suthers, D. D., Girardeau, L., & Hundhausen, C. D. (2003). Deictic roles of external representations in face-to-
         face and online collaboration. In B. Wasson, S. Ludvigsen & U. Hoppe (Eds.), Designing for change in
         networked    learning   environments    (pp. 173-182).    Dordrecht,  The  Netherlands:     Kluwer     Academic
         Publishers.
Sweller, J., Van    Merriënboer,   J. J. G., &  Paas, F. G. W. C.    (1998). Cognitive architecture    and   instructional
         design. Educational Psychology Review, 10, 251-296.
Teasley, S. D., & Roschelle, J. (1993). Constructing a joint problem space: The computer as a tool for sharing
         knowledge. In S. P. Lajoie & S. J. Derry (Eds.), Computers as cognitive tools (pp. 229-257). Hillsdale,
         NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Van Boxtel, C. A. M., Van der Linden, J. L., Roelofs, E., & Erkens, G. (2002). Collaborative concept mapping:
         Provoking and supporting meaningful discourse. Theory into Practice, 41(1), 40-46.

                                                                                                                             2-22
         Van Boxtel, C. A. M., Van der Linden, J., & Kanselaar, G. (1997). Collaborative construction of conceptual
                understanding: Interaction processes and learning outcomes emerging from a concept mapping and a
                poster task. Journal of Interactive Learning Research, 8, 341-361.
         Van Boxtel, C. A. M., Van der Linden, J., &  Kanselaar, G.    (2000). Collaborative learning tasks and the
                elaboration of conceptual knowledge. Learning and Instruction 10, 311-330.
         Van Drie, J., Van Boxtel, C. A. M., Jaspers, J., & Kanselaar, G. (2005). Effects of representational guidance on
                domain specific reasoning in CSCL. Computers in Human Behavior, 21, 575-602.
         Van Meter, P., & Garner, J. (2005). The promise and practice of learner-generated drawing: Literature review
                and synthesis. Educational Psychology Review, 17, 285-325.

       Acknowledgments
         We gratefully acknowledge the support of the Netherlands Organisation for Scientific Research (411-01-004).
         Wim Euverman created the artwork used in the Timeline tasks.

2-22
