                   Symposium: ICT4D and the Learning Sciences
                      Michael A. Evans, Aditya Johri, George E. Glasson, Virginia Tech USA
                               Email: mae@vt.edu, ajohri@vt.edu, glassong@vt.edu
                                 Kursat Cagiltay, METU Turkey, kursat@metu.edu.tr
                     Joyojeet Pal, University of California, Berkeley USA, joyojeet@berkeley
                           Piya Sorcar, Stanford University USA, sorcar@stanford.edu

         Abstract:    Over the   last two decades,    the   learning sciences  have   contributed   immensely    to
         curricula-based learning in formal environments. Recently, there is an increased emphasis on
         learning  that   occurs  outside formal     institutions, especially  through  the   use   of technology.
         Design experiments and design-based research have resulted in several innovations and in an
         overall conception of designing and researching new learning environments. Not surprisingly,
         technology    has been   a   critical component     of research   and   teaching.   Yet,   this focus  has
         primarily been on developed nations in the West. Recently the participation from other areas
         of  the world,   especially  Africa,  Asia,  the   Middle  East, has  been  on the     increase  while  the
         community of researchers and scholars is internationalizing. One area of innovation that has
         not been part of the community but which we wish to bring to focus through our symposium is
         the use of information and communication technologies for development (ICT4D) in emerging
         economies.

Overview
         Over the past several years the field of information and communication technologies for development
(ICT4D) in emerging economies has become an active area of development and increasingly more scholars are
studying ways to make the use of ICT in these international contexts more efficient. Although ICT4D is being
applied in many areas such as microfinance and health, education and learning are increasingly critical areas of
concern. At a recent conference on ICT4D over 50% of submissions were related to some kind of education or
learning  innovation,   a  significant  number     focusing    on  informal   learning  settings    (ICTD     2007).   In this
symposium we propose to present findings from field studies of innovation in Africa, Asia, and the Middle East,
and relate them to the learning sciences. We believe that these studies have several lessons that the learning
sciences can benefit form as a field. One of the advantages of ICT in developing and emerging economies is that
restricted resources force us to innovate to derive new ways of doing things. These innovations are not restricted
to technology, but also how to socially organize learning or education. Moreover, the implementations teach us
the importance   of  integrating  the  findings   with  the  ecology  of  the  place, that   it is  critical to integrate   the
innovations  with   the social   and   cultural   practices of  the  locality  for long-term    use    and   benefits. In this
symposium we bring to light several challenges associated with doing this kind of work ranging from finances
to the ability to partner with local institutions and be able to carry out fieldwork in geographically distant field
sites.
         Education for all students, particularly in developing countries, requires understanding the worldviews
and epistemologies of diverse cultures as well as the conflicts and problems that students may experience when
crossing  cultural borders  to   learn western    ideas   (Aikenhead,    2001; Aikenhead      &    Jegede  1999;    Snively &
Corsiglia, 2001).    Although    science, engineering,    and   literacy are  potentially  a  driving    force  for economic
solutions to poverty, little attention is given to the cultural context in which these areas of study are taught,
particularly in  reference to  indigenous   knowledge       and technology    of which  the   villagers   are  most  familiar.
Indigenous knowledge represents descriptive and explanatory ways about nature acquired across generations
from cultures with strong oral traditions (Kawagley, Norris-Tull, Norris-Tull, 1998; Dzama, E.N.N. & Osborne,
J.F., 1999; Snively & Corsiglia, 2001). In one clear example, indigenous knowledge has transformed modern
science  in  many   areas, most   notably   taxonomy,       medicine, agriculture,   natural    resource   management     and
conservation (International Council for Science, 2002).
         Research in developing countries requires a perspective of understanding emerging technologies as not
simply external tools, but integral parts of socio-cultural practices within a community (Miller & Slater, 2000).
From a communities of practice perspective, establishing social and technical connections among community
constituents is critical.  Further, information and communication technology (ICT) can be "used to promote
connections: between one learner and other learners, between learners and tutors [or elders]; between a learning
community    and   its learning   resources."     (Jones, 2004,    p.1). For   example,   although     the   current   network
infrastructure  in many   African   nations    is underdeveloped,    mobile   phones  are  prevalent     in  many    emerging
economies    and are   inherently democratic      as many   poor   people  make    sacrifices   to pool  resources   within  a
community to purchase airtime for purposes such as conducting business in the market (Friedman, 2007; Jones
&   Marsden,   2006).  As  mobile   smart  phones     can now   be   used  for maintaining      communications,      accessing

                                                                                                                                  3-
         computer    networks, and  capturing    and  delivering  multimedia   (Giulio,     Antti, &  Antti,  2007),   there  is  vast
         potential for connecting African schools to the internet for the first time and for using mobile devices as a data
         gathering device to share and communicate ideas within the context of the local culture (Rogers, 2003).

       Symposium Themes
                 As    researchers and   developers   in the field our   sense   is that what   is  needed    are new   frameworks,
         methodologies,   and  empirical  studies to  illustrate social  organization    and   ways  in which     the social  and the
         technical may be combined to enable ICT4D to be `made within the local context' in everyday settings of use,
         many  times   this being  informal  settings where  socialization   and    communication    are  focal.  This  will  require
         close and   ongoing   cooperation  between   learning   scientists, social  and   cultural analysts,  linguists,   computer
         scientists, and engineers.  To   foster  such   collaboration  we   encourage   dialogue    that brings   researchers    and
         developers working within international contexts together to consider themes of broad relevance to situating
         ICT4D in formal and informal learning environments.
            x    Instructional Design. What underpins or constitutes ordinary activity is human interaction with others,
                 designed artefacts, and environments. The notion of design has already been appropriated by the wider
                 learning science community but we invoke it here not necessarily to import existing agendas but to
                 raise the study of individual's interactions with one another, through designed artefacts that are situated
                 in the environments they inhabit, as a central theme or topic for the study and design of ICT4D.
            x    Accountability. A defining feature of human-human interaction is accountability or the `telling' of what
                 is going on, what's being done, how something happened, what will happen next, etc. Accountability is
                 a    fundamental   barrier  to   computer-mediated      communication,        computer-supported      collaborative
                 learning, and human-computer interaction and as heterogeneous computing applications and devices
                 proliferate, combine and become more complex, the problem of accountability becomes a core theme
                 for ICT4D to address.
            x    Awareness. Closely coupled to accountability, the theme of awareness draws our attention to the ways
                 in   which  people keep    track of  ordinary   activities  and  make   situated   judgments     and  decisions. Of
                 particular and distinct note is the role of the physical environment or `ecology' in awareness and the
                 ways in which people exploit the ecologies they inhabit to organize their interactions.
            x    Tangibility.   Technical   research  in  tangible computing      is   well established.  However,      the   learning
                 sciences (with rare exception, Cf., Roschelle, 1996) currently offer little analysis of the everyday use
                 and   manipulation   of   artifacts, comparing    physical   manipulatives     with    their digital  counterparts.
                 Existing studies draw attention to the close coupling of object manipulation with the ecology of space,
                 opening up new avenues for interdisciplinary consideration of the interplay between social studies and
                 the design of ICT4D technologies that are embedded in the physical environment.
            x    Coordination.     Being  dispersed   across multiple   environments     ­  in the  office, the   home,   out  on the
                 streets, etc. ­ and accessed by multiple users ­ family members, friends, relations, community elders
                 and   so   on ­  raises new  challenges   for   managing    interactions   with   highly mobile      and ubiquitous
                 computing systems. Central to such challenges are concerns with control, privacy, and the coordination
                 of interaction more generally. These issues require us to consider the development of a range of socio-
                 technical protocols to support learning and interaction.
            x    Context. The notion of context has been a defining concern of the learning sciences. Yet context is of
                 primary    concern  to  the behavioral   and    social sciences    as well  computer    sciences     and social  and
                 technical   understandings   of  context  vary  immensely.    For     behavioral   and social    scientists, context
                 extends beyond metrics to sense-making and provides for the meaningful character of interaction. The
                 concept of context provides a fruitful vehicle for the social and technical to consider new avenues of
                 collaboration.

       Connecting Classrooms and Communities in Africa with Mobile Technologies
       ­ A Representative ICT4D Project
                 In this project run by the organizer of the symposium, researchers are investigating the facilitation of
         connections   among   community    elders,  primary school     teachers, and   science  teacher  educators    using  mobile
         phone (Tinker, Horwitz, Bannasch, Staudt, & Vincent, 2007) and Web 2.0 technologies (Alexander, 2006) to
         learn about sustainable agriculture in Africa. In the host country for the current project, past research has shown
         that elders are a valuable source of knowledge for schools and villages. However, this knowledge has not been
         systematically connected to the school science curriculum, due to social and technical barriers. As an important
         goal of the primary school curriculum in the host country is for children to learn from elders in the community,
         the authors were interested in how mobile phones and Web 2.0 technologies (blogs and wikis, instant and text
         messaging, cf., O'Reilly, 2005) could be used to establish and nurture connections. Establishing technological
         connections between indigenous knowledge and school curriculum is particularly important when posed within

3-30
the context of developing nations that are struggling to modernize and improve the educational experiences of
their citizens in the midst of widespread challenges such as poverty, hunger, disease, lack of infrastructure, and
environmental degradation (Leach, Ahmed, Makalima, & Power, 2006).
        As     most  primary    schools   in  the   host country    have   limited   access   to  electricity  and   wired
telecommunications,    the  potential   for using   mobile devices   for educational     purposes   to access  and  create
information is immense. For example, in the year 2000, citizens of the host country had 49,000 cell phones in
use and by 2004 the number increased to 222,100.           Mobile phones are thus being explored as a platform for
delivery of instructional multimedia and are critical for addressing the digital divide (Jones & Marsden, 2006),
but also progress (Curry & Kenney, 2006), in developing countries.
        In this project, science educators and instructional designers are collaborating with elders, teachers,
teacher educators,  and   community     members     in the host  country   to  establish a  mobile   network   to  develop
curriculum that draws from local resources and makes them available on a global network. These ideas and
curriculum   artifacts are shared  with   educators    and designers  who     are developing   instructional   multimedia
materials to align with and enhance the primary science curriculum in the host country by including indigenous
knowledge about sustainable agriculture from elders in the communities.
        The following research questions were proposed: 1) What is the cultural context for implementing a
mobile phone communication network in the host country?             For example, what are teachers' attitudes toward
indigenous knowledge?       What kind of indigenous knowledge might be useful for learning about sustainable
agriculture?   2) How    do   we connect    the indigenous   knowledge   of   elders,  classroom    teachers, and  science
teacher educators   using  mobile  technology?    3)   How  do   we design    and develop   multimedia    curriculum   that
draws from these knowledge sources using mobile technology? In this paper, we will report on findings that
address the cultural context and instructional technology issues that are part of the design phase of this project.

Data Sources and Analysis
        Data   sources    include:  (1)   audio-recorded   interviews   with   community     elders   to learn  about   the
feasibility on connecting sustainable agricultural practices to the primary school curriculum; (2) audio-recorded
interviews with   teacher  educator and     science teachers  to assess  their feasibility of  using   mobile, web-based
devices as   a means    of  connecting    understandings   of  the  use  of   indigenous   scientific  knowledge    in  the
curriculum;  (3)  primary  school  curriculum    guides  and  other  artifacts  that pertain  to indigenous    knowledge.
Formative evaluation has employed the model proposed by Tessmer (1993) and with additional techniques for
alpha and beta testing from Alessi and Trollip (2000). In the tradition of qualitative research, iterative processes
of data analysis are used to generate themes reflective of the data, to capture the complexities of the research
context, and illuminate the questions that guide this research (Hammersley & Atkinson, 1983).              Interviews are
coded and categorized to identify emerging themes related to the subjects' perspectives on indigenous science,
sustainable agriculture, and the use of mobile web-based technologies. The data will be further reviewed to look
for confirming and disconfirming evidence related to interpretation of the data. From a post-colonial theoretical
framework (Carter, 2004), we are interested in understanding the cross hybridization of ideas from Western and
indigenous science perspectives as we explore teaching about sustainable agriculture.

Results
        In   reporting  of  the  results, researchers   have  focused   on  the   cultural context  that  is  necessary to
understand as part of the design phase of this project.      First, we will report on the perspective of a community
elder on sustainable agriculture.     Second,   we  will report  on  teachers'    perspectives   on including  indigenous
knowledge in the curriculum.     Finally, we will discuss how these cultural elements are being considered in the
design of the curriculum that is being developed using mobile phone devices.

Community Elder: Organic Gardener
        Dr. C has been a farmer since 1982. Originally an economist, he realized that farming was the only
profession  that  would  give   him food    sovereignty.   He    employs   channel    irrigation and   traditional organic
methods of growing crops without the use of mechanized equipment or synthetic fertilizers.                Diverting water
from a  river, his  farm   is irrigated from    hand-dug   channels, sunken    fields, and  underground      seepage from
damned ponds. He uses organic compost from recycled plant material, natural pest control, and crop rotation.
Dr. C grows maize three times a year (normally maize is harvested once); he also harvests a variety of fresh
fruits and vegetables, legumes, and he farms fresh fish.     He supplies food for six villages and the local hotels in
the capital city. Villagers work for food at his farm. Dr C has been awarded a doctoral degree by University of
[host country] in recognition for his experimentation, observation, knowledge creation and exemplary practice
in the village and to the world at large.

Host Country Teachers

                                                                                                                              3-3
                  The interviews revealed that contemporary African educators were very aware of traditional beliefs and
         practices; however, this knowledge was not expressed in relation to understanding how indigenous knowledge
         might  provide    a context     for the  learning     of  Western    scientific concepts.    Teachers    expressed    that it is
         advantageous to discourage the use of traditional knowledge because it is not "scientific." According to the
         teachers, the importance and application of traditional ecological knowledge was also marginalized due to the
         severe impact of deforestation and economic pressures for survival.              From our analysis of curriculum guides,
         Western science knowledge was largely compartmentalized and taught as a subject separate from the culture and
         environment where the children live.           Most examples of indigenous knowledge were portrayed negatively as
         examples of "non-science."       Nevertheless, the science educators are very interested in participating in a project
         designed to use mobile devices to connect them to information and resources outside their classrooms.

        Design Considerations
                  We    are  iteratively  designing,    implementing,     and evaluating   mobile  and  Web      2.0 technologies   in  a
         participatory manner (Sharp, Rogers, & Preece, 2007). An activity-centered design approach (Bodker, 1989;
         Gay & Hembrooke, 2004) creates a living archive of traditional and scientific knowledge related to sustainable
         agriculture. This   approach    takes   the position  that  "to  understand   development,    it  is essential not  to impose
         assumptions about the goals of development of one group on individuals from another. Interpreting the activity
         of people without regard for their goals renders the observations meaningless" (Rogoff, 1991, p. 117, emphases
         in original).   The    pedagogical    goal   is to    provide    technologies   for  unfettered   knowledge      building   and
         communication within real-world constraints found in large cities, where teacher educators work, and poor, rural
         areas, where primary schools are found.
                  For   this project, the    nodes   of the  network   to connect   knowledge    cultures  within    Africa  and in    the
         United States   include    the   following:     (1) A    community   elder in    the host   country   is a  farmer    providing
         knowledge    of sustainable     agriculture    practices, including   channel   irrigation,  composting,    and   organic   pest
         control; (2) A science and agriculture educator in the host country is conducting field testing of mobile devices
         and sustainable agriculture curriculum with pre-service teachers; and (3) A target primary school classroom and
         teacher has been selected from a primary science and agriculture class in the host. The class will be involved in
         developing a sustainable garden based on elder knowledge.             In an effort to establish a culturally diverse virtual
         team connected by mobile phone technology, a living archive website is being developed to share information
         and document the communication patterns and progress of the project.
                  Blogs    and    wikis,  using  open-source      software,   WordPress    (http://wordpress.org/)    and   MediaWiki
         (http://www.mediawiki.org/)         are  being      developed    and    implemented     as   distributed     knowledge      and
         communication platforms. Moreover, taking the lead from projects such as MobilED (http://mobiled.uiah.fi/),
         we are exploring text-, voice-, and multimedia messaging, and the potential of solar-powered devices, including
         battery chargers (Solio, http://www.solio.com/) and wireless outdoor routers (Meraki, http://meraki.com/).                  The
         rationale for using mobile phones and handheld devices is that they consume less power than other hardware
         (e.g., laptops and tablet PCs) and can access the Internet via a cellular network, much needed in a country such
         as that found in Africa.

       Paper 1: Computers and Aspirations in Rural India
                  Computer      aided    learning    programs     have   expanded   rapidly   in  rural   India   despite  a   prevalent
         environment    of   dire poverty    and  resource   shortage    of several kinds.    The  question   of  books,   teachers,   or
         buildings  as  against   technology     continues   to   be a   prevalent  argument,    especially   as  the  funds   for  such
         investments   start coming      out of  the    same   pools   of public  funds.   Much    scholarly   work   has   focused    on
         institutions, learning methods, and teachers themselves, but little if any work looks at parents. This research
         includes  interviews   with  parents    of  children  in  rural  Indian schools   recently   provided   with computer      aided
         learning centers    in the  southern  Indian    state of  Karnataka   with an   aim  of documenting      their perceptions    of
         technology and education. The guiding idea behind the project is that technology deployments have second-
         order effects  relating  to  the expectations    from    technology  and  the   aspirations  that arise  subsequently.  These
         second order    effects  are difficult  to  measure,   but  have   consequential    impacts  across  the  spectrum    from    the
         family all the way up to policy circles. Using three years of continuing work primarily with rural parents, but
         also  with children,     teachers,  policy  leaders,   and   school  administrators,    this work    describes    the evolving
         environment around schools with computer aided learning. In the course of this work, we documented locations
         where rural parents had seen computers in use, who they associated with usage, and what kinds of abilities they
         attributed to computers, and computers.        We find that the symbolic value of computers in the minds of parents is
         deeply tied to their locations of contact, and these in turn are highly instructive in understanding their aspirations
         as well as propensity to invest in their children's schooling. We find also an interesting tug between English
         language acquisition and computer use in parents' imaginations of power and class ascendancy. We find that a
         great number of factors, including the gradual diminishing of economic possibilities in agriculture, the fears of
         urban  living,  and    even  the economic      pressures  of  dowry   impact    decisions   related  to  parents' interest  and

3-3
inclination to their children's technology use. In continuing this research, we hope to expand academic work on
school  technology    initiatives  to  include  larger concerns    from   within   the 'science   technology    and  society'
scholarship   on  aspiration and   social  change.  In an age   of "One   Laptop   per   Child" and   other such   technical
innovations being at the forefront and driving the debate around ICTD, it is critical to understand the socio-
organizing dimensions as well.

Paper 2: Interactive Teaching AIDS in India
          The UN recently declared India as one of the largest HIV/AIDS infected populations in the world.
Nine out of ten infected people are unaware of their status, increasing their risk of infecting others. Although
education    represents  a "window     of  hope" in  stemming   the  tide   of the epidemic,    as   the World   Bank  says,
traditional tools are ineffective. Due to cultural barriers and stigma around openly discussing sexual practices,
many Indian institutions do not provide students with practical prevention education. Recently, ten Indian states
rejected  federal  programs    and banned    sex education   in their schools. The     Indian  education   ministry   has no
mandatory requirement for health or sex education classes in elementary schools, colleges, or universities in
India. For this reason, many learn about HIV/AIDS from mass media campaigns through television, billboards
and   radio. Although    there are strong   efforts to disseminate   HIV/AIDS      information    in India, because   of  the
nature of the strategies they utilize, individuals must make sense of these short, disparate pieces of information
on  their own.     Young   adults  receive   fragmented     knowledge     instead  of  a  coherent   conception      outlining
HIV/AIDS      education.   With    little understanding   of   the connection     between   high   risk   fluids  and  direct
transmission leading to a possible HIV infection, individuals memorize random fragmented data. The storage of
disparate data in their minds may make it difficult for them to retrieve and apply the knowledge to a variety of
situations. Interactive Teaching AIDS provides special learning steps to scaffold learners to develop a coherent
conception of basic biology, the concept of bodily fluids, transfer of bodily fluids into the human body and its
application to various misunderstood actions or scenarios. Through interactive animated modules, ITA helps the
learner  transfer  a coherent    conception  of  knowledge   into   their own   lives  in order   to make   more   informed
decisions. In the case of the Interactive Teaching AIDS curriculum, the knowledgeable adult is the doctor figure
who guides the student through various concepts of understanding HIV/AIDS. After providing the student with
a basic understanding of fluids and transmission, the doctor "challenges" the student to try to answer questions
on his/her own, while providing guidance if the student decides to learn more. The doctor continues to provide
the student guidance and allows them to practice their skills until the end when the student is able to answer
questions on their own and has more competence and confidence with the subject. This study measures the
efficacy of a pedagogically grounded new approach to teaching AIDS education in India. It evaluates changes in
knowledge, attitudes and behaviors of 430 young adults after interacting with a technology-based animation
program.  The    results   reveal  significant  increases in   learning   with large   effect  sizes and   students   rapidly
spreading prevention education through their peer networks.

Paper 3: Convivial Computing ­ Technology for Design, Expression and
Innovation and Lessons for ICTD
          A swift and sharp revolution of sorts is underway in the world of computing. This revolution stems
largely from user participation that has been made possible by recent advances in computing. An increasing
number    of  people  are  becoming       producers  rather  than  consumers    of  artifacts,  information    and   content;
expressing   and   designing   for themselves    as  well as   their fellow    beings. From    Open   Source     Software to
Wikipedia, from Blogs to remixed videos on YouTube, people finally have an opportunity to participate in the
process of expression and they are doing so in large numbers. This revolution is for the people by the people
aided largely by recent advances in computing technology. Aided by advances in computing the relationship
between   people   and   computers    can   help us  move    towards    more   than  the  sum   of   its parts  ­ collective
intelligence. Are we finally taking a step towards becoming a convivial society (Illich, 1973) aided in large part
by  convivial   computing?     Illich proposed   the idea   of "tools   for conviviality"   and   defined   the  concept  of
conviviality as:

          [ ] autonomous and creative intercourse among persons, and the intercourse of persons with
          their environments;     and  this  in contrast  with  the  conditioned   response    of  persons  to   the
          demands made upon them by others, and by a man-made environment. I consider conviviality
          to be individual freedom realized in personal interdependence and, as such, an intrinsic ethical
          value. I believe that, in any society, as conviviality is reduced below a certain level, no amount
          of industrial productivity can effectively satisfy the needs it creates among society's members
          (p. 11.)

          There are six primary characteristics of convivial computing that I want to discuss and highlight in this
talk: access  to  tools, ability  for self-expression, ability  to interact and   form   relationships   with  other people,

                                                                                                                                 3-33
         ability to use personal energy creatively, ability to personalize the environment, and opportunity to enrich the
         environment.  Together,  these   characteristics enhance   a person's  self-image and   make  it possible for him  to
         "invest the world with his meaning (Illich)." I will use the concept of conviviality to reflect on several ICT4D
         projects I have been involved with and a social innovation competition I helped organized.

       Paper 4: Turning mobile phones into teaching machines in Turkey
                  Among all technological devices available in our era, mobile technologies including mobile phones and
         pocket computers are the most popular ones, and they have an important place particularly in young people's
         lives. In all over the world ­except Canada­ the mobile phones outnumber the personal computers with 5 to 10
         times the total number of mobile phones as compared to the number of personal computers. With its widespread
         use and its features and functions such as mobility, reachability, localization, and personalization, mobile phone
         technology may lead to positive effects in learning environments. Our first and foremost aim in this study has
         been to make use of this profound interest in mobile phones in education, and contribute to the efforts to help in
         making these mobile technologies widespread in all spheres of education.
                  The push aspect of mobile phone technology may break the motivational barriers to learning for many
         students, and it may free the learner from studying in front of a computer screen. By the push aspect, we mean
         that the instructional materials will be sent to the students via mobile phones. They will be passive in the case of
         initiating their study or practice since they will not have to visit a WEB or WAP page in order to study or
         practice course contents. They will only read, listen, and reply (in SMS quiz questions) by using their mobile
         phones. On the other hand, the web pages developed for the instructional purposes use the pull aspect of web
         technology. This requires learners to visit web pages to study the contents. However, most of the learners are not
         willing  to use these   web  sites to enhance    their foreign  language  skills because  of their  lack  of intrinsic
         motivation.
                  The  mobile  phones   have   great potential  to provide  supplemental   practices for  students outside the
         school. Mobile phone learning is a young discipline that is gaining more and more attention because of its
         promises for education. Therefore, the major aim of this study was to investigate the potentials and effectiveness
         of using mobile phones in foreign language education. More specifically, this study investigated how the use of
         multimedia   messages   (MMS)    and  SMS   quizzes   via mobile   phones affects the  students' English  vocabulary
         acquisition.

       Weaving ICT4D Innovations into Everyday Life for Learning and Development

                  The most profound technologies are those that disappear. They weave themselves into the fabric of
                  everyday life until they are indistinguishable from it. (Weiser, 1991, p.94)
                  
                  Despite the appeal of Mark Weiser's vision for human-computer interaction in the 21st century there is,
         at this current moment, a significant divide between learning technology developments and their resonance with
         the everyday   settings in  which  they  might   be deployed,   particularly  where  multi-national  participants are
         involved  and  focal  points for intervention.   We believe  that  working   out the  significance of the  social and
         cultural is a central problematic   for the learning   sciences if the divide is  to be bridged. However,    weaving
         technical developments into everyday settings ultimately depends on working out what the `social and cultural'
         consists of and what it means for ICT4D. As a first measure in what has to be a long-term consideration of these
         issues we have invited participation from interdisciplinary researchers who have experience in the field working
         across the globe, from Africa to India to Turkey.      The goal of this symposium is to enable themes of generic
         purchase to the developers of ICT4D systems to be initially identified and articulated. Moreover, it is to address
         squarely the theme of the conference, which is "to broaden the geographical, cultural, and intellectual scope of
         the learning sciences community, while maintaining its focus on the innovative consideration of learning as it
         occurs in authentic contexts."
                  If as learning scientists and technologists we take the vision of Mark Weiser seriously, then it is clear
         that the ultimate challenge for our field is to weave or situate new technologies into the very fabric of everyday
         life. Despite a great deal of impressive work developing and evaluating prototype systems, many researchers
         will no doubt recognize that ICT4D demonstrations are nevertheless very `distinguishable'. Such systems have
         yet to disappear or become an `unremarkable' feature of everyday life (Tolmie et al., 2002) and this is, we
         suggest, largely as a result of how the emphasis that been placed on the development of learning technology
         systems.
                  Although some attempts have been made to understand the `fabric of everyday life' of target users,
         emphasis to date has primarily been placed on demonstrating theoretical principles from computer science and
         the capabilities of new ubiquitous technologies. Given the nascent state of the field and the immaturity of these
         new technologies, this has been an understandable first phase of growth. Nonetheless, with the movement of
         computing research away from the workplace and its diversification into novel areas of everyday life, the time is

3-3
ripe for  serious reflection on the nature  of everyday  life and  its importance   to the ongoing  development     of
ICT4D systems.
          What we are suggesting then is that there is a distinct and pressing need for the learning sciences to
reconsider its priorities in order for the field to develop, at least in terms of design and development, along the
path envisioned by Weiser. This will involve rethinking current development strategies, which primarily focus
on developing more novel, scalable and reliable solutions, to incorporate a complementary strand of research
that is   concerned to  understand   the   social and  social character  of everyday     life. The  purpose    of  this
complementary strand of work will be to inform the development of technologies that resonate with the ordinary
activities that lend a setting its `everyday' nature. This principle should resonate clearly with those conducting
design experiments and design-based research.

          Of particular concern   from our  own   perspective is the resonance   of technological  systems    with the
social or cultural organization of ordinary activities, for reasons best articulated by the sociologist Harvey Sacks
(1992):

          ... it's the source for the failures of technocratic dreams that if only we introduced some fantastic new
          communication machine the world will be transformed, where what happens is that the object is made
          at home in the world that has whatever organization it already has.

          As the organizer and colleagues have emphasized in previous work, we are not trying to scaremonger
in delivering such quotes but draw attention to the salience of social or cultural organization to be the pre-
eminent challenge to ICT4D writ large. Without exception new learning technologies are `made at home' or
`woven into' everyday life by situating them into a `world' (or more prosaically a setting) that has whatever
organization it already has (Crabtree et al., 2003; Gonzalez, Moll, & Amanti, 2005). Technology's purchase
relies  on its capacity  to  be   situated in  and  amongst   that organization.    We  are    suggesting, then,   that
understanding the socially organized character of a setting and its activities is a matter of central importance to
the development of ICT4D for, as Weiser      (1991) himself observed, the learning and computing sciences should
be concerned with making "machines fit the human environment, instead of forcing humans to enter theirs".
          This does not mean that the developers of systems for ICT4D should simply be constrained to design
for existing organizations of ordinary activities in everyday settings, though there may well be great profit from
doing so. Rather, we would suggest that understanding the social organization of everyday settings and ordinary
activities provides a basis and rich insights for thinking about the design of new technologies, new forms of
activity, and  new  forms of  organization  that  are rooted  in and   resonate with the everyday   life   of learners,
teachers, an community members.

References
Aikenhead, G.S. (2001). Students' ease in crossing cultural borders into school science.         Science Education,
          85(2) 180-188.
Aikenhead, G. S., Jegede, O.J. (1999). Cross-cultural science education: A cognitive explanation of cultural
          phenomenon.   Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 36(3), 269-287.
Alessi, S., & Trollip, S. (2000). Multimedia for learning: Methods and development (3rd Edition). New York:
          Allyn & Bacon.
Alexander, B. (2006) A new wave of innovation for teaching and learning?, EDUCAUSE, 41(2), 33­44.
Bodker, S. (1989). A human activity approach to user interfaces. Human-Computer Interaction, 4, 171-195.
Carter, L. (2004). Thinking differently about cultural diversity: Using a postcolonial theory to (Re)read science
          education. Science Education, 88(6), 819-836.
Crabtree, A. et al. (2003) "Finding a place for UbiComp in the home", Proceedings of UbiComp `03, pp. 208-
          226, Seattle: Springer.
Curry, J, & Kenney, M. (2006). Digital divide or digital development. First Monday, 11(3). Retrieved July 1,
          2007 from http://www.firstmonday.org/issues/issue11_3/curry/index.html
Dzama, E.N.N. & Osborne, J.F. (1999).       Poor performance in science among African students: An alternative
          explanation to African worldview thesis.    Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 36(3), 387-405.
Friedman, T.L. (April 6, 2007). Cellphones, maxi-pads, and other life-changing tools. New York Times.
Gay, G., & Hembrooke, H. (2004). Activity-centered design: An ecological approach to designing smart tools
          and usable systems. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Gonzalez, N., Moll, L. C.     &   Amanti,   C. (2005). Funds   of  knowledge:   Theorizing  practices in   household,
          communities, and classrooms. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Eribaum Associates, Publishers.
Giulio, J., Antti, O., & Antti, S. (2007). Active construction of experience through mobile media: a field study
          with implications for recording and sharing. Personal Ubiquitous Computing, 11(4), 215-234.
Hammersley, M., & Atkinson, P. (1983).      Ethnography, principles in practice.  London, New York:        Tavistock.

                                                                                                                          3-3
        ICTD (2007). http://research.microsoft.com/workshops/ictd2007/program.htm
        Jones, C. (2004). Network theory and description­The Lancaster ALT masters programme. In L. Dirckinck­
                 Holmfeld, B. Lindstro¨m, B. M. Svendsen, & M. Ponti (Eds.), Conditions for productive learning in
                 networked learning environments. Aalborg: Aalborg University/Kaleidoscope.
        Jones, M. & Marsden, G. (2006).     Mobile interaction design.   West Sussex, England:   John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
        Kawagley, A.O., Norris-Tull, D. & Norris-Tull, R. (1998).        The indigenous worldview of Yupiaq culture: Its
                 scientific nature and relevance to the practice and teaching of science. Journal of Research in Science
                 Teaching, 35(2), 133-144.
        Leach,  J., Ahmed,   A.,  Makalima,   S., &   Power,  T. (2006). DEEP   IMPACT:   An    investigation of  the use of
                 information and communication technologies for teacher education in the global south. Retrieved July
                 27, 2007 from http://www.open.ac.uk/deep/Public/web/publications/pdfs/ReportFeb2006.pdf
        Miller, D. & Slater, D. (2000).   The internet: An ethnographic approach.  Oxford, United Kingdom: Berg.
        O'Reilly, T. (2005). What is Web 2.0: Design patterns and business models for the next generation software.
                 Retrieved   July   27, 2007  from  http://www.oreillynet.com/pub/a/oreilly/tim/news/2005/09/30/what-is-
                 web-20.html
        Roschelle,   J. (1996). Designing  for  cognitive communication:    Epistemic  fidelity or  mediating  collaborating
                 inquiry. In D. L. Day & D. K. Kovacs (Eds.), Computers, Communication & Mental Models (pp. 13-
                 25). London: Taylor & Francis.
        Rogers,  Y.  (2003). The    Periscope:  supporting  a computer   enhanced  field trip   for children. Personal  and
                 Ubiquitous Computing, 7(3-4), 227-233.
        Rogoff,  B.  (1991). Apprenticeship    in thinking: Cognitive development  in  social context.   New  York:   Oxford
                 University Press.
        Sacks, H. (1992) "A single instance of a phone-call opening", Lectures on Conversation (ed. Jefferson, G.),
                 Volume II, pp. 542-553, Oxford: Blackwell.
        Sharp,  H.,  Rogers, Y.,  Preece,  J. (2007). Interaction design: Beyond  human-computer      interaction  (2nd ed).
                 Hobiken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons.
        Snively, G.  &   Corsiglia,  J. (2001).     Discovering  indigenous  science: Implications   for  science education.
                 Science Education, 85(1), 6-34.
        Tessmer, M. (1993). Planning and conducting formative evaluations: improving the quality of education and
                 training. Philadelphia: Kogan Page.
        Tinker,  R., Horwitz,   P., Bannasch,   S., Staudt,  C., &  Vincent, T. (2007).  Teachers    uses of  highly  mobile
                 technologies: Probes and podcasts. Educational Technology,47 (3), 16-21.
        Tolmie, P. et al. (2002). Unremarkable computing, Proceedings of CHI `02, pp. 399-406, Minneapolis: ACM
                 Press.
        Weiser, M. (1991) "The computer for the 21st century" Scientific American", vol. 265 (3), pp. 94­104.

3-3
