              Joint and Individual Knowledge Elaboration in CSCL
          Ning DING, GION, Grote Rozenstraat 3, 9701 BG, Rijksuniversteit Groningen, the Netherlands,
                         N.Ding@rug.nl Phone: 0031-50-363-6389 Fax: 0031-50-363-6670

          Abstract:   This case study   aims  to  illustrate the sequential  process  of  joint and  individual
          knowledge   elaboration  in   computer-supported      collaborative  learning   (CSCL).   Six  Dutch
          secondary   school  students  (three    males,  three   females)   participated in    the three-week
          experiment.  They   were  paired  based    on self-selection.  Each  dyad  was   asked    to  work  on
          moderately-structured   problems    concerning        Newtonian    mechanics.   With   the    help  of
          elaboration values, students'  online   interactions   were categorized   and   sequentially  plotted.
          Three dyads showed three different patterns of individual knowledge elaboration.

Knowledge Elaboration in CSCL
          Group is the learning agent in collaborative learning (Suthers, 2006). Problem solving process can be
regarded  as  a joint process  of  knowledge     elaboration    made  up  of numerous    meaningful     artifacts, such  as
utterances, visual representations, etc. In computer-supported collaborative learning (CSCL), verbal and visual
interchanges in students' interaction are of ultimate importance for students' joint knowledge elaboration. To
solve a problem collaboratively, highly elaborative messages are important for group success. As Van Boxtel
(2000) posited that joint knowledge elaboration is a process within which all participants should contribute to
the knowledge   elaboration   verbally  and  propositionally.   Collaborative  learning  involves   individual  cognitive
elaboration, and will not reduce it (Stahl, Koschmann & Suthers, 2006). But there exists a qualitative difference
in individual involvement. Each person has unique situated prior knowledge, and their knowledge elaboration
may vary in the degree of cognitive engagement.

Methodology
          Six tenth  graders (three  females,  three  males)    from  a  Dutch secondary   school    participated   in   the
synchronous CSCL experiment. Students were paired based on self-selection. The scope was limited to average
students. Students   were  spread  into different  rooms     to avoid face-to-face  contact. The    content  of    students'
interaction messages was analyzed, and each was endowed an integral, -1, 0 or +1. This was roughly in line with
Kumpulainen     and  Mutanen's  (1999)   three    cognitive  processing   modes  that acknowledged       that procedural
processing  referred  to the routine execution    of task without    improving  the ideas  (value=0).   Interpretative   or
exploratory processing referred to students' deep engagement in problem solving activity (value=+1), while off-
task activity referred to those absent-minded activities or off-task social talk (value=-1). We aggregated numbers
of messages one by one sequentially, and plotted the sum to illustrate the process of joint knowledge elaboration.
Then we added up the numbers of each individual to trace the process of individual knowledge elaboration in
CSCL.

Joint Knowledge Elaboration in CSCL

          Sandy-Carol Dyad                     Peter-Henry Dyad                      Ralf-Jenny Dyad
                                Figure 1. Joint Knowledge Elaboration in CSCL.
          Let's take one problem as an example. Sandy-Carol dyad spent 15"34' on it. Their joint knowledge
elaboration  (Figure  1) showed   that  the girls almost  hadn't   talked anything  off  task.  But  at the  last  stage of
problem solving, they stopped at a plateau, without any advancement of knowledge elaboration. Henry-Peter
dyad spent 19"07' on the problem. The joint knowledge elaboration process showed that only at the later stage
of collaboration boys seemed to talk about something off the task, and the curve dropped. But they came back to
the topic soon. In comparison with the other two dyads, Ralf-Jenny dyad was the most productive dyad. They

                                                                                                                               3-3
       spent more than one hour (1'05") on the problem, exchanging 369 messages. The graph in Figure 1 showed that
       there was almost no off-task interaction.

      Individual Knowledge Elaboration in CSCL

                 Sandy-Carol Dyad                    Peter-Henry Dyad                    Ralf-Jenny Dyad
                                   Figure 2. Individual Knowledge Elaboration in CSCL.
                When we added up the elaboration values for individuals and plotted them sequentially (Figure 2), we
       found three patterns of individual knowledge elaboration process in CSCL.
       Pattern 1: Parallel Knowledge Elaboration
                Sandy  and Carol's curves  showed    a   substantial gap. Sandy seemed   to excel Carol  in knowledge
       elaboration, and guided her from beginning till end. It looked like that Carol followed closely all the time. It is
       noticeable that the curves kept roughly parallel.
       Pattern 2: Cross Knowledge Elaboration
                Henry and Peter's curves were entangled most of the time.     During the first thirteen minutes, there was
       no substantial gap between their elaboration curves. It indicated that both Henry and Peter contributed to the
       final success, pushing the problem solving process in turn.
       Pattern 3: Divergent Knowledge Elaboration
                There was a gap between Ralf and Jenny's curves, and the gap tended to get larger and larger. Their
       individual elaboration process seemed to be two divergent tracks.

      Conclusion:
                Method like elaboration value enables us to visualize the joint and individual knowledge elaboration
       process  in CSCL.  The  difference found   in Ralf  and  Jenny  dyad   helps to explain why group  success  and
       individual achievement may be not synchronous.

      References:
       Kumpulainen, K., & Mutanen, M. (1999). The situated dynamics of peer group interaction: An introduction to
                an analytic framework. Learning and Instruction, 9 (5), 449-473.
       Stahl, G., Koschmann, T., & Suthers, D. (2006). Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning: An historical
                perspective. In R. K. Sawyer (Ed.). (2006). Cambridge Handbook of the Learning Sciences. Cambridge,
                UK: Cambridge University Press.
       Suthers, D.  D. (2006). Technology  affordances    for intersubjective meaning   making: A  research agenda for
                CSCL. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 1(3), 315-337.
       Van Boxtel, C. (2000). Collaborative concept learning. Collaborative learning task, student interaction, and the
                learning of physics concepts. Doctoral Dissertation, Utrecht, The Netherlands: Print Partners Ipskamp.

3-
