                Knowing and Throwing Mudballs, Hearts, Pies, and Flowers:
                            A Connective Ethnography of Gaming Practices
                               Deborah A. Fields, Yasmin B. Kafai, University of California, Los Angeles
                                           2331 Moore Hall 95121, Los Angeles, CA 900095
                                           Email: stareyes@gmail.com, kafai@gseis.ucla.edu

                 Abstract: Little is known how young players learn to participate in various activities in virtual
                 worlds. We use a new integrative approach called connective ethnography that focuses on how
                 gaming expertise spreads across a network of youth at an after school club that simultaneously
                 participates   in a virtual world   Whyville.net.    To   trace youth participation   in online  and  offline
                 social  contexts,   we  draw   on  multiple   sources   of information:    observations,  interviews, video
                 recordings, online tracking and chat data, and hundreds of hours of play in Whyville ourselves.
                 One    particular   game practice  ­  the throwing     of projectiles and  its social uses  and    nuances  ­
                 became     the focal  point  of   our analyses.  The    discussions   address  methodological      challenges
                 underlying the synthesis of diverse types of data that allowed us to follow youth across multiple
                 spaces     and times  as  well  as   initial  insights  into  how  this  practice  was   used   to negotiate
                 relationships in multiple spaces through play.

       Introduction
                 Over two decades ago, Marjorie Goodwin (1985) argued in her paper, `The serious side of jump rope,' that
         even game play such as jump rope is not divorced from everyday experience but is, in fact, a continuation of it that
         allows participants to discover how social order works. In recent years the idea of continuity between games and
         everyday experience has been expanded into the realm of online games and virtual worlds. Virtual playgrounds in
         the form of video games have become the new play spaces for peer culture to develop as parents and society exert
         more control over the places that are considered `safe' for children's play (Jenkins, 1998). Yet little of the growing
         research on gaming has been applied to how children learn to "legitimately" participate (Lave & Wenger, 1991) in
         virtual worlds, much less how they use play in these worlds to explore relationships and social order. How young
         players come to understand both the explicit and tacit ways through which to participate successfully in these virtual
         worlds is of interest not only to gaming researchers but also to learning scientists.
                 Our studies of an after school club where twenty 10-12 year-olds came regularly to play in a virtual world
         called Whyville.net provided a window into how players helped each other to navigate the geographical intricacies
         of the site and how the participants subsequently appeared to become peer teachers and experts in their own right
         (Ching & Kafai, in press). Knowledge important to being an insider in the virtual world that included both game
         mechanics and navigation of relationships unmistakably spread throughout the club, but how it did so was difficult
         to discern. Like others interested in the growing field of learning in gaming and online spaces, we began to realize
         that these spaces   (online  and  offline) could   not  be  studied   separately (Leander,  in   press; Stevens,  Satwicz, &
         McCarthy, in press). In previous work (Fields & Kafai, 2007) we developed an approach of connective ethnography
         (Leander   &  McKim,      2003;  Hine,  2000)    that integrates   multiple   data sources  combining      online and  offline
         interactions. As   we  will argue in  this paper,  this allowed    us to re-establish  the continuity   between   the different
         spaces and extend the connection between game and everyday life deemed so important by Goodwin. As a focal
         point for  tracing the  tweens'  learning  across    multiple  spaces   we chose   to study one   particular type  of  gaming
         practice, throwing projectiles, a popular practice in Whyville and, as it turned out, connected with social navigation
         of both the club and Whyville ­ thus a good prototype for looking at play as learning and participation.
                 In this study our goal is to conduct a connective ethnography that focuses on how the gaming expertise of
         projectile throwing spread across a network of youth at an after school club that simultaneously participated in a
         multi-player virtual world. Our questions regard the tweens' learning and social navigation through play in the club
         and Whyville as well as methodologies for studying them. How did club members learn knowledge about projectiles
         important to socializing on Whyville and how did this spread throughout the club? Secondarily, how could we trace
         this learning across   both virtual and   physical   spaces, and   between  the  club  community   and   the larger   Whyville
         community? Finally, how did club members differ in their uses of projectile knowledge and how could we trace this
         complexity    with the available  set  of  data?  In  order  to answer   our  questions,   we drew  on   multiple  sources of
         information: observations (field notes), interviews, video recordings, online tracking and chat data, and hundreds of
         hours of play on Whyville ourselves. These different, complementary data sources embody the multi-modal aspects

1-
of  connective    ethnography,    and  allowed  us  to  trace players'  activities  and   learning  across  physical    and virtual
spaces. Since     this type   of methodology    is relatively new,   we  hope   that this  study  will   inform  future  efforts at
researching and analyzing play and learning across blurred virtual and physical spaces.

Background
         Despite arguments concerning the importance of children's play for social (Piaget & Inhelder, 1969) and
cognitive (Vygotsky, 1978) development there is only very limited research on children's interactions in play spaces
(e.g., Goodwin 2006). The play spaces studied have largely included playgrounds, which serve as a laboratory for
understanding peer culture. In particular Goodwin (1985) has argued that participation in play needs to be seen as
continuation of everyday practices that let children position themselves within a group. Video game and virtual
worlds  have   extended     children's   play  spaces and   occupy   significant portions   of   their  leisure time (Lenhardt   &
Madden,  2005).     Only    recently has   our attention turned   to them   as spaces   valuable    for learning,  recapturing   the
earlier arguments made about children's play. Researchers have begun to illustrate the complexities of learning how
to play these games and their collaborative nature ­ indicative of rich learning environments (Gee, 2003). Most of
the research has focused on interactions in virtual spaces paying little attention to the intricate connections between
online and offline interactions situating most play, particularly within groups of children (Leander, in press).
         Our research on gaming expertise, in particular insider knowledge, draws from two distinct bodies of work
that illustrate very different approaches of what is involved in becoming a gamer. One thread of studies has focused
largely on online play, most prevalent perhaps the first person accounts in which researchers use their own learning
experiences    and  reflections   in conjunction   with  ethnographic   studies  (e.g.,   Steinkuehler,   2006;  Taylor,  2006)  to
document various social, economic, and cultural practices in virtual worlds. A second group of researchers have
turned their attention to the physical spaces in which game play is situated, focusing mostly on gaming clubs or
Internet cafés (e.g., Beavis, Nixon & Atkinson, 2005; Swalwell, 2003) and to a lesser extent homes and dormitories
(e.g., Lin, in press; Stevens, Satwicz, & McCarthy, in press). In these studies researchers try to capture how the
configurations and dynamics in the physical space situate access and participation to game play, including settings
of homes or dormitories where players are often alone but in contact with others. Researchers here have used mostly
observational     methods,   often  supported  by  video  recording   and ethnographic     notes,   to  capture  the comings   and
goings, interactions and conversations among participants while involved in online gaming.
         Each of these approaches has informed us a great deal on what players have to learn in order to master the
complexities of the social game spaces. But at the same time, the research focus and choice of methods have led to
an  artificial separation   between    the online  and  offline (real or  virtual). Many    now   argue   that  we  need  different
approaches     to capture   the  complexities  of  participation. Proposals    such  as   connective   ethnography   (Hine,  2000;
Leander & McKim, 2003) have started to map out new strategies for researching learning across multiple spaces and
times and include traditional qualitative approaches such as observation, field notes and interviews but may also
incorporate quantitative approaches such as log files of participants' online movements (Fields & Kafai, 2007). The
goal is to build comprehensive accounts or "thick descriptions" in Clifford Geertz's sense (1973) of what youth do
as they navigate and participate in virtual & physical worlds.
         In    this paper,  we   focus on  one  particular  game   practice called   "throwing    projectiles"   to trace learning
across spaces amongst a group of tweens in an after school club. While throwing projectiles involves mechanics
such as selection and typing computer commands, more importantly, there are multiple social purposes and nuances
attached to    the  act of  throwing   a projectile that  are not  accessible  at   first sight. It is  a very  traceable   type of
knowledge, easily identified in chat lines, and a common practice in the club and Whyville that could not be learned
outside  of Whyville.      Further,  throwing   projectiles involves  crossing   different     boundaries  that  are important   to
connective ethnography; not only does throwing projectiles facilitate a type of virtual `touching' between virtual
characters or avatars on Whyville, it represents passing between outsider and insider status in both the physically
and virtually located communities of our study.

Research Settings and Approach
         Whyville.net      is a  virtual world  with   over 1.2   million registered    players  at  the  time  of  the study  that
encourages youth ages 8-16 to play casual science games in order to earn a virtual salary (in `clams'), which youth
can then spend on buying and designing parts for their avatars (virtual characters), projectiles to throw at other users,
and other goods. The general consensus among Whyvillians (the citizens of the virtual community of Whyville) is
that earning a good salary and thus procuring a large number of clams to spend on face parts or other goods is
essential for fully participating in the Whyville community (Kafai & Giang, 2007). Social interactions with others
are the  highlight     for most  Whyvillians   and  consist   primarily  of ymailing      (the Whyville   version   of  email) and

                                                                                                                                     1-
         chatting on the site where users are visible to each other on the screen.
                  In early 2005 we set up an after school club where 20 youth in the 4th-6th grades came to play on Whyville
         for an hour most days after school.     Most youth were new to Whyville, though one had played the year before the
         club started. They distributed themselves among 10 computers, often sharing a computer or wandering around the
         room talking to others. While the club began as a quiet place, it quickly became loud and lively as participants
         learned the site and began to shout advice to each other, arrange parties on Whyville, chat, throw virtual projectiles
         at one another, and critique each other's looks.

        On Throwing Projectiles
                  Beyond chatting and ymailing, one key way to socialize on Whyville is by throwing projectiles. Projectiles
         and face parts (with which one can assemble one's avatar or online representation) form the two main types of
         products for  sale  on  Whyville.   The Projectile   Shoppe offers  more  than  45 types   of projectiles for sale ­  from
         mudballs to hearts to Frisbees ­ all of which can be thrown at other avatars on Whyville. Projectiles range in price
         from 1 clam (smileys, winks) to 2 clams (mudballs, snowballs) and on up to 15 clams (maggots, spiders). Throwing
         projectiles involves knowledge of the mechanics of throwing as well as how to use throwing to achieve various
         social goals. Some of the mechanics of throwing include typing the actual command to throw. Players can throw to a
         person  by name    as in "throw  mudball    oriahsiri" (or "throw  [projectile] [username]")   or players can  throw  in a
         direction designated by degrees in a circle as in "throw heart 90" (or "throw [projectile] [degree]") (see Figure 1).
         Yet  there are also   social nuances   to  throwing. One   of the  most obvious    is that different projectiles might be
         interpreted differently. Throwing a piece of garlic at someone might result in a different reaction than throwing a
         Frisbee. And throwing a heart from a boy to a girl will probably be construed differently than from a boy to a boy
         (in the club this usually resulted in several minutes of convulsive giggling).

                                             Figure 1. Throwing a Red Paintball on Whyville.

        Data and Analytical Methods
                  In order to study the tweens' activities in the "multiple, simultaneous space-time contexts" (Leander &
         McKim, 2003) of the club and Whyville, we gathered and analyzed numerous types of data aimed to track the youth
         in the club over multiple spaces (physically in the club as well as virtually over multiple spaces on Whyville).
         Ethnographic field notes were recorded daily to capture the overall activity of the club while video tapes focused on
         small groups of youth clustered at tables with 2-3 computers throughout the nine weeks the club took place in the
         winter of 2005. Numedeon, the owner and creator company of Whyville, gathered click-level and chat data on each
         club participant.  This  means   that every  time  a club  member   clicked to  go to  a new   space on   Whyville it  was
         recorded, in addition to every word they typed in chat or whisper bubbles in public spaces. In addition, participants
         were interviewed individually at the end of the club about their learning preferences (e.g., "When you want to learn
         something on Whyville what do you do?"). While we report on our analytical methods in this section, we wish to
         note to  that these methods     are really part of our  findings. Tracking  and  chat  data has   generally been  used for
         summing up behaviors of large numbers of players rather than close analysis of a small group of young people, nor
         has it been combined with other forms of qualitative data to understand learning.
                  After determining that projectile-throwing was a type of insider knowledge largely learned only from other
         people1, we   set out  first to understand   how   the community   as a  whole   learned   to throw  projectiles (how  the
         knowledge spread) and then how individuals learned person-to-person. We began by selecting out club members'
         chat data from the larger database and searching for the times they typed "throw" in their chat. These were manually
         counted and organized by username and date to identify the first time each participant threw projectiles and how
         often they threw projectiles. Based on this data we contextually analyzed both the online tracking/chat data and the
         video data to flesh out the context(s) in which children discovered that throwing existed and how to throw. To do
         this we searched all of our data just before and after the times identified in our initial "throw" search and followed
         the activities and chat until we felt we had reached as close to the beginning of an individual's learning to throw as

1-
the data allowed. In addition, based on trends in the initial "throw" search, we used video and field notes to analyze
club-wide events that may have influenced members to learn about throwing.
          Finally, during the process of searching through the breadth of our data to understand throwing and how
youth   learned to throw, we   determined  several social  uses  of  throwing (see Table   1). In an additional step, we
identified four socially specific ways of throwing visible in chat based on whom club members threw to and what
they threw with. We made these categories mutually exclusive and calculated percentages for how much each club
member    used  each of  these methods   (see Table   2).  Then  we  further  analyzed the  tracking  and video  data  to
understand how members used projectiles in different ways and how they learned this cultural knowledge.

Findings
          Our questions about how club members learned the insider knowledge of throwing projectiles involved
individual learning as well as community-wide learning across the virtual and physical social worlds in which club
members simultaneously participated. In addition, through this analysis we realized that learning to throw included
(not surprisingly)  understanding  the mechanics   of throwing    as well  as the social purposes   one could   pursue in
throwing projectiles. While our analyses were iterative, in order to illustrate projectile throwing more thoroughly we
begin with an individual case study of a girl learning how to throw a projectile then follow with a community-wide
analysis.

Individual Learning: Isabel Learns to Throw
          While we know from chat records when each club member first threw a projectile, the connection to how
they learned  was  not always  obvious.   However,   there are  a few  instances  where  we    have extended details  that
demonstrate the process by which some club members learned to throw projectiles. One of these is the case of
Isabel2, who learned during the fourth week of the club. In the following description of the video interaction (see
Figure 2: the transcript is shortened due to space limitations), we can see how she learned some of the mechanics
and social nuances of throwing projectiles while interacting with club members.
          Isabel's interest in throwing projectiles appeared to start while she was sitting next to Cole at neighboring
computers when Cole organized a throwing party by yelling, "Okay you guys, meet me at the Beach, no, at the Pool
Party!" Taking this invitation to heart, Isabel started paying attention to Cole's activities of shopping for Projectiles,
expressing wonderment about the various types of projectiles for sale: "Mudball, Red Paintball, Chocolate?" Several
minutes later, after both watching Cole throw projectiles at others and being the intended recipient of a projectile
herself, Isabel did her own shopping for projectiles for the very first time. With projectiles in her satchel and some
knowledge of how to throw them, Isabel faced the social dilemma of deciding who her target should be, made
evident in her question: "Who am I supposed to be throwing this at?" Cole directed her to throw at a friend in the
club that Isabel initially started to do when she said, "No I'm doing this at somebody else," outrightly differentiating
her activity from his. One interpretation of this is that having achieved some confidence in her ability to throw and
in at least one social use of throwing (i.e., a playful throwing war with club friends), Isabel decided to pursue a
different social purpose in her own activity of throwing projectiles. From chat records we can tell that she initiated a
friendship with  a  Whyvillian  through   projectile throwing.   Though   she did  not actually   succeed in throwing   a
projectile that day, visible in the incorrect spelling and/or syntax displayed in chat records, Isabel did experiment
with and learn different social navigation strategies through her efforts.
          Interestingly enough, from chat records we can see that Isabel followed up on her learning in the club
setting across  various   spaces. First, she  asked  questions    of non-club  members     in  Whyville  to  solidify her
understanding of the mechanics of throwing. Then she proceeded to apply them back with Cole while they were in
their separate homes but in a shared virtual space on Whyville. Isabel hit Cole with a projectile, resulting in a short
and  friendly   throwing  war  between   them, and   from   that  time threw   projectiles at  both  club members     and
Whyvillians, trying out several social uses of projectile throwing to navigate relationships, some successful and
some not.

Community-Wide: Different Social Purposes in Throwing
          As Isabel's case demonstrates, there is more to learn about the insider knowledge of throwing projectiles
than simply the game mechanics of knowing how to throw them. One must consider who to throw at, what to throw
at them, and what purpose one is aiming for in throwing. As Goodwin (2006) argues, children's play is a space in
which they negotiate relationships of inclusion and exclusion.      As a first step of laying out what different purposes
club  members    might   have  for throwing    projectiles at  different  people,  we  created    a typology  of throws

                                                                                                                           1-
        (differentiating    primarily  between      inclusive  and exclusive     purposes,   and  also  between throws at club     members
        (known in the `real'/physical world) and throws at Whyvillians.

              Cole:       Four pies, four mudballs, four ­                            Cole shops for projectiles, listing different kinds
              Isabel:     No wait, go down? No get, um, ((pointing at                 for different purposes.
                          projectiles on the screen))
              Cole:       I need to get one pair of flowers for my girlfriend, a
                          kiss for my girlfriend.
                          Oh I already have some hearts.
              Isabel:     Purple paintball, mudball, red paintball.                   Isabel engages in exploring available projectiles
                          Chocolate?
              .....       .....                                                       .....
              Cole:       I splatted the person behind you. I tried to splat you but  Cole throws something at Isabel but misses.
                          I splatted the person behind you.
                          Throw pie ((typing))
                          Webster where are you? '
                          Yoda ((typing Webster's username))                          After watching the projectile battle, Isabel
                          Webster - go inside the mall to the food court!             decides to get some projectiles of her own.
              Isabel:     Okay I want to get something.
              .....       .....[Isabel goes to Projectile Shoppe].....                .....
              Isabel:     How you spell throw again?                                  After watching Cole throw projectiles at club
                          T-h- ((looking over at Finn's screen))                      members, Isabel asks for help on Mechanics of
                          T-h-r. ((goes to her own screen))                           throwing.
              .....       .....                                                       .....
              Isabel:     Who am I supposed to be throwing this at?                   Isabel asks for Social instruction on who to
              Cole:       Boom. Pied you with your own pie.                           throw at.
                          Bluwave, okay?                                              Cole tells her to throw at a club member.
              Isabel:     Okay. Well no wait. what's her name?
              Cole:       Bluwave.
              Isabel:     No I'm doing this at somebody else.                         Isabel determines to do her own thing.
                                                          Figure 2. Isabel Learns to Throw.

                    Two practices of inclusion with club members (we never observed practices of exclusion using projectiles
        between club members) include throwing as a way to show attention to a club friend or as part of a throwing war
        (similar to a snowball fight, as in the example of Isabel and Cole above). Inclusive throws to Whyvillians could
        include     similar purposes   with      the addition  of  using    projectiles to   initiate a friendship (some  basic     level    of
        camaraderie or friendship was already taken for granted in the club). In addition there are throws using symbolic
        objects such as hearts and kisses to members of the same or the opposite gender. Exclusive purposes of throwing
        projectiles include throwing things at avatars that visibly stood out, such as observed incidents of club members
        throwing at avatars who dressed like a ketchup bottle or carrot ­ standing out because they did not have the standard
        face with     eyes, nose,    hair, etc.  In  addition, as  we    described   earlier   with the Whyvillian  who  offended     Ulani,
        projectiles can be thrown in retaliation for an offense or insult.
                    We can apply our typology of different social purposes of throwing to our chat analysis of club members'
        throws.     Broadly  speaking,     after identifying   every   time a club   member     correctly threw a  projectile,  we   divided
        members'      throws    into four  mutually    exclusive   categories    identifiable  in chat. We  can think of  throws     to   club
        members, discernable by the inclusion of a club/school friend's name in the throw command, as generally inclusive
        and either a show of attention or part of a throwing war (or possibly flirting or gender/homophobic play though we
        have not observed many incidences of these so far). We divided throws to Whyvillians into three categories: throws
        with gendered       objects   (including     only hearts   or   kisses), throws     to Whyvillians  by  name,  and   throws       in a
        direction/degree. While each of these types of throws could be part of multiple social purposes, they are observable
        by the words used and easily counted. We divided each club member's throws into these four categories, calculated
        percentages to look for preferences, and color-coded general preferences among club members in terms of where the
        highest percentage of throws lay. Light colored boxes show either a strong preference for throwing to club members
        or for throwing across all four categories. Dark colored boxes show a strong preference for throwing to Whyvillians
        by name or throwing by degree. We can interpret the latter type of throw as slightly less targeted than throwing by
        name. If someone threw a projectile at 85 degrees and it hit someone, that person would not necessarily be able to
        tell whether the throw was directly targeted at him or her or whether the direction was randomly chosen.

1-
        Looking at the progression of learning displayed on Table 2 as a whole, two weeks stand out as having the
most number    of  youth   learning to  throw, Week   4   and  Week   7. One  reason why     four  youth may    have  started
throwing projectiles during Week 4 is that Cole (who learned during Week 3) was a significant social mover in the
after school club and often yelled out to the entire room for people to meet him at a specific location in Whyville
where he would then throw projectiles at them. This likely made projectile throwing more public to the club where it
became a common activity, at least for the boys. The main reason why projectile throwing doubled during Week 7
probably has to do with a club-wide incident that occurred mid-week. While four girls were hanging out on Saturn, a
Whyvillian insulted one of the girls, Ulani, who broadcasted this insult to the club. Within seconds, most of the club
members present made their way to Saturn and started throwing projectiles at the offender until he left the planet.
Several members were so incensed that they organized a search party to go from space to space on Whyville so they
could continue to pursue the offender. We see evidence for the influence of this club-wide incident in conversations
about it that occurred for the next few days and in girls' increased participation in throwing wars in the club.
        One of the observations we can make about throwing projectiles is the agency with which all club members
experimented with it as a social practice. We see evidence for this in Table 2 where we laid out the tweens' different
types of throws and where we can see preferences for certain types of throwing among some of the tweens. While
almost all club members tried out the practice of throwing projectiles, they differed in their adoption of the practice.
For instance, Cole tried out every major form of throwing projectiles (to club members, to Whyvillians, by degree,
with hearts and    kisses) but demonstrated    a  strong preference for  only  throwing   projectiles to club  members.   In
contrast, while Briana also tried out every way of throwing projectiles, she had a decided preference for throwing by
degrees (sometimes in the Zero Gravity Game) and rarely threw to club members on Whyville. Finally, one group of
girls tried out projectile throwing once or twice (Jill, Ulani, Marissa) or not at all (Molly and Paige) and never
pursued throwing as a regular practice on Whyville. However, despite their decisions not to throw projectiles, they
still defined themselves in relation to the practice by occasionally inviting club members to throw things at them.
        When Goodwin (1985) referred to the continuation between play and everyday experience, her focus was
on bridging two worlds in which kids are participants just as we sought to understand the continuation between
online and  offline  play.  Connective   ethnography  helped   us  to integrate both the  virtual  and   real  spaces in our
analysis and understand the dynamics in the larger context of the gaming club. Yet our particular application of
connective  ethnography     illustrates how a  combination     and integration  of qualitative  and   quantitative   methods
allowed us to provide a more comprehensive account of interactions and learning. Using tracking data enabled us to
narrow  in on   a  specific practice    (throwing projectiles) and  trace how   the use   of it was   both shared    and yet
differentially practiced   among  club   members.   More   than  traditional  participant observation,   the   tracking  data
allowed us to see club members in multiple online spaces (in Whyville) while in a shared physical space (i.e., the
club) as well as peek into virtual activity while in different physical spaces (i.e., in Whyville while in a classroom,
home or elsewhere).
        Our analysis also revealed other aspects of importance to the field, in particular what concerns the private
and public side of play facilitated in virtual worlds. One of our initial observations of the club based on coding of
field notes was that the boys primarily threw projectiles while the girls avoided this practice until after the "incident"
with Ulani that we described. Yet looking through the tracking data we found that several girls were among the first
and most frequent projectile throwers in the club. Similarly, while boys often made quite a show about flirting with
members  of    the opposite  sex on  Whyville     through throwing  hearts  and kisses,   at least two   girls tried out this
practice, though they certainly did not make it known to the club. This points to a potential difference in public
versus private play in the club and on Whyville. One area we have yet to analyze is how club members "articulate"
difference" (Goodwin, 2006, p. 241) through projectile throwing. We have evidence that club members did this by
throwing projectiles at avatars who stood out as newbies or as different looking (e.g., as a bottle of ketchup instead
of a face with with eyes, nose, and hair). To us it is fascinating that this practice, which shares the same syntactic
command, can be used in so many different ways: to establish inclusion or exclusion, difference or commonality.

                                                                                                                              1-
1-
Conclusion
         As Leander and McKim (2003) point out, virtual spaces are now everyday spaces in the lives of many
youth, yet we know little of how they use these spaces to negotiate identities and ways of being in them, much less
how the interaction between multiple social spaces (both virtual and `real') influences these ways of being. Our
study of how one (and yet many) social practice on Whyville, throwing projectiles, was learned and adapted by
tweens in an after school club provides one inroad to understanding how tweens learn to socially navigate a virtual
space. Further, unique access to an expansive set of tracking and chat data allowed us to go beyond other forms of
connective ethnography, to trace throwing projectiles by a group of tweens across times and spaces, something not
easily done through more traditional forms of ethnography.

Endnotes
(1)The only exception is the Zero Gravity Game where throwing by degree instructions are written out. However, only one club
   member played this game (Briana).
(2) All names of club players and their screen identities are pseudonyms.

References
Beavis, C., Nixon, H., & Atkinson, S. (2005). LAN cafes: Cafes, places of gathering, or sites if informal teaching
         and learning? Education, Communication, Information, 5(1), 41-60.
Ching, C. C., & Kafai, Y. B. (in press). Peer pedagogy: Student collaboration and reflection in a learning through
         design project. Teachers College Press.
Fields, D. A. & Kafai, Y. B. (2007). Tracing insider knowledge across time and spaces: A connective ethnography
         in a teen online game world. In C. Chinn, G. Erkins, and S. Puntambekar, (Eds.) Proceedings of the Eighth
         Conference of Computer Supported Collaborative Learning, New Brunswick, NJ, 196-205.
Gee,  J. P. (2003). What   video games   have  to teach us about          learning and literacy. New   York,   NY: Palgrave
         Macmillan.
Geertz, C. (1973). The interpretation of cultures: Selected essays. New York: Basic Books.
Goodwin, M. H. (1985). The serious side of jump rope: Conversational practices and social organization in the
         frame of play. Journal of American Folklore, 98(389), 315-330.
Goodwin, M. H. (2006). Hidden lives of girls: Games of stance, status and exclusion. Oxford: Blackwell Publishing.
Hine, C. (2000). Virtual ethnography. London: Sage Publications.
Jenkins,  H. (1998). Complete    freedom of   movement:  Videogames          as gendered  playspaces.    In J. Cassell &   H.
         Jenkins (Eds.), From Barbie to Mortal Kombat: Perspectives on gender and computer games (pp. 323-
         356). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Kafai & Giang (2007). Virtual playgrounds. In T. Willoughby & E. Wood (Eds.), Children's Learning in a Digital
         World (pp. 196-217). Oxford: Blackwell Publishing.
Kaiser Family Foundation (2005). Generation M: Media in the Lives of 8-18 year olds. Washington, DC: March 9.
         Available online at http://www.kff.org/entmedia/entmedia030905pkg.cfm (access September 2006).
Lave, J.  &    Wenger,  E. (1991)   Situated  learning: Legitimate         peripheral  participation. Cambridge,   England:
         Cambridge University Press.
Leander, K. (in press). Toward a connective ethnography of online/offline literacy networks. To appear in D. Leu, J.
         Cairo, M. Knobel, & C. Lankshear (Eds.) Handbook of research on new literacies. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Leander, K. M., & McKim, K. K. (2003). Tracing the everyday 'sitings' of adolescents on the internet: A strategic adaptation
         of ethnography across online and offline spaces. Education, Communication, Information, 3(2), 211-240.
Lin, H. (in press). A cultural geography of gaming experiences in homes, cybercafés              and dormitories. In Y. B.
         Kafai, C. Heeter, J. Denner & J. Sun (Eds.), Beyond Barbie and Mortal Kombat. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Piaget, J. & Inhelder, B. (1969). The Psychology of the child. New York: Basic Books.
Steinkuehler,  C. A.   (2006). Massively multiplayer   online   video      gaming   as participation  in a  discourse. Mind,
         Culture, and Activity, 13(1), 38-52.
Stevens, R., Satwicz, T., & McCarthy, L. (in press). In game, in room, in world: Reconnecting video game play to
         the rest of kids' lives. In K. Salen (Ed.), Ecology of games: MacArthur Foundation series on digital media
         and learning. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Swalwell,   M. (2003). Multi-player computer   gaming:  'Better than       playing (PC  Games).  Reconstruction:   Studies in
         Contemporary Culture 3(4)   Retrieved September 1, 2006, from http://reconstruction.eserver.org/034/swalwell.htm
Taylor, T. L. (2006). Play between worlds. Cambridge: MIT Press
Vygotsky,   L. S. (1978).  Mind  in society: The  development   of higher       psychological processes.    Cambridge,  MA:
         Harvard University Press.

                                                                                                                              1-
