            Students' sense-making with visual data in small-group
                                                argumentation
                          Josh Radinsky, Susan Goldman, University of Illinois, Chicago
                                     Email: joshuar@uic.edu, sgoldman@uic.edu
                                       Melissa Singer, Bridgewater State College

        Abstract:    Argumentation   is  a key  component   of   scientific practice.    It involves a dialectical
        balance   of opposition    and  agreement,  requiring negotiation    and  affording   conceptual   change
        through the co-construction of understandings.     In classroom science inquiry with complex visual
        data  representations,    argumentation is  an essential discourse     structure through which   students
        make sense of data and domain concepts.         This study analyzed the argumentation practices of
        middle school students conducting an earth science inquiry project using data visualization tools.
        Analysis of spoken and gestural interactions during small-group work of one group of students in
        each of three classrooms revealed three common modes in which students employed visual data in
        argumentation: (1) using data-referenced talk and gesture to challenge authoritative positioning;
        (2) using gesture to participate in argumentation with incomplete conceptual vocabulary; and (3)
        using argumentation about data as a means of co-constructing the goals of academic tasks.

Learning to argue about data
        Argumentation is a key component of the practice of science, both in the everyday work of scientists (Bell,
2002; Dunbar, 1995; Latour, 1990) and in learning objectives for K12 science education (Andriessen, 2006; NRC,
1996).  Leitao (2000) tracked the ways in which the importance of argumentation has been articulated by education
researchers since Piaget, and located the importance of argumentation in its potential to impact conceptual change.
The essence of argumentation for Leitao (2000) is that it is "a process of negotiating divergence" (p. 335), co-
constituted by   interlocutors who   present opposing   viewpoints,   justify  their  own  viewpoint,   and  recognize an
opponent's argument in some way.       Its significance for learning lies in its potential for establishing intersubjectivity
and opening the door to changes in perspective and understanding.
        Argumentation is dialectical: it requires both some form of opposition, and some process of negotiation.
The coordination of disagreement and agreement provides the leverage to effect conceptual change (Andriessen,
2006; Leitao, 2000). This process is inherently social, occurring in a context that mediates the goals, norms, and
cultural tools employed by the arguers (Wertsch, 1998). Argumentation in subject matter learning settings such as
K12 classrooms is likely to have different discursive features in comparison to other everyday situations, due to
differences in expectations and goals for participants in activities designed for learning (Leitao, 2000). As such,
argumentation in service of subject matter learning merits particular attention as a special case of argumentation
more generally.
        Providing    opportunities   to learn   and practice   the skills   of  argumentation    is  central  to students'
understanding of science (Duschl, et al., 2007). Because students' classroom arguments about science topics often
feature many properties of informal argumentation (Walton, 1996), a goal of instruction is to move students toward
more  formal, scientifically  acceptable forms  of  argumentation.  This    development    does  not come    automatically:
students need to be instructed and scaffolded (Andriessen, 2005, 2006; Goldman, Duschl, Ellenbogen, Williams &
Tzou, 2003; Linn & Bell, 2000). Andriessen (2006) argues that the purpose of argumentation among students should
not be to convince the other of one's point of view, but rather to engage in "cooperative explorations of a dialogic
space" of solutions. In so doing, several learning mechanisms can be called into play: knowledge is made explicit,
new knowledge is co-elaborated, and interpretations of data are employed as evidence in relation to claims and
positions (Andriessen, 2006; White & Frederiksen, 1998).
        The   present   study  focuses  on one  specific context   of argumentation:      the negotiation  of  meaning  of
complex,   visually-intensive  data  in small   groups. Increasing  use     of computer    tools for  data representation,
visualization, and communication, along with increasing access to Internet-based resources in schools, have made
the use of  rich visual data   in classrooms  increasingly common     (vanJoolingen,     deJong  et al, 2007).   Such data
resources both afford and require sets of skills and habits that are highly valued in education, as evidenced by a
recent consensus report on science education in the U. S., Taking Science to School (Duschl et al., 2007). In science,
argumentation requires constructing and evaluating explanations with evidence derived from such data (Duschl &
Osborne, 2002; Goldman, Duschl, et al, 2003; Herrenkohl & Guerra, 1998; Stewart, Cartier, & Passmore, 2005). For

                                                                                                                              2-2
         example, students conducting an investigation using a data visualization environment must coordinate multiple goals
         and  activities of the investigation;  make    observations; communicate      those  observations     to their peers   or   group
         members; coordinate their observations about the data with explanations of the phenomenon; and negotiate different
         observations that may exist across members of the group (Shauble, Glaser et al, 1995; Radinsky, in press; Tabak,
         2004;   Sandoval   &   Millwood,   2005).   It is  important   for the  research    community      to better   understand      the
         development of the skills and habits of scientific argumentation with visual data artifacts, as they emerge at the
         microgenetic level of analysis.
                  Small-group inquiry situations are important contexts for examining this kind of argumentation with data
         (Driver, Newton, & Osborne, 2000; Duschl & Osborne, 2002; Duschl, Schweingruber, & Shouse, 2007).                         Small-
         group collaboration provides a space in which students can practice interactional skills that are valued in science
         learning standards (NRC, 1996), such as joint consideration of data, communicating emergent understandings, and
         weighing  and   evaluating alternative   ideas  or solutions.  While   all of  these  skills can   be    taught,  modeled,     and
         practiced in whole-class   instructional settings, small-group     activities provide the   chance    for students   to practice
         these skills with more independence; for all members of a class to practice them at the same time; and for the teacher
         to work more closely with one small group at a time while other groups pursue their work independently (Goldman,
         Radinsky & Rodriguez, 2007). For learning the skills and habits of effective argumentation, working in small groups
         affords  opportunities to  develop   better coordination    of multiple  perspectives,   potentially     leading   to improved
         reasoning and coordination of evidence with explanations (Kuhn, Shaw & Felton,1997; Linn & Hsi, 2000).
                  This paper examines episodes in which students in small groups engaged in argumentation about data, in
         the context of a middle-grades science investigation of plate tectonics.        The classes enacted a science unit called
         Earth Structures and Processes (Radinsky, Alamar, Leimberer, Rodriguez & Trigueros, 2005; Radinsky, Leimberer
         & Gomez, 2000), in which the students used a geographic information system (GIS) computer application as one of
         the primary tools of their investigation. A GIS is a computer program consisting of a database connected to an
         interactive map (Audet & Ludwig, 2000).         Information in the database can be viewed on the map as objects of
         different colors, shapes, and sizes.  The GIS is interactive, which means that users can zoom the map in and out, turn
         layers of data on and off, choose how the information should be displayed, and submit queries to the database to
         answer specific questions.  Other data representations used by students included large (4' x 6') paper world maps
         with  GIS-generated    earthquake  and volcano    data plotted, as  well as   topographic    maps  and    models   representing
         ranges of elevation values for particular areas.

       Research methods
                  This   study examined  the   ways  that  groups of   students engaged    in  argumentation      as part  of  the   larger
         process of co-constructing the meaning of visual representations of large data sets. The analysis draws from a corpus
         of data gathered for a larger study of middle-school classrooms in public elementary schools in a large city, enacting
         inquiry  projects  using a range   of  visual   data  representations  and    tools. The    larger research    program      is an
         investigation of ways students develop skills, habits, and dispositions for reasoning with complex data in inquiry
         projects (Radinsky, Alamar et al, 2005). Data presented here are drawn from two different years of this research
         program, and from two elementary schools.         The student population of each school was diverse in terms of race,
         ethnicity, academic performance, and language dominance.
                  In this study, five focal episodes from each of three science classrooms (two 6th grade, one 7th grade) that
         enacted the Earth Structures unit were chosen for analysis. These episodes constitute the class sessions in which
         students  conducted    independent   inquiry   tasks  using  visual  data.    ("Visual" here  means       graphic  and    spatial
         representations of data, as opposed to numeric, textual or tabular ones.)         Students' curricular assignment during
         these episodes was to apply concepts introduced in whole-class instruction to generating an explanation for crustal
         formations (i.e., elevation patterns) and earthquake and volcano data patterns found in a particular place on earth.
         Each group of students was assigned a different location to study. Students were assigned the tasks of finding the
         plate boundaries,   determining   the type  of  plate  motion   at the boundaries     (e.g.  subduction,    rift, or  buckling),
         hypothesizing the direction of plate motion, and preparing a presentation to the class explaining their findings.
                  In each classroom a subset of three students (a "table group") was videotaped during small-group inquiry
         activity. The table groups for this study were selected in coordination with the teachers to be representative of the
         classrooms in terms of academic performance, with students who were neither the highest- nor lowest-performing
         academically.    Two   researchers documented     interactions  among  students   during    science   instruction  for  all class
         sessions of the Earth Structures & Processes unit, one operating a video camera and the other taking field notes.
         Target episodes for the present analysis included all small-group inquiry sessions in which students were conducting
         an inquiry task with visual data (GIS or paper maps); five to seven such episodes were identified in each class.

2-2
Transcription and coding of speech and gesture
         All student speech during each target episode was transcribed and time-coded by one researcher, and each
transcript was verified by a second researcher. Discrepancies in transcription were worked out in conference, with
reference  to the videotape   as    needed.  The  primary    verbal unit  of analysis   was  the  turn  in  group  talk, i.e. an
uninterrupted  speech   burst by    an individual  student   with no  pause  greater than    two  seconds   (though  units  both
within and across turns were employed in coding argumentation moves, described below).
         To identify all segments of group work in which students were talking about data, every turn was coded for
presence or absence of a data referent, i.e. speech referring to data items or relationships among data items, whether
described in the visual language of the inscription (e.g., "dots," "a big line"), or in indeterminate indexical terms
(e.g., "look  at that one  right  there," "they're  close    together"). To  establish  reliability, a  second   researcher   not
previously   familiar with   the  transcripts  was  trained   on  the coding   using    two  transcripts.  After  training, two
researchers coded three other transcripts independently.         Reliability was calculated using Cohen's Kappa (0.7509,
n=932   turns coded   in  the reliability sample).     All differences   were  resolved  in  discussion,    and  the  remaining
transcripts were coded by one researcher.
         Analysis of gesture was employed as a second resource for identifying communication about data.                 Coding
for gesture was done from the videotape of the episode with a turn-segmented transcript of the verbal information at
hand. Using an adaptation of McNeill's (1992) gesture coding scheme (Singer, Radinsky & Goldman, in press), one
researcher coded all five of the episodes for points, traces, and representational gestures.         Points were coded if the
student used her fingers or hand to indicate some specific location or object on a GIS display or on any of the other
materials. Traces    were coded   if the  student  moved     her fingers or  hand  along   a part of  a GIS   display  or  other
materials. Representational gestures were coded on two dimensions: hand-shape (e.g., two flat hands with palms
faced down or one hand with a closed fist) and motion (e.g., hands moving horizontally toward each other, hands
moving   horizontally   away    from   each  other  or  hands    moving  vertically, up  and   down).   The    meaning   of   the
representational gesture was inferred based on the context of the accompanying speech.
         To   establish  reliability on  the   gesture  coding,   another  researcher   (one  not already    familiar with    the
transcripts) coded   two  of  the small-group     class sessions  for occurrences    of each  type   of gesture,  and for   their
meaning in the case of representational gestures. The first episode was used to establish code definitions and clarify
the gesture-coding process. Reliability on the second episode was calculated separately for occurrence and number
of gestures in a turn, each type of gesture (points, traces, and representational gestures), and their meaning.           There
was 90% agreement on gesture content of each turn, with disagreements resolved in discussion.

Data analysis
         References   to  data,  in  speech  and  gesture,   were coded   at the level  of spoken    turns, by  student  and  by
timecode, which enabled us to identify all periods of time in which students were engaged in communication about
data.   These  engagements    around    data   were then   reviewed,  using   the  transcripts and   video,  to   determine   the
positionality of  students    with   respect   to particular  explanations    or  characterizations,    constructing  them    as
agreements or disagreements.      Exchanges were considered examples of argumentation if they were determined to
include at least one proposition, a counter, and a reply (following Leitao, 2000).
         A second phase of coding of student speech differentiated the data references into three types: (1) reference
to a singular data item, (2) reference to data relationships (e.g., characterization of a pattern, or relative positions or
values of multiple items), and (3) explanations of data.          This second level of coding enabled us to differentiate
among instances of argumentation by the content of the discourse, and to view the ways both speech and gesture
were used as communicative resources in each exchange. These representations of each episode of argumentation-
with-data highlighted differences in modes of argumentation across episodes within and across groups which were
then explored in qualitative analyses of each episode. We treated these analyses as contrasting case studies (Yin,
2002).  Characterizations  of   each   student's  emergent   role in  each   group (developed     in detail in  other analyses,
including  Radinsky,   2000;  Radinsky,     in press)   provided  background   for analyses    of each   student's   positioning
within each episode of argumentation. The case studies examined the role of spoken and gestured references-to-data
in the development of each case of argumentation, and evidence of changes in domain reasoning during the episode.

Results: Students' engagement of visual data in small-group argumentation
         How     did students employ     visual   data  as a resource  in argumentation      within  their  small groups?   The
analyses of the contrasting cases suggests several modes of references-to-data, in speech and/or gesture, that fell
within the discursive structure of argumentation.       Some of the modes were identified across groups.         Three of these

                                                                                                                                  2-2
         modes are   presented here, to organize   the results  section around  themes for conceptualizing   students'   modes of
         argumentation with visual data:
                      x   Use of data-referenced talk and gesture to challenge authoritative positioning
                      x   Use of gesture to participate in argumentation with incomplete conceptual vocabulary
                      x   Use of argumentation about data to co-construct the goals of activity

        Mode 1: Referencing visual data to challenge authoritative positioning
                Authoritative   positioning  by  a student   in a small   group can often contribute  to the development    of an
         absolutist epistemological perspective (Kuhn, 1991) in group discourse, i.e. a willingness to accept answers as being
         definitively right or wrong, on the basis of the speaker's perceived authority as being "smart" or having domain
         expertise. Kuhn  (1991;   Kuhn   et al, 2000)     suggests  that science learning requires   developing an     evaluative
         epistemological stance, i. e., one employing evidence in support of claims, and valuing exploration and investigation
         over closure based on authority.
                One mode of engagement with visual data in argumentation, observed in two of the groups (and in others
         not presented here), was as a resource for challenging absolutist discourse by students who positioned themselves as
         science experts in the group. For example, in the following transcript segment Mario (an academic leader in the
         class) authoritatively announced the "answer" to the group's inquiry task (map the boundaries of their plate), but
         was challenged by Joel (a student who was often marginalized in group work).
                1.        Mario: THIS is the plate. ((traces a broad circle above the map))
                ...
                5.        Joel:    The plate boundary is right over HERE, Mario!
                6.        Mario: Yeah, but it goes up here
                7.        Joel:    But it's over here too ­ it goes like this!
                8.        Mario: That's what I'm saying! ((Mario draws line, Joel and Juan watch closely))
                9.        Joel:    Go all the way around
                10.       Mario: I put it like all of this
                11.       Joel: That's it
                12.       Mario: What about down here?       That's one plate too!
                13.       Juan: {inaudible, pointing}
                14.       Joel: No, but it stops ­ see right here it stops ­ No no no ­ right here it stops! ((lifting
                          Mario's pen from the map)) ­ and then it starts up again!
                15.       Mario: I know!
                16.       Joel: But it's sort of right in the middle

             Figure 1. Joel (left front) challenges Mario's authoritative claim by pointing to data, initiating a revision.

                Joel here stopped Mario from imposing a simplified conception of the task on the group: a casual tracing
         gesture around the map (Figure 1, left frame) to characterize the plate boundary. When Joel challenged him (lines 5,
         7, and 14) Mario became more tentative, though he tried to maintain an authoritative posture ("That's what I'm
         saying!" ... "I know!"). But Joel had noticed something in the data that Mario had missed:      an area of Mario's plate
         boundary line where there was no earthquake data at all ("See right here it stops ... and then it starts up again!").
         Mario revised his assertion, using his domain knowledge to cover his retreat with an air of authority (line 21 below),
         but adopting Joel's interpretation of the data by acknowledging the "big old gap":
                21.       Mario: Why?     Plates are huge, man!   There's a plate that takes up the whole Euro-Asia!
                22.       Joel: Mario, look ­ this is where it really starts, see it goes up ­ and look what happens!
                          Look what happens!     It starts to drop!
                          ((Mario, Joel and Juan huddle over the map))
                23.       Mario: There's that big old gap!     There's a big old hole right there

2-20
         As   evidenced in  Figure   1 (right frame),    Joel's challenge     here    established intersubjectivity (three
simultaneous points to data in close proximity), problematizing a gap in the pattern of earthquakes and bringing the
group into closer examination of the data. This challenge to Mario's authoritative positioning appeared to lead both
Mario and Juan to closer consideration of the data, while also requiring Joel to make his initial disagreement more
explicit through pointing,  tracing, and more  carefully  describing     the data.    Similar challenges to authoritative
positioning through reference to data were found in each group studied.

Mode 2: Using gesture for domain argumentation with incomplete vocabulary
         One possible affordance of visual data in small-group science inquiry is to provide material referents with
which students   can engage  in domain   reasoning   and argumentation,      prior to  verbal mastery   of the conceptual
vocabulary.  If visual data are to play this role ­ i.e., to afford an entry point into domain reasoning­ a question is
how students are to manage communicating about these data artifacts such that they can engage in argumentation.
One answer to this appears to be the use of gesture. Research suggests that gestural reference often precedes speech
in some learning contexts (Roth, 2001; Singer, Radinsky & Goldman, in press).          Our analysis distinguished between
two modes of gestural support for argumentation with incomplete vocabulary:            (1) points and traces (Clark, 2005;
McNeill, 1992) being used to establish joint attention and building common ground in arguing about data patterns,
prior to developing verbal descriptive skills; and (2) representational gestures (McNeill, 1992) being used to argue
about abstract concepts  and  explanations for  which    vocabulary     was  incomplete   (see also  Singer, Radinsky  &
Goldman, in press). Numerous instances of each of these uses were identified in the data analysis.
         In an example of the use of points and traces, the transcript excerpt below is from the initiation of a five-
minute episode of argumentation focusing on interpreting a pattern of data in the GIS:
         191.    C: Go to the main thing ((points))
         192.    J:  I think it's still there because one of them are right there ((points))
         193.    V:  OK, ha ha
         194.    C:  Go to the main one, Violeta ((points))
         195.    C:  Look, see, ((points)), I think the whole planet has one
         196.    V: ((standing)) Look at the volcanoes!   They go like in a, see look, they go like in a line!
                 ((traces))
         197.    C:  I know, that's what I'm saying - it's all, it's all one big placa
         198.    V:  ((traces)) Look at that, the volcanoes are all in a line!
         199.    C:  ((points, traces)) I know, down here --
         200.    V:  And it goes right here ((traces))-- vooooom
         201.    C:  See, it's all one big placa ((traces right, left, across bottom))
         202.    J:  ((laughing)) That's just great
         203.    C:  It is, Violeta! ((traces up right side, retracts))

         Here the negotiation of how to display the appropriate data, and which area to attend to, was carried out
primarily through pointing gestures (lines 191, 192, 194), followed by a proposition by Cecilia that "the whole planet
has one" (line 195) ­ i.e., that one plate (or placa in Spanish) encircles the globe.  This proposition, and its association
with a detailed pattern of earthquakes and volcanoes, was articulated through a series of tracing gestures (lines 196,
198-201, 203) without which the discourse would have little geographic meaning.        The relatively simple language used
to describe the visible patterns of data ("the whole planet has one," "the volcanoes are all in a line") does not prevent
the group from establishing joint attention to a detailed and complex spatial pattern, through gesture.

                                                                                                                             2-2
                         Figure 2. A class session in which a group argued about data patterns (min. 14-18).

                  This exchange initiated a five-minute debate about whether a single plate could indeed circle the globe (a
         later episode of which is excerpted below).   Figure 2 depicts the pattern of spoken and gestured references to data
         during the 21-minute session from which this excerpt was drawn; the exchange above marks the initiation of the
         argument about data patterns (circled in Figure 2), at minute 14.    The coding of this session reveals that all three
         students went on to use tracing gestures (large empty circles), in combination with verbal characterizations of data
         relationships (large empty squares) to communicate about the data during this argument.
                  This contrasts with the example shown in Figure 3 from another group, in which Leo, Kerry and Eliana's
         argument   employed primarily   representational gestures  (large shaded   circles) and explanatory  domain   language
         (large shaded  squares) to conduct   their argument   about  how    plates might   be moving  at  their plate boundary
         (discussed in detail in Singer, Radinsky & Goldman, in press). Figure 3 shows all three students making use of
         representational gestures as part of their argumentative discourse (with one student, Eliana, also using many points
         and traces, linking her explanation more concretely to the data). This coding suggests that both argumentation about
         visible data patterns (prevalent in Figure 2), as well as more abstract argumentation about the meanings of those data
         (prevalent in Figure 3), can be distributed across speech and gesture.

                      Figure 3. A class session in which a group argued about a domain explanation (min. 8-13).

        Mode 3:     Co-constructing the goals of the inquiry through argumentation with data
                  Part of the reality of classroom inquiry (like any other instructional context) is the negotiated nature of any
         assigned task. Regardless  of the  degree  of specificity of the  task charge and   the teacher's instructions, there is
         always a process of negotiation and co-construction as the students jointly establish a shared, and often contested,
         conception of the task (Radinsky, 2000; Radinsky, in press; Doyle, 1983). This conception of the task includes
         emergent understandings of the goals of the inquiry.  When students are using complex visual data, their articulation
         of the goals of the inquiry is often accomplished through establishing acceptable ways to talk about the data.     The
         shared understanding of "what we're supposed to do" becomes tightly integrated with developing norms for "how
         we should talk about the data." This often occurs through argumentation.
                  For example,   Cecilia's group had   several episodes   of intense argumentation   centered on   two   disputed
         questions: How big should a plate be?   and, What do we do when a boundary doesn't connect?          These conceptual
         issues for interpreting data  were  argued    with warrants   based    on  assumptions  about the   assigned  task and
         expectations, as seen in the following exchange:
                  90.     Juanita:  So what do you think?   But then if that's the plate --
                  91.     Cecilia:  [Or it could be] up here, but nothing connects there, that's the problem

2-22
        92.      Juanita:  If that's the [plate that's gonna be] --
        93.      Cecilia:  [Right there]
        94.      Juanita:  [That's going to be too big] ((points))
        95.      Cecilia:  I know it's cuz it's [lots of plates]
        96.      Juanita:  [And   that would be including], another, another area. That would be including
        the Himalayas or something ((points))
        97.      Cecilia:  (But ...) nothing connects right there ((points))
        98.      Violeta: [Exactly]
        99.      Juanita: [Exactly]
        100.     Cecilia:  [That's what] I'm saying
        101.     Violeta: You're saying that the whole, the whole thing is the plate
        102.     Juanita:  And isn't it too big to be a plate?
        103.     Cecilia:  No, the other ones are big ((points to other groups' mapped plates))

        Here we see that the essential science understandings being co-constructed in discourse ­ the concept of
plate (lines 90, 94, 95, 101, 102) and criteria for analyzing data (lines 91, 97-100) ­ are intricately connected with
the group's emergent conception of the expectations for the task assignment.         For example, Juanita's objection that
"that would be  including  ... another area  ... the  Himalayas"    (line  96)  refers to the fact  that another group  was
assigned the Himalayas, so it could not be on their plate.   Similarly, Cecilia responds to the question about how big a
plate could be  by  referencing other  students'  answers:   "No,   the  other  ones are  big" (line 103).   In  these ways
argumentation with data became a medium for shared task construction, and vice versa.

Discussion
        These examples illustrate some of the ways students employed spoken and gestured references to visual
data in argumentation in the small group context.     These three modes of using data as a resource in the small-group
activity system provide insight into the mechanisms by which science understandings are co-constructed in inquiry.
They  highlight the  intersection of  social and  intellectual   growth    in  classroom  activity,  and  contribute to our
understanding of the emergence of science knowledge at the microgenetic level of analysis.
        Data visualization tools like GIS, and inscriptions like data-rich maps, are important means with which to
engage in the practices of science. They clearly bring both challenges and opportunities to the science classroom.
To understand the nature of these challenges and opportunities, we must attend to social purposes to which such
tools may be put, such as challenging or disrupting the discourse of didactic authority, or extending and altering the
nature of student-student domain talk during independent work. We must come to understand the multiple ways
these cultural tools can  become  "handles"   for students   who    are  not  yet conversant  in the domain   to engage  in
meaningful disciplinary reasoning ­ or to avoid or distort it.
        We   have   shown  that  students can    use  visual data   as   a tool for  confrontingand   disrupting  absolutist
positioning; that they can employ gesture as a resource for arguing prior to mastering domain vocabulary; and that
the negotiation  of  task expectations   can be   a   meaningful    site   of sense-making    with  data. These  modes   of
argumentation-as-sense-making-with-data all involve establishing a balance between confrontation and agreement.
This dialectic, at the heart of argumentation, presents a significant challenge for young adolescents, as it does for
adults. Norms that involve opposition can disrupt discourse and stymie students' decision-making processes, but
they also can stimulate reflection on science understandings and conceptualizations of data. Students' positioning in
these interactions over time contributes to the development of roles, or emergent identities, as knowers and doers of
science (Radinsky,   in press). This  suggests   that it is  important   for  educators   and researchers  to improve   our
understanding of how students' contingent and negotiated constructions of the goals and practices of argumentation
develop from emergent discourse moves toward stable aspects of identity over time: i.e., the skills and habits of
effective scientific argumentation.

References
Andriessen, J. (2005).  Collaboration in computer conferencing.         In A. O'Donnel, C. Hmelo, & G. Erkens (Eds.),
        Collaboration, reasoning and technology (pp. 277-321).          Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Andriessen, J. (2006).  Arguing to learn. In K. Sawyer (ed.) Cambridge Handbook of the Learning Sciences (pp. 79-
        96). New York NY: Cambridge University Press.
Audet, R., and G. S. Ludwig. (2000). GIS in Schools. Redlands, CA: ESRI Press.

                                                                                                                             2-2
        Bell, P. (2002).   Science is argument: Developing sociocognitive supports for disciplinary argumentation.           In T.
                Koschmann,     R. Hall   &  N.  Miyake  (Eds.), CSCL2:    Carrying  forward   the  conversation    (pp. 449-455).
                Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
        Clark, H. H. (2005). Coordinating with each other in a material world. Discourse Studies, 7 (4 -5), 507 ­ 525.
        Doyle, W. (1983). Academic work. Review of Educational Research, 53(2): 159-199.
        Driver, R., Newton, P., & Osborne, J. (2000). Establishing the norms of scientific argumentation in classrooms.
                Science Education, 84 (3), 287-312.
        Dunbar, K. (1995). How scientists really reason: Scientific reasoning in real-world laboratories. In R. J. Sternbert &
                J. E. Davidson (Eds.), The nature of insight (pp. 365-395). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
        Duschl, R. A.,   & Osborne,   J.  (2002). Supporting   and promoting   argumentation   discourse   in  science  education.
                Studies in Science Education, 38, 39-72.
        Duschl, R. A., Schweingruber, H. A., & Shouse, A. W. (2007). Taking science to school: Learning and teaching
                science in grade k-8. Washington D.C.: National Academies Press.
        Goldman,   S., Duschl,   R., Ellenbogen,   K., Williams,   S. &  Tzou,  C. (2003).   Science    inquiry in a digital age:
                Possibilities for Making Thinking Visible. In H. van Oostendorp (Ed.) Cognition in a Digital Age. pp. 253-
                283. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum Publishers.
        Goldman,  S.,  Radinsky, J., &   C. Rodriguez  (2007).  Teacher   interactions with  small groups  during  investigations:
                Scaffolding the sense-making process and pushing students to construct arguments with data. Paper presented at the
                Annual Meeting of the American Educational Research Association (AERA), Chicago, IL, April 2007
        Greeno, J. G. (2006). Learning in activity. In K. Sawyer (ed.) Cambridge Handbook of the Learning Sciences (pp.
                79-96). New York NY: Cambridge University Press.
        Herrenkohl, L. R., & Guerra, M. R. (1998). Participant structures, scientific discourse, and student engagement in
                fourth grade. Cognition and Instruction, 16, 431-473.
        Kuhn, D. (1991).   The skills of argument.  Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press.
        Kuhn, D., Black, J., Keselman, A., & Kaplan, D. (2000).         The development of cognitive skills to support inquiry
                learning.  Cognition & Instruction, 18(4), 495-523.
        Kuhn, Shaw & Felton,1997
        Latour, B. (1990).   Drawing things together.     In Lynch, M. and Woolgar, S. (Eds.) Representation in scientific
                practice (pp. 19-68). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press
        Leitao, S. (2000). The potential of argument in knowledge building.     Human Development, 43, 332-360.
        Linn, M. & Hsi, S. (2000).   Computers, teachers, peers: Science learning partners. London: Routledge.
        McNeill, D. (1992). Hand and Mind: What gestures reveal about thought. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
        Means, M. L., & Voss, J. F. (1996).       Who reasons well?     Two studies of informal reasoning among children of
                different grade, ability, and knowledge levels.  Cognition & Instruction, 14(2), 139-178.
        National Research Council (1996). National science education standards. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
        Radinsky, J. (2000). Making sense of complex data: A framework for studying students' development of reflective
                inquiry    dispositions. Learning  Sciences.   Unpublished   doctoral    dissertation, Northwestern    University,
                Evanston IL: 349.
        Radinsky, J.   (in press). Students' roles in group-work with visual data: A site of science learning. To appear in
                Cognition and Instruction.
        Radinsky, J., Alamar, K., Leimberer, J., Rodriguez, C., & Trigueros, J. (2005).       Science investigations with GIS:
                Helping    students  develop the  need to know   more.   Spectrum: Journal of the Illinois Science Teachers'
                Association, 31(2), 34-42.
        Radinsky, J., Leimberer, J. M., & L. M. Gomez. (2000). Reflective inquiry with complex data: A case study of
                dispositional learning. Paper presented at the Annual Conference of the American Educational Researchers
                Association (AERA), New Orleans, LA.
        Roth, W.M. (2001). Gestures: Their role in teaching and learning. Review of Educational Research, 71, 365-392.
        Sandoval,  W.  A.,  &  Millwood,    K.  A. (2005). The   quality  of   students' use of evidence    in  written scientific
                explanations. Cognition & Instruction, 23,     23 - 55.
        Sandoval,  W.  A.,  &  Reiser,   B. J. (2004). Explanation    - driven inquiry:  Integrating   conceptual  and  epistemic
                scaffolds for scientific inquiry. Science Education, 88, 345 - 372.
        Sawyer, R. K. (2006).  Analyzing collaborative discourse. In K. Sawyer (ed.) Cambridge Handbook of the Learning
                Sciences (pp. 79-96). New York NY: Cambridge University Press.
        Schauble, L., R. Glaser, R., Duschl, R. A., Schulze, S., & John, J. (1995). Students' understanding of the objectives
                and procedures of experimentation in the science classroom. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 4, 131-166.

2-2
Singer, M.,  Radinsky, J. & S. Goldman   (in press). The  role of gesture in meaning    construction. To appear in
        Discourse Processes.
Stein, N. L., & Albro, E. R. (2001).   The   origins and  nature of arguments:  Studies in conflict understanding,
        emotion, and negotiation. Discourse Processes, 32(2-3), 113-133.
Stewart, J., Cartier, J. & Passmore, C. (2005). Developing understanding through model-based inquiry. In M.S.
        Donovan & J. Bransford, Eds., How students learn: Science in the Classroom. (pp. 515- 565).   Washington,
        DC: National Academies Press.
Tabak, I. (2004). Synergy: A Complement to Emerging Patterns of Distributed Scaffolding. Journal of the Learning
        Sciences, 13 (3): 305-355
vanJoolingen, W.R., deJong, T., & Dimitrakopoulou, A. (2007). Issues in computer supported inquiry learning in
        science. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 23 (2), 111­119.
Walton, D. N. & Krabb, E. C. W. (1995). Commitment in dialogue.     Albany, NY: Suny Press.
Walton, D. N. (1996). Argumentation schemes for presumptive reasoning. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Wertsch, J. V. (1998). Mind as action. Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.
White,  B., & Frederickson, J. (1998). Inquiry,  modeling,  and  metacognition:  Making  science accessible to  all
        students. Cognition & Instruction, 16, 3 ­ 118.
Yin, R. K. (2002). Case Study Research: Design and Methods, 3rd ed. Newbury Park: Sage Publications.

                                                                                                                    2-2
