                               Reflection in professional play
                                    David Hatfield and David Williamson Shaffer,
                            University of Wisconsin-Madison, Educational Psychology,
                                1025 West Johnson St., Madison, WI 53711 USA
                               Email: dhatfiel@wisc.edu , dws@education.wisc.edu
Introduction
    Computer simulations make it possible to create computational microworlds--"environments where people can
explore and learn from what they receive back from the computer in return for their exploration" (Hoyles, Noss, &
Adamson, 2002). This has been shown in STEM programming environments (Papert, 1980; Resnick, 1994; diSessa,
2000), direct manipulation environments (Goldenberg, and Cuoco, 1998), and game worlds (Adams, 1998; Barab et
al., 2001). Working in these environments gives students opportunities to learn STEM subjects through problems
that are realistic, complex, and meaningful.
    At  the same  time, simply  turning  students  loose  in a computational     microworld--no  matter  how  cleverly
designed--is  a  poor instructional strategy  (Kirschner, Sweller,  &  Clark,  2006). Putting students into a complex
environment and asking them to figure out the underlying rules does not work because "learners are novices [and]
leaving them to float in rich experiences with no support triggers the very real human penchant for finding creative
but spurious patterns and generalizations" (Shaffer et al., 2005).
    A  key  component   in turning  activity in a STEM    microworld   into STEM   understanding  in the real world  is
reflection: a student's ability to step back from a task and talk with peers and mentors about what worked, what
didn't work, and why. Studies of expertise, particularly in STEM domains, show that this combination of action and
reflection develops sophisticated   ways of   thinking (Schon, 1987;    Shaffer, 2004;  Shaffer, 2005; Shaffer, 2007;
Bruner, 1996; Dreyfus & Dreyfus, 1986).      Authentic training practices in STEM fields can thus provide a model for
integrating action and reflection for STEM understanding.
Epistemic Games
    In epistemic games, players develop STEM expertise by playing as novices training to be STEM experts of a
particular kind: engineers, urban   planners, science  journalists, and so  on (Beckett &  Shaffer,  2005;  Hatfield &
Shaffer, 2006; Shaffer, 2004; Shaffer, 2005; Shaffer, 2007). Because expert mentoring is part of any professional
training, explicit guidance is part of any epistemic game. But it is the kind of mentoring that STEM professionals get
in their practicum experiences, rather than the traditional direct instruction of school-based learning or the skill-and-
drill in basic facts and skills that too many educational games currently provide.
    In the epistemic game Urban Science, for example, players become urban planners to redesign their city. They
use a geographic information system (GIS) model to propose land use changes (for example, turning a parking lot
into a neighborhood park and playground) to improve quality of life. In the game they perform the kind of actions
that urban planners do in their training: They receive materials that urban planners use, such as a city budget plan,
that provide information about revenue, pollution, and other issues. They conduct a site visit and interview virtual
stakeholders. They use a GIS model to create preference surveys and construct proposals for redevelopment.
    But in Urban Science, people playing the role of planning consultants--game mentors (GMs)--also engage
players in the kind of reflection that planners use to turn planning activity into understanding of the planning process
and the    STEM   concepts  relevant  to the  planning    profession. During   individual work,  team   meetings, and
interactions with clients and supervisors, GMs ask players to answer questions like: What's the problem? What have
you tried? What other options did you consider? How and why did you decide which options to take? What worked
well and what didn't? Why? Research on Urban Science shows that asking these questions as part of the illusion of a
simulated work environment is a powerful educational tool (Beckett & Shaffer, 2005; Shaffer, 2007).
Professional Practice Simulator
    In our current work, we are developing and testing a professional practice simulator (2PS) based on our studies
of Urban Science. The 2PS is a game engine designed to integrate action in the game and reflection on that action
within the game technology itself, based on the way that reflection and action are integrated in professional training.
    To provide this technological support for reflection and action in the game, the 2PS is designed as a shared
workspace that simulates the technologies and workflow of a professional office. The overall interface is a virtual
planning company's intranet or portal, which provides various services to planning team members, aka players.

                                                                                                                          3-
             For example, players interact through simulated email with virtual supervisors (non-player characters or NPCs)
         and peers. Reading and/or      replying to messages triggers dynamically generated  NPC   responses. Throughout  the
         game players are prompted by NPCs to email work products and accompanying justifications or explications. The
         2PS can then generate NPC feedback using thin AI models of the NPCs operating on pre-defined features of the
         emailed products. For example,     the  2PS  system can check  that a  proposed GIS model   meets minimum     criteria
         outlined by a client and produce an email response from an NPC from a database of pre-defined responses for that
         criterion. As a result, the 2PS can harvest reflections embedded within messages and attachments, and the email
         interface thus controls the overall activity flow while simulating feedback from coworkers, stakeholders, and clients
         to drive players' reflections.
       Goals
             The goal is not to have the 2PS simulate all forms of reflection in the game virtually. It is instead to provide
         technological scaffolds for explication and justification within the game by (a) tracking players' progress through
         the game and asking appropriate reflective questions at appropriate times, and (b) providing realistic feedback to
         proposed plans modeled in the professional tools integrated into the system. We recognize that game mentors play
         an important role in helping players reflect on their actions with professional tools in the virtual world of the game.
         The goal of the 2PS is to create in silico elements of game mentoring that are both feasible and appropriate given the
         learning processes of the professional practicum, and thus to make the illusion of the game world more realistic
         while lowering barriers to game play by simplifying the role of the adults in the game.
             Based on our prior work on Urban Science and other epistemic games, we hypothesize that offloading elements
         of reflection in this way will (a) reduce the amount of training, effort, and number of adults required for game play;
         and (b) increase players' immersion in the simulated work environment by providing multiple sources of feedback
         in addition to the GMs. If these hypotheses are correct, it will be possible to reduce the barriers to using epistemic
         games for  STEM   learning.    More generally,  understanding how   to offload elements  of reflection from  social to
         technological resources will make it possible to improve the efficacy of games for STEM learning more generally.
       References
         Adams, P.C. (1998). Teaching and learning with SimCity 2000. Journal of Geography, 97(2): p. 47-55.
         Barab, S.A., et al. (2001). Constructing virtual worlds: Tracing the historical development of learner
                 practices/understandings. Cognition and Instruction, 19(1): p. 47-94.
         Beckett, K.L. and D.W. Shaffer. (2005). Augmented by reality: The pedagogical praxis of urban planning as a
                 pathway to ecological thinking. Journal of Educational Computing Research, 33(1): p. 31-52.
         Bruner, J.S. (1996). The culture of education. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Univ Press.
         diSessa, A.A. (2000). Changing minds: Computers, learning, and literacy, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
         Dreyfus, H.L. and S.E. Dreyfus. (1986). Mind over machine : the power of human intuition and expertise in the era
                 of the computer. New York: Free Press.
         Goldenberg, E.P. and A.A. Cuoco. (1998). What is dynamic geometry?, in Designing learning environments for
                 developing understanding of geometry and space, R. Lehrer and D. Chazan, Editors. Lawrence Erlbaum:
                 Mahwah, NJ. p. 351-368.
         Hatfield, D. and D.W. Shaffer. (2006). Press play: designing an epistemic game engine for journalism. in Paper
                 presented at the International Conference of the Learning Sciences (ICLS). 2006. Bloomington, IN.
         Hoyles, C., R. Noss, and R. Adamson. (2002). Rethinking the microworld idea. Journal of Educational Computing
                 Research, 27(1&2): p. 29-53.
         Kirschner, P.A., J. Sweller, and R.E. Clark. (2006). Why minimal guidance during instruction does not work: An
                 analysis of the failure of constructivist, discovery, problem-based, experiential, and inquiry-based
                 teaching. Educational Psychologist, 41(2): p. 75-86.
         Papert, S. (1980). Mindstorms: Children, computers, and powerful ideas. New York: Basic Books.
         Resnick, M. (1994). Turtles, termites, and traffic jams: Explorations in massively parallel microworlds, Cambridge,
                 MA: MIT Press.
         Schon, D.A. (1987). Educating the reflective practitioner: Toward a new design for teaching and learning in the
                 professions, San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
         Shaffer, D.W. (2004). Pedagogical praxis: The professions as models for post-industrial education. Teachers
                 College Record, 106(7): p. 1401-1421.
         Shaffer, D.W. (2005a). Epistemic Games. Innovate, 1(6). Reprinted in Computer Education (in press).
         Shaffer, D.W. (2007). How Computer Games Help Children Learn, New York: Palgrave.
         Shaffer, D.W., et al. (2005). Video Games and the Future of Learning. Phi Delta Kappan. 87(2): p. 104-111.

3-
     "They listen to stakeholders": Promoting civic thinking through
                                           epistemic game play
                              Elizabeth Sowatzke Bagley and David Williamson Shaffer
                              University of Wisconsin-Madison, Educational Psychology,
                                 1025 West Johnson Street, Madison, WI 53711 USA
                               Email: easowatzke@wisc.edu, dws@education.wisc.edu

Introduction
         Democracies today face ecological crises such as global climate change, water scarcity, and widespread
disease; issues which cannot be solved with basic facts and basic skills alone. These crises are simultaneously crises
of knowledge   and  skills,  but also  crises of values. As such,   we  need     to develop   a mode   of education  that is
simultaneously ecological and civic and is based on the knowledge, skills, and values that guide actions.
         Ehrlich (2000) argues that education should foster and maintain democracy by proposing a more specific
model for educating and involving youth in civic issues. For Ehrlich, civic thinking is composed of three separate,
but interrelated elements: 1) knowledge, 2) skills, and 3) values, or as he describes it, "mutually interdependent sets
of knowledge, virtues, and skills" (xxvi). Here, we use Ehrlich's conception of civic education to examine how a
particular kind of computer game, an epistemic game, modeled on a professional urban planning practicum can
promote civic thinking in young people.

Theoretical Framework
         Shaffer (2006)   argues  that becoming   a  professional, such  as    an urban planner,   involves developing  the
epistemic frame--the ways of knowing, of deciding what is worth knowing, and of adding to the collective body of
knowledge and understanding--of a particular community of practice. For example, professional urban planners'
epistemic frame involves thinking about cities as systems, using their skills to enact planning processes, and valuing
serving the public interest.
         Epistemic games are role playing games that give young people the opportunity to learn the knowledge,
skills, and values of  a  profession  by simulating  professional  training.    For example,    in the game Madison   2200
modeled on the professional practices of urban planners, players developed knowledge of systems thinking and core
skills important to the planning practice. In other words, by playing a well-designed game based on the training of
real urban  planners--rather   than  on  a fictionalized process   of urban     growth  and development     like SimCity--
Madison 2200 provided players with an urban planning framework--the knowledge and skills--for engaging in a
course of action that paralleled the decision-making processes and technological tools of practicing urban planners.
(Beckett and Shaffer, 2005) Here, we extend that work through the epistemic game Urban Science by looking not
only at knowledge and skills, but at the acquisition of values.

Methods
         Urban Science was designed based on an ethnographic study of an urban planning practicum. Similar to the
practicum, Urban Science players were charged with redesigning three neighborhoods. They researched the history
of the sites, conducted physical site visits to see first-hand the character of the place and virtual site visits where they
met with virtual stakeholders expressing their concerns about the neighborhoods. Players then used iPlan, a custom-
designed Geographic Information Systems tool to create preference surveys to submit to stakeholders for feedback.
Using   the stakeholders' feedback,   players  completed  final plans and      compiled final reports  before presenting  to
professional planners and city officials who provided players with input and feedback on their plans.
         In the summer of 2007, twelve middle school students (4 girls, 8 boys) played Urban Science during a four-
week summer program. Clinical pre-, post-, and follow-up interviews with the players were transcribed and broken
into excerpts. Paired t-tests were used to compare interview responses between pre, post, and follow-up interviews
in matched-pair questions.
         Excerpts were coded for knowledge of systems thinking when players used specific vocabulary or terms of
art from the domain or urban planning and mentioned interactions inherent in cities: "[W]ithout it you wouldn't
really  know  what the consequences     were  of the decisions  the city makes--like     by   putting  high-density housing
might increase the crime in the area, or greenspace and trash."
         Coding for skills occurred when players referred to professional planning practices: "[Planners] listen to
stakeholders, they also do background research and site visits...Because they need to know the kind of neighborhood,
the history of it, what is it like, what are the people that live there like."

                                                                                                                             3-
                 Number of players
                Coding for values occurred when players referred to particular norms of good urban planning practice:
         "...The main goal is...trying to come up with a solution for all the different opinions and point of views."

        Results
                Players talked about aspects of systems thinking such as interconnectedness significantly more after the
         game than before the game (pre = 0, post = 8, follow-up = 9; p<0.05).
                Players discussed using planning skills significantly more during the post-interviews than during the pre-
         interviews (pre = 5, post = 11, follow-up = 10; p<0.05).
                Players mentioned serving the public interest significantly more during the post-interviews than during the
         pre-interviews (pre = 2, post = 9, follow-up = 7; p<0.05).

                                                                Changes in frame elements

                                   12

                                   10

                                    8

                                                                                                                        Knowledge
                                    6                                                                                   Skills
                                                                                                                        Values

                                    4

                                    2

                                    0
                                                  Pre                    Post            Follow-up (+3 months)

                                              Figure 1: Changes in frame elements for twelve Urban Science players

                In                  short, through playing  Urban  Science,  players learned  about systems  thinking, enacting  planning
         processes, and the core planning value of serving the public interest.

        Discussion
                By                  participating  in authentic professional practices like managing  physical and  social tradeoffs and
         negotiating                compromises   between  stakeholders, players in  Urban  Science gained knowledge,  skills, and values
         important to the planning profession and used those traits to better understand the complexity of the urban system.
         Further, through playing Urban Science, players learned the type of civic thinking urban planners employ--the type
         of thinking that enables them to see their local contexts as dynamic spaces that they can help mold and shape and
         consequently, envision a particular role for themselves in their community.

       References
         Beckett, K. L. and Shaffer, D. W. (2005). Augmented by reality: The pedagogical praxis of urban planning as a
                pathway to ecological thinking. Journal of Educational Computing Research, 33(1), 31-52.
         Ehrlich, T. (2000). Civic Responsibility and Higher Education. Phoenix: Oryx Press.
         Shaffer, DW. (2006). How Computer Games Help Children Learn. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.

3-
            Digital Zoo: The effects of mentoring on young engineers
                                       Aran Nulty and David Williamson Shaffer
                             University of Wisconsin-Madison, Educational Psychology,
                                 1025 West Johnson Street, Madison, WI 53711 USA
                                  Email: anulty@wisc.edu, dws@education.wisc.edu

Introduction
         Contemporary video games are profoundly engaging and motivating to young people. They keep the gamer
focused for hours at a time. (Gee, 2003) But students need more than time, engagement, and motivation to develop
deep understanding through game play.
         More    than 3  decades  of research   have   shown     that computer   simulations   make   it possible to  create
computational microworlds--"environments where people can explore and learn from what they receive back from
the computer in return for their exploration."(Hoyles, Noss and Adamson, 2002) Working in these environments
gives students an opportunity to learn by tackling problems that are realistic, complex, meaningful, and motivating.
However, this body of research also suggests that simply turning students loose in a computational microworld is a
poor instructional strategy. (Kirschner, Sweller, and Clark 2006; Shaffer 2006) A key component in turning activity
in a microworld into understanding in the real world is reflection: a student's ability to step back from what he or
she is doing and talk with peers and mentors about what worked, what didn't work, and why.
         In this paper we are interested in the role of adult mentors in an epistemic game.         An epistemic game is a
game based on professional practices, in which players learn by going through the same professional practicum
process as professionals in training.    In particular here we focus on the epistemic game Digital Zoo, and look at
whether the mentors in the game contribute to the development of players' understanding of engineering.

Theoretical Framework
         In his  book  Educating  the   Reflective   Practitioner, Schon  (1987)   describes   the process  of becoming    a
professional as a process of alternating action and reflection-on-action. In professional practica, mentors facilitate
this reflection, through  meaningful   dialogue  with    novices.  So  we can    think of  Schon's  process of becoming    a
professional as action followed by meaningful interaction with mentors (Shaffer, 2006). For example, in order for
novice   engineers  to  become    fluent in the      engineering  design  process,    they alternate  between  design    and
conversations with Design Advisors or Clients, in which they reflect on design decisions.
         A professional develops a set of skills, knowledge, identity, values and epistemology that is specific to their
practice (Shaffer, 2006). Becoming an engineer means acquiring the epistemic frame of an engineer (Svarovsky and
Shaffer, 2006). In the game Digital Zoo, players participate in specific engineering activities: they receive a design
task for which   they  brainstorm their  ideas, develop   design   alternatives, test  them, and  choose  which   designs to
recommend.    Participating  in  these   activities, which are   modeled  on  the  activities  of  a professional engineer,
establishes the   groundwork  for  players'  epistemic     frame   development.    In   this paper,  we   examine    whether
meaningful interactions with mentors throughout this process are essential to players' abilities to acquire the frame.

Methods
         We recruited 18 fourth and fifth grade students from a school class to play Digital Zoo for nine hours over
the course of three days. Players designed wire-frame prototypes of characters within a computational spring-mass
modeling environment for a fictitious upcoming animated film. They worked in teams with adult Design Advisors,
and the game concluded with each team of players presenting their design recommendations to Clients.
         In order to assess what players learned during the game, we conducted clinical pre- and post-interviews
with each player. We coded a set of six questions about the engineering frame that were identical in pre- and post-
interviews for 12 elements of the epistemic frame of engineering: the set of skills, knowledge, identity, values and
epistemology that engineers develop in their professional training.
         We used epistemic network analysis to construct a weighted network graph representation of the pre and
post epistemic frame for each player by computing a separate adjacency matrix, a, for the pre- and post-interview
responses of each player. Each element of the matrix ai,j was determined by the presence of frame elements ei and ej
in the frame questions Qk for a player's pre- or post-interview by the co-occurance formula (1). We then computed
the  weighted density   D of each  player's  pre-    and post-epistemic   frame  (2)   and determined    whether  or not the
weighted density of each player's frame increased between pre- and post-interview.

                                                                                                                             3-
         (1)                                                   (2)
        ai, j  6 ¦1®    ifk 1 ¯0ei  Qk    and    e j  Qk ½¾¿     D    ¦i, j §¨a i, j ©¨ 2 2 ·¸¹¸

                  We examined two questions from each player's post interview that asked about their experiences working
         with the adult mentors who  played  Design   Advisors   and  those who  played             Clients in the game.  We coded for
         meaningful  mentor  interactions when   a player  reported that the adult mentors             helped  them to think about their
         designs or themselves and their job differently.

        Results
                  Here we present three results from this analysis:
         1. The mean weighted density of the epistemic frame graph for players increased significantly from pre (mean=.207)
         to post-interview(1.237, p<.01).
         2. Out of 18 players,11 reported meaningful mentor interaction.
         3. Players who reported meaningful mentor interactions were significantly more likely to show a positive change in
         weighted density (p<.05).

        Discussion
                  The players in Digital Zoo who reported that the design advisors and clients changed the way they thought
         about their designs were  significantly more likely  to demonstrate  an increased             understanding  of the engineering
         frame by the end of the game. Thus, we conclude that, in Digital Zoo, adult mentors with expertise in the game's
         domain play a key role in helping players understand engineering.

       References
         Gee, J.P. (2003). What video games have to teach us about learning and literacy. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
         Hoyles, C., R. Noss & R. Adamson. (2002). Rethinking the microworld idea. Journal of Educational Computing
                  Research, 27(1&2): p. 29-53.
         Kirschner, P.A., J. Sweller, & R.E. Clark. (2006). Why minimal guidance during instruction does not work: An
                  analysis of the failure of constructivist, discovery, problem-based, experiential, and inquiry-based teaching.
                  Educational Psychologist, 41(2): p. 75-86.
         Schon, D.A.. (1987). Educating the reflective practitioner: Toward a new design for teaching and learning in the
                  professions. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
         Shaffer, D.W. (2006). How Computer Games Help Children Learn. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
         Svarovsky, G. N., & Shaffer, D. W. (2006). Engineering girls gone wild: Developing an engineering identity in
                  Digital Zoo. Poster at the International Conference of the Learning Sciences (ICLS), Bloomington, IN.

3-0
                   Player-mentor interactions in an epistemic game:
                                                 A preliminary analysis
                                        Padraig Nash and David Williamson Shaffer
                              University of Wisconsin-Madison, Educational Psychology,
                                    1025 West Johnson St., Madison, WI 53711 USA
                                    Email: pnash@wisc.edu, dws@education.wisc.edu

Introduction
         Epistemic    role  playing  games        prepare young   people    to solve real-world   problems    by  developing   the
epistemic frames of professionals (Beckett & Shaffer, 2005; Hatfield & Shaffer, 2006b; Svarovsky & Shaffer, 2006).
To   accomplish    this, epistemic  games        feature frequent interactions   between   players  and adults    in the roles  of
professional   mentors   (Shaffer, 2006a).       Here, we  examine   this mentoring   role  by   measuring   the extent  to which
players' epistemic frames come to resemble mentors' frames during these interactions.

Theoretical Framework
         In professional communities of practice, mentors play an essential role in the learning and development of
novice members (Lave & Wenger, 1991).                In   professional training  experiences,    or practica, novices  engage   in
simulations of the kinds of professional problem solving they will encounter as experts, interspersed with guidance
from more experienced mentors (Schon, 1987).              Mentors help novices develop the epistemic frame of the practice:
the  collection of skills, knowledge,   identity,      values, and   epistemology    that shape  professional   thinking (Shaffer,
2006).   Key    to the   concept of  an  epistemic       frame, however,    is  that frame    elements are   not simply   isolated
components of practice, but are linked to one another in a systematic way to create a coherent professional vision
(Goodwin, 1994).
         An epistemic game is a game based on professional practices, in which players learn by going through the
same  professional  practicum    process       as professionals in   training  (Shaffer,  2006).  In this study, we look at the
epistemic game Urban Science, in which participants play the role of urban planners and are aided by mentors called
planning consultants. We focus on how planning consultants shape the epistemic frame of players in the game--and
how this process can be uncovered through epistemic network analysis.

Methods
         We recruited 15 middle school students to play Urban Science for 80 hours during the summer. In the game,
players redesign three neighborhoods in their city. They conduct background research, physical and virtual visits,
create preference surveys to solicit stakeholder feedback, and complete final plans for redevelopment of the city.
Four graduate students served as planning consultants. In this mentoring role, they met regularly with players to
reflect on their work as planners.

Data
         These    regular  interactions were       recorded,   transcribed, and  coded    for the presence    of elements   of the
epistemic frame    of  urban planning:       the  skills (strategies for accomplishing     planning  tasks),  knowledge   (use  of
planning terms of art or discussion of cities as systems), identity (talk of feeling like a planner or professional),
values  (talk  of  what   things are important       to   planners), and    epistemology   (talking  about   or  engaging   in the
substantiation of claims).

Data analysis
         To analyze the linkages between frame elements over time, we computed two sets of adjacency matrices, pi
and mi, representing the co-occurrence of frame elements in each interaction i in the utterances of either players (pi)
or mentors (mi). We then computed the centrality of each frame element e following interaction i, for players (P) and
for mentors (M) as:

Pi e   ¦ p *e, j 2       where  p*          i¦ p j , and similarly for M and m.
            j                              j   1

We then compared changes in P and M over the course of the game for each element of the frame.

                                                                                                                                   3-
                   Centrality
                                                                                                     Centrality
       Results
                                The     elements   of the   players'     epistemic frame      and the            elements    of  the  mentors'    frame    together     become
         progressively more central. For example, changes in the centrality of values in the players' frame followed closely
         changes in the mentors' frame (see graph 1). The progression of relative centrality of each frame element was not
         always the same for the mentors and players, as in the changing centrality of epistemology (see graph 2). However,
         even when there is a lag, the slopes for both the mentors and players increase consistently and similarly through the
         game,                suggesting    that   with   more   time     the centrality     of the frame              element   of   epistemology     would   continue       to
         increase.

                               Graph 1: Changes in Centrality of Values                           Graph 2: Changes in Centrality of Epistemology
                              160
                              140                                                                               120
                              120                                                                               100
                              100                                              Mentor Values                     8080                                            Mentor
                               60                                              Player Values                     60                                              Epistemology
                               40                                                                                40                                              Player
                               20                                                                                20                                              Epistemology
                                0                                                                                 0
                                   1  6 11 16 21 26 31 36 41 46 51 56 61                                             1  6 11 16 21 26 31 36 41 46 51 56 61
                                               Interactions                                                                      Interactions

                                We thus conclude that in this game, by sharing the discourse of urban planners with planning consultants in
         the process of facing real planning problems, players began to internalize the epistemic frame that characterizes the
         planning profession and that was enacted in the discourse of the planning consultants. Moreover, since the adjacency
         matrices p and m represent not isolated frame elements but linkages between frame elements, the similarities in
         centrality of frame elements over time in P and M suggests that players internalized not just isolated elements of
         professional discourse but a systematic pattern of practice characteristic of the epistemic frame of urban planning.

       Limitations
                                This study is clearly preliminary in nature.                 We analyzed frame elements at a relatively coarse level of
         granularity, and in subsequent work plan to examine how specific aspects of the skills, knowledge, identity, values,
         and epistemology                   of  planning     are linked    through  player-mentor                   interactions  during    game     play.  Because     players
         interacted with different mentors and worked in different teams throughout the game, in this study we examined the
         collective frame of the mentors and the collective frame of the players. In future work we plan to conduct a more
         detailed analysis of the development of the frame in individual players through their unique interactions over the
         course of the game.

                                The     results of this   preliminary     look at  the interactions               between     mentors    and   players     suggest that   such
         further investigation is warranted.

       References
         Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge: Cambridge
                                University Press.
         Goodwin, C. (1994). Professional Vision. American Anthropologist, 96(3), 606-633.
         Schon, D.A.. (1987). Educating the reflective practitioner: Toward a new design for teaching and learning in the
                                professions. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
         Shaffer, D.W. (2006). How Computer Games Help Children Learn. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.

3-
