       Rethinking Analysis of Progressive Discourse in Online Learning:
                                         An Activity Theory Perspective
          Nobuko Fujita, Clare Brett, OISE/University of Toronto, 252 Bloor St. W., Toronto, ON, Canada, M5S 1V6
                                        Email: nfujita@oise.utoronto.ca, cbrett@oise.utoronto.ca

                   Abstract: This paper describes an innovative approach to analyze the progression of dialogue
                   in asynchronous      online   forums.   Although    schemes   analyzing    the  content   of individual
                   messages exist, they fail to capture the subtle relationships between messages that constitute
                   progressive discourse for knowledge building. We present a group-level discourse analysis
                   based    on cultural-historical  activity  theory   that characterizes   the unfolding    collaborative
                   learning  and   knowledge     construction   processes   in context. The    application  of  the  mixed-
                   method approach is illustrated in the context of two online graduate courses. The analysis
                   highlights connected sequences of discursive actions that multiple students make to advance
                   shared understanding. The mechanics of the approach offered in this paper can be used as an
                   analytic and transformative tool for enhancing online learning, research, and instruction.

       Objectives
                   Historically, researchers analyzing online discourse to improve the depth of learning that occurs in
         these computer-supported       collaborative   learning   (CSCL)      environments    have  focused    on   the  content of
         individual   contributions.   Existing  content   analysis    schemes   (e.g.  Garrison,   Anderson,    &    Archer,  2001;
         Gunawardena, Lowe, & Anderson, 1997; Henri, 1992) thus tend to classify the content of individual student's
         notes into   hierarchical    categories of   interaction  and phases    of  knowledge     construction  or   inquiry. From
         sociocultural perspectives, however, knowledge is constructed through social interactions among individuals
         mediated by tools (Vygotsky, 1978). It is critical for research in CSCL to understand the collaborative process
         of knowledge construction that occur as students try to learn and the role that tools may play in mediating their
         learning  (Hmelo-Silver,     2003). Different    analysis approaches    than  reductive   content  analysis  are needed  to
         understand how assessments of individual engagement in the discourse relate to assessments of group cognition
         and knowledge building, where the holistic outcome exceeds the sum of its parts (Bereiter, 2002; Stahl, 2003).
         As Lee, Chan & van Aalst (2006) observed, assessing and fostering the complex interactions between individual
         and group understanding remains a challenge for learning scientists.
                   In the   present   paper, we   rethink  the   analysis   of student  discourse   aimed    at deep   learning  and
         knowledge    building    based on   an  cultural-historical  activity  theory  (Engeström,   1987,    1993)  framework   to
         highlight the importance of cultural context in which this activity takes place. Knowledge building is defined as
         "the production and continual improvement of ideas of value to a community" (Scardamalia & Bereiter, 2003,
         p. 1370). Knowledge building pedagogy thus emphasizes constructivist learning for deep understanding. A focal
         activity in knowledge building communities is to engage in progressive discourse through which participants
         develop "a new understanding that everyone involved agrees is superior to their own previous understanding"
         (Bereiter, 1994, p. 6). Bereiter (1994) presents a set of quasi-moral commitments that distinguish progressive
         discourse from other kinds of discourse and that amount to devotion to advancing knowledge and deepening
         understanding over time: 1) work toward common understanding satisfactory to all; 2) frame questions and
         propositions in ways that enable evidence to be brought to bear on them; 2) expand the body of collectively
         valid propositions; and 4) allow any belief to be subjected to criticism if it will advance the discourse. In short,
         progressive   discourse   represents    what  it  means   for students   to  engage    in knowledge-building     discourse
         (Bereiter, 2002).
                   While central to knowledge building theory and pedagogy, the characteristics of progressive discourse
         as an  activity  integral  to  and  constitutive  of   knowledge    building   is not yet  well  understood.    Progressive
         discourse  in  the    online learning   context   is a  complex    process  distributed   across  individuals,   the  course
         environment,    and   the  discussion   activity. Activity    theory,  increasingly   being used    as  an   analytical and
         transformative construct to explain social and distributed cognition in higher education and workplace settings,
         may   shed   light on  how    instantiations of   progressive  discourse   may    unfold  online   in  real online courses.
         Therefore,   we    begin  by  introducing  the   activity theory   framework      informing the   group-level   analysis of
         discourse.   Thereafter,  the  mechanics   of the    method  will  be outlined,   and illustrative examples   of   emergent
         connected sequences of progressive discourse will be considered in the cases of two online graduate courses or
         "activity systems."      The  main   assumptions     in this  paper   concern  the   necessity of   analyzing   progressive
         discourse for knowledge building using a group unit of analysis, and the complexity of the systemic tensions
         that  opportunistically   drive discourse    towards    knowledge     building,   or alternatively,   present a  barrier to
         knowledge building.

1-
Theoretical Framework
         Activity theory is an interdisciplinary theory initiated by the founders of the cultural-historical school
of Russian psychology--Lev Vygotsky, A.N. Leont'ev, and A.R. Luria--in the 1920s and 1930s. The approach
has since been expanded by a large number of contemporary scholars in both in the former socialist countries
and in   the West (Engeström,     2001; Engeström,   Miettinen,   & Punamäki,     1999). In   contrast to   the  standard
cognitive perspective that identifies individual mental structures as the context of learning, the activity theory
perspective takes the entire group or activity system as the unit of analysis, including the societal and cultural
aspects in its notion of context. Activity theory thus offers a naturalistic framework for characterizing human
activity and  provides  a set  of perspectives on   practice that bridges   the individual  and   social  levels (Barab,
Barnett, Yamagata-Lynch, Squire, & Keating, 2002). Yrjö Engeström's (1987; 1993) activity theory framework
guiding  this study   graphically represents  the expansion   of  Vygotsky's    (1978) tri-partite model    of  mediated
action in Leont'ev's   (1981)  three-level model    of collective object-oriented   activity, conscious   individual   or
group goal-oriented action, and unconscious operation (see Figure 1):

 Figure 1. The structure of a human activity system (Engeström 1987, p. 78). The points of each triangle in the
                           model above indicate the components of the activity system:

         Subject refers to the individual or subgroup whose agency is chosen as the point of view in the
         analysis. The object refers to the "raw material" or "problem space" at which the activity is
         directed and  which   is molded   or transformed    into outcomes   with  the help   of physical   and
         symbolic,    external and  internal  tools (mediating    instruments   and signs).   The  community
         comprises    multiple individuals and/or   subgroups  who   share   the  same  general   object.   The
         division of  labor refers  to  both  the horizontal division of    tasks between    members     of the
         community and vertical division of power and status. Finally the rules refer to the explicit and
         implicit regulations, norms, and conventions that constrain actions and interactions within the
         activity system. (Engeström 1993, p. 67)

         Engeström's framework also allows us to examine the secondary contradictions that exist between the
components. The contradictions may be considered as systemic tensions that drive and sustain innovation in
these systems (Barab et al. 2002). Elsewhere this framework has been employed to identify activity structure
through  analysis of  discourse   (Bracewell  &   Witte, 2003;    Sicilia, Bracewell,  Park,  &  Tung,    2007), and   to
investigate  knowledge  building   community   dynamics   in  elementary    classrooms  (Hewitt,   2004;    van  Aalst &
Hill, 2006). This paper departs from previous research by using activity theory to characterize, in situ, student
discourse that is aimed at the object of engaging in progressive discourse in fully online graduate courses. It also
describes  in  detail the innovative    group-level  analysis  approach     used. As   online    learning   opportunities
proliferate, it becomes increasingly important to be able to analyze discourse to improve collaborative learning
and knowledge construction processes in these contexts given the affordances and constraints of the computer-
mediated communication medium.

Methods
         This design-based research study (Brown, 1992; Collins, 1992) made continual changes to instructional
scaffolding within and across two thirteen-week online graduate educational technology courses delivered using
Web-Knowledge Forum (Fujita & Brett, 2007). We roughly followed Chi's (1997) set of functional steps in our
mixed-method approach to analyzing our online discourse data. First, we reduced the number of notes to code.
Two weekly discussion "views," folders that contain student postings for a particular week, from each of the
two courses were selected as representative of the students' discourse from the beginning and end of the two
courses. Next, each note was read several times in the context of the thread in which the student posted the note.

                                                                                                                             1-
         Using constant comparison (Merriam, 1998; Strauss & Corbin, 1998), we qualitatively coded the content of
         each note to topic, or what we refer to as the "problem". This clustered notes referring to a common problem of
         understanding together. We historically ordered these notes to create sequences of connected notes. Implicit in
         clustering and chronological ordering notes thus is the assumption that knowledge building will emerge from
         sustained discussion on a common problem.
                  Second, we segmented notes into theme units, "a single thought unit or idea unit that conveys a single
         item of information extracted from a segment of content" (Budd, Thorp, & Donohew, 1969, p. 34). Because
         researchers have expressed concern about the subjective nature of theme units (e.g. Rourke, Anderson, Garrison,
         &  Archer,   2001)   we  calculated inter-rater reliability for  segmentation   as well  as  coding   described below
         following Strijbos, Martens, Prins, & Jochems (2006).
                  Third,  we  adapted  a  coding  scheme    developed  by  Zhang,   Scardamalia,  Lamon,   Messina,    & Reeve
         (2007) to code each theme unit segment. These schemes embody knowledge building and progressive inquiry
         frameworks consistent with our study. Adaptations addressed complex knowledge and reflective practice at the
         graduate  level.    We   removed    the "correctness    of  ideas"   category,  a  four-point   scale  for  measuring
         misconceptions    in  Zhang   et  al.   more  suited for    studying   elementary   school   science;  we   added  the
         "metacognitive   comments"    category   following   Muukkonen,     Lakkala,   and Hakkarainen   (2005),   as  research
         suggests that graduate students employ metacognitive control and learning strategies for progressive discourse
         (Oshima & Oshima, 1999). From the data, we also added the emergent categories "socio-affective connection"
         and "technical issues."
                  Fourth, we operationalized this coding scheme. Using coded theme units, we mapped sequences of
         actions multiple    students made   to  transform   the subjects'  shared   understanding   of a particular   problem.
         Importantly, we considered such a mapping over two or more notes a minimal unit of analysis. We also situated
         these actions in the context of the secondary tensions that drive activity in the system.
                  Finally,   we   sought  patterns in   the  mapped    results  within  episodes   of   progressive  discourse,
         concentrating    on  the patterns  of   interconnections  between   multiple   students' notes.  We    interpreted the
         interactions to  understand   characteristics of progressive    discourse. This   highlights the interaction   between
         individual and collaborative processes between multiple student notes that together work towards the collective
         outcome  of   shared   conceptual   understanding.   From   such   qualitative assessments   of  knowledge     building
         discourse, quantification of the relationships can be developed in future research. Doing so will make the labor-
         intensive assessment method described in this paper more useable in practice.

       Data Sources
                  Four types of data were collected: student discourse, pre and post assignments, learning journals and
         online  questionnaires.  Participants  were  33  students  enrolled in two  online  graduate   courses in  educational
         technology at a large, research-intensive, Canadian university.       Both courses were delivered using web-based
         Knowledge Forum (KF) (version 4.5.3). KF differs from typical conferencing systems by having features such
         as scaffolds, annotations    and  "rise-above"  or  summary   note   capabilities, and  allowing  lateral  linking and
         references to be created between notes in different topic views. This paper focuses on qualitative analysis of the
         student discourse.

       Results and Conclusions
                  The central concern of this study was to capture the trajectory of progressive discourse as it unfolded in
         two semester-long online graduate courses. Instead of classifying the content or product of individual student
         notes in these courses into categories of interaction or knowledge construction, we characterized interactions
         between  a   minimum     of  two participants  that turned   out well--episodes    of  group   discourse  that seemed
         progressive. We were not interested in concluding whether knowledge building did or did not occur in these
         semester-long courses. Rather, we were interested in understanding the process through which students begin to
         construct deep understanding of key concepts through high-quality online discourse.
                  Qualitative analysis of the reduced sample of 465 student notes at the note level revealed that students
         revisited certain topics or "problems" over time. Within and across the two courses, student notes coded to 26
         emergent topics or problems of understanding for the students. The largest cluster contained 61 notes from all
         four selected views and dealt with the problem of understanding the affordances and constraints of different
         computer-mediated communication (CMC) environments. These notes showed some evidence of progressive
         discourse. Over time, students changed from writing short, superficial notes sharing personal opinions or listing
         attributes of CMC environments to contributing longer, reflective notes using KF scaffolds to build on to peers'
         ideas respectfully and to remain open to considering different perspectives.
                  The  theme   unit  codes included   categories  and subcategories   adapted  from   Zhang  et al. (2007)  and
         Muukkonen     et al. (2005),  with  additional  categories  added   as they emerged    from  the data  (1). Inter-rater
         reliability on segmentation (88%) and coding (83%) for were achieved on 10% of the data by two independent
         raters. Overall, the theme-unit analysis showed that students identified slightly fewer problems of understanding

1-0
towards the end of both courses, but proportionally more of these problems were posed as questions to peers.
For example,     in Course    1, Educational    Applications  of CMC,      students identified 18    problems   in  week  3
compared    to 15   problems  in   week  10.  Similarly, in Course    2,   Constructivist  Theory   and Design   of  Online
Learning Environments, students identified 23 problems in week 3 compared to 19 problems in week 10. A
possible explanation    for   the  reduced number     of   problems  may    be that students   were    investigating fewer
problems,   but  were  discussing   them   in more   depth.  Instead  of   relying on   the instructor  or weekly   student
discussion  leaders,   students   shouldered    more   responsibility for   generating    questions  within   their role as
discussion   participants.    This  suggests    that students  increasingly    demonstrated    more     epistemic   agency
(Scardamalia, 2002; Scardamalia & Bereiter, 1991) for sustaining progressive discourse online. In so doing,
they posed "wonderment questions" to explore ideas and negotiated a fit between personal ideas with those of
others. As well, analysis of the theme units revealed that students referenced their peers' ideas more often at the
end of the course in both courses. For instance, students in Course 1 referenced their peers 26 times in week 3
compared to 50 times in week 10. Likewise, students in Course 2 referenced their peers 21 times in week 3
compared to 24 times in week 10. In KF, students may insert live hyperlinks to another note, view, or website
URL. When referencing peers, students can link to another student's note in the same view or a different view.
This allows students to create a "richly connected hypertext document" in which students cite others' ideas
rather than copying and claiming them as their own (Scardamalia, 2002).
         Using activity theory, we methodically examined sequences of actions that multiple students made to
transform the group's understanding of a particular problem.        By "actions," we refer to the level associated with
individual knowledge and skills as conditioned by the larger cultural scope of the higher level of activity and
supported by the lower level of automatic operations (Leont'ev, 1981; Kuutti, 1996; Barab, Evans, & Baek,
2004). We were interested in tracing the actions that multiple students made while engaging in the activity of
progressive discourse. To do so, we traced actions over a group of notes using the theme unit codes.
         To illustrate, we present two examples of episodes of what we consider progressive discourse from the
data, wherein    groups   of  students  carry   out  interdependent   actions  to  achieve   shared  understanding.   Both
episodes are brief excerpts selected from longer threads of discussion involving the whole course community.
Note that in the transcripts below, the segments in which students quoted or referenced their peers were omitted
to avoid repetition. Knowledge Forum's scaffold supports are indicated with italics, and abbreviated theme unit
coding is shown in uppercase letters within brackets (1).
         The first episode portrays multiple nested actions spread over four days in Course 1, week 3. This
week's student discussion leaders, Laurel and Dylan, asked the course community to discuss "What value do
asynchronous and synchronous tools have in augmenting collaboration and communication." The subject is a
group of students within the course community who were interested discussing in how different kinds of CMC
environments can mediate learning and knowledge creation. The instrument includes asynchronous discussion
(KF) and synchronous chat (FirstClass) environments, and other course materials. The object is to engage in
progressive discourse. An advanced M.A. student, Adam, initiates the discussion by questioning the capability
of synchronous chat tools for supporting idea improvement and knowledge building. Adam's action challenges
the discussion leaders' responsibilities and creates a disturbance by taking on the epistemic agency for asking
questions (Scardamalia, 2002; Scardamalia & Bereiter, 1991). This is an underlying cause of the secondary
tension  in this activity system    between   the synchronous    instrument    and  the object to   engage  in progressive
discourse.

         Day 1
         Adam:      Different opinion  I would    like to  share my   concern   about    the possibility   of idea
         improvement and advancement (a.k.a. knowledge building) in synchronous environments like
         chat or instant messaging. (OU)
         Reason     I believe idea  improvement      takes certain time--to    reflect, to  revise, improve,  and
         generalize--that is hardly available in synchronous online communication tools. (OU)
         I need to understand if anybody can think of a specific case of idea improvement (as opposed
         to idea sharing) during a chat session (PE)

         Belinda (building on to Adam's I need to understand): I need to understand how you define
         idea improvement? Before I can answer your question, I would need to know what constitutes
         and improvement (PE)

         Day 2
         Paul:   (building   on  to Adam's    I need  to understand)     I understand   that some    synchronous
         environments allow you to copy a transcript of your chat session and paste it into a word
         processor. Couldn't knowledge building be promoted by reflecting on the ideas captured in
         the transcript and discussing those reflections in future sessions? (RP, OE, PE)

                                                                                                                               1-1
                 Day 4
                 Adam (responding to Belinda's I need to understand; accepting Paul's suggestion by citing a
                 chat transcript with Chloe, Yvonne, and Sharon):
                 Adam: If an idea has certain application like explaining the world around us or generalizing
                 experience or being a mental model, an improved idea does the same thing but--BETTER...
                 Chloe: ok, so idea improvement addresses the exceptions and counterexamples
                 Adam: it is necessitated by counterexamples...or perceived imperfections...counterexamples
                 to an effective theory/good conceptual artifact (RP, RS)

                 In the transcript above, a group of three students contribute to developing a robust understanding of
        "idea improvement" and how synchronous tools can mediate this process. They honor the progressive discourse
        commitment to work toward mutual understanding. Initially, Adam's action is to challenge Laurel and Dylan's
        statement by asking an explanatory problem (PE). Belinda's action is in response to Adam's own unelaborated
        idea (OU) of idea improvement, in which she asks for a definition to transform her understanding of this term.
        Belinda thus poses an explanatory problem (PE). Paul's action is reframing the discussion to transform his
        understanding  of  how  synchronous   tools  can  support idea  improvement.  Finally,    Adam's  action  is taking
        responsibility for fulfilling  Belinda's request for a definition   and  accepting Paul's  suggestion  to  use chat
        transcripts in asynchronous discussion. Adam thus quotes an excerpt from a chat in which one object of the chat
        was to transform Chloe's understanding of idea improvement. This chat transcript that Adam quotes serves as a
        tool to mediate this group's understanding of the relationship between synchronous and asynchronous tools to
        support idea improvement and knowledge building. We argue that the understanding of the role of synchronous
        tools in supporting   knowledge    building has  deepened  for  all participants  as  a result of these  embedded
        interactions, where students    acknowledge  the contribution  of others  through  of referencing  peers  (RP) and
        progressive problem solving. Students consistently inserted direct quotes in the body of their build-on note or
        used KF's hyperlinked referencing feature to work on the problem. The individual actions are nested together
        and result in progressive discourse, and the collective object of this group to engage in progressive discourse for
        knowledge building is attained through the interdependence of these multiple actions. The episode ends as the
        collective object is attained.
                 The   second episode   displays multiple actions by   different students  taking place   over two days  in
        Course 2, week 3. The subject, a group of students in the course community, is responding to student discussion
        leaders  Paul  and Brian's question,  "What   opportunities    do online  environments    present for  coordinating
        experiences into representations and mappings and then systems as learners work toward understanding?" The
        instruments include KF and course materials. The object is to engage in progressive discourse on the concept of
        building versus borrowing (Schwartz & Fischer, 2003). The secondary tension shown in this episode is between
        the rules and the object. The rules include course requirements for participation and individual student learning
        goals, in this case Dana's goal to learn HTML tags to format a note composed in KF. The dialogue below opens
        as a M.Ed. student, Chloe, agrees with another M.Ed. student, Dana, that asynchronous CMC environments can
        facilitate "building an understanding of a concept." In addition, Chloe suggests that synchronous tools were
        even more helpful in deepening her understanding in Course 1:

                 Day 1
                 Chloe: (building on to Dana's note) Opinion From my prior experiences in on-line courses I
                 find this statement to be true. I have been able to eventually use other students' knowledge to
                 help me better understand concepts. However, it is the very act of "bouncing back and forth"
                 that sometimes throws me off course, i.e., I want the answer now not when someone else
                 takes the time to read my note and reply. Where I have had better success is when I have had
                 synchronous chats using tools such as MSN messenger. (OE)
                 Reason In synchronous chats I can ask a question of another student and get an immediate
                 response if, of course, they know the answer. I feel more comfortable asking for clarification
                 and examples about a topic. I don't worry as much about wording or grammar and therefore I
                 find it to be more similar to having a f2f chat. (OE)
                 Example If Dana and I had chatted I could have told her in less than a minute that you need to
                 use the HTML <b> and </b> surrounding the word you wanted bolded (OU)
                 How idea is useful If others also have this same opinion then perhaps we should think of
                 incorporating both methods (synchronized and asynchronized chats) into all online courses as
                 we are doing in this week's discussion. (OU)
                 Problem/limitation It requires two or more people to be in front of their computers at the same
                 time, which takes away from the benefits of asynchronous forms such as Knowledge Forum
                 that doesn't require that. Does anyone else have any further thoughts? i.e. benefits/weaknesses

1-
         of my idea? (PE)

         Day 2
         April: Chloe,   you  provided  a  great  response    to Dana's   posted  message.   It is  true that
         synchronous features such as chat would help you resolve any questions that you have. In
         thinking  about the  process  of  asking   questions    and reflecting  this to my  own     personal
         classroom experiences, I must agree with Schwartz and Fischer who state that teachers should
         stop answering some questions or providing quick answers. (SAC, MC; rest of note omitted)

         Chloe: (annotation on April's note) Very true, it never occurred to me to think of it that way.
         Lately I have been so busy with school, work, and the kids that I tend to look for the quickest
         solution, rather than appreciating the journey I just want to get to the destination. (MC, SAC)
         Drew (building on to Chloe's Problem/limitation from day 1): I think there is a tradeoff in this
         respect. What   we  gain  in immediate    response   time   when  having  a   chat  or face-to-face
         conversation,  we lose   in terms  of a  variety  of viewpoints   and   consideration  time.  While
         postings are not so direct and immediate, they allow time for a number of people to respond to
         a question. They also allow people to consider the question in depth and formulate considered
         responses. This is of benefit to complex questions, but I agree that a more immediate form of
         contact is better for questions of clarification or simple content. (OE)
         I wonder if the immediate response would be borrowing and the considered response would
         be a  better attempt  at building. And    yet, maybe    the considered   response   is just a more
         complex form of borrowing. Need to think about this more... (SE, MC)

         Sue: Perhaps the question is not whether one is better than another but rather, "What role do
         synchronous/asynchronous learning environments play in a particular course?" For example,
         if you are taking a course which requires students to grasp concepts at key stages of a course
         before moving   onto  other  concepts--you     may   find that synchronous    chats are beneficial.
         Students would have the opportunity to ask questions, clarify concepts and you would have a
         feel for whether the majority of students were able to build onto the concept or move onto
         another subject area. This could occur in a relatively short chat period vs. a longer chat period
         using an asynchronous forum. (OE)

         In the transcript above, a group of four students engage in progressive discourse on the concept of
building versus   borrowing--the  challenge    of actively constructing   ideas. Chloe,  April,  Drew,   and  Sue are
honoring the progressive discourse commitment to work toward mutual understanding. The systemic tension is
between the collective object to engage in progressive discourse on building versus borrowing and the rules, the
attempt by some students to learn, concurrently, the course technology. In this episode, the KF version that the
students were using required knowledge of HTML tags in order to format notes (bolding, inserting tables, etc.).
         Chloe's  main  action is to  propose  that all online   environments    incorporate both    synchronous  and
asynchronous communication. Chloe explains that synchronous chats were particularly helpful to deepen her
personal understanding in Course 1. Having prior knowledge of HTML, Chloe states that she could have taught
Dana how to use the HTML tags in "less than a minute" during a synchronous chat. Fortunately, Chloe remains
open to having her belief about quick answers to be subjected to criticism to serve the collective object of
progressive discourse. April's action is to politely and indirectly challenge Chloe's focus on obtaining quick
answers via synchronous chat. April elaborates source-based ideas (SE) from Schwartz and Fischer (2003) and
integrates these with her own classroom teaching experiences in her note. April emphasizes that students need to
coordinate experiences on their own to create representations and that instructors should stop answering some
questions to bring this about. April's action mediates growth in Chloe's conceptual understanding that active
construction of ideas is not about borrowing quick answers. Chloe's annotation on April's note suggests that
some shift  in  Chloe's thinking  took  place. Drew's    action  is  to accept  responsibility  for  further exploring
problems and limitations of synchronous tools in response to Chloe's request. Drew integrates his own ideas
(OE) and source-based ideas (SE) from course readings to do so. Sue's action is to build onto Drew's note and
reframe the discussion polarizing synchronous and asynchronous learning environments into a more useful one
for practice that emphasizes the different roles that each can play in the design of a particular course. Later, in
week 10, these Course 2 students discuss the role that synchronous and asynchronous tools play in the design of
online courses in different content areas, referencing successful programs in subjects like music and drama that
some students initially did not believe would be suitable for the online learning.
         In both episodes individual actions by themselves do not achieve the collective object to engage in
progressive discourse. Rather, the actions are interdependent. Progress is made when students are committed to
remain open to examining their beliefs, critique their peers constructively, accept responsibility for sustaining

                                                                                                                          1-
         the discourse, and reframe the discussion in ways that will enable evidence to be brought to bear on ideas. This
         exchange suggests an "exploratory talk" pattern more accurately described as Initiation, Discussion, Response,
         Feedback    (IDRF)   (Wegerif,    1996)   than   the  more    typical  Initiation, Response,    Feedback    (IRF)   pattern of
         pedagogical   interaction    (Sinclair  &   Coulthard,    1975).  Patterns  of  actions    that emerged    through   mapping
         sequences of progressive discourse in the data include a student finding a problem, requesting explanation from
         peers with a question (PE), followed by their peers referencing the theme unit segment containing the question
         (RP), proposing an explanation integrating own ideas (OE) with ideas from the course readings (SE). When
         students contributed unelaborated ideas of their own not supported by evidence (OU), this led their peers to
         reference this segment, then ask a question of clarification or express disagreement, which in turn sparked a
         knowledge building turn.
                  Analyses from an activity theory perspective showcase the inseparability of individual actions from the
         community    context  in  which     they are  enacted.    Identifying  secondary    tensions    between  components    in   the
         asynchronous online forums helps us understand what drives innovation or presents barriers in these online
         course   activity  systems.  In  the example     episodes,    the secondary   tension   between   the   object  to  engage  in
         progressive discourse and other components of the system, namely the instrument in episode 1 and the rules in
         episode 2, was productive. Other systemic tensions were less auspicious for knowledge building. For instance,
         students balanced learning how to use the scaffold support tools in KF with the collective object of progressive
         discourse. Students also contended with rules, like expectations to meet their own goals and the instructor's
         course participation grade, the object of engaging in progressive discourse, and the outcome of deeper shared
         understanding. Common practices that students carry out online can efficiently process voluminous notes in
         forums,  but  can   contribute   to  thread   death   and  a  new   culture of  conferencing     that   focuses  attention  on
         progressive problem solving is needed (Hewitt, 2005). Despite explicitly fostering cultural norms conducive to
         progressive discourse in this study, the systemic tension between various components in the activity systems,
         especially between individual and collaborative aspects, remained unresolved.
                  Given the small sample size and the exploratory nature of this study, we do not claim to generalize the
         findings reported here, but the approach we explored provided a promising avenue for analyzing complex group
         discourse activity. Activity theory provided a cultural-historical grounding for the individual actions we mapped
         over time. In future research, it may be fruitful to compare this qualitative analysis of progressive discourse with
         more   quantitative  analyses    of the  ties that students   formed   with each    other  in each   course  to highlight   the
         interdependent    nature  of the  actions   directed  at  the progressive   discourse  activity.  Our   analysis inspired   by
         activity theory   revealed   contradictions   in  the course   activity systems,    which  has   important   implications   for
         instruction. For   example,    a common     secondary     tension that  existed in  the data    was  between    the object, to
         engage   in  progressive  discourse,     versus  the  design   of  the  technological   tool    used to deliver  the  course,
         Knowledge Forum. Instructionally, it was important to give students time and opportunity to learn features of
         the technology in parallel with learning the course concepts, especially since the design of sophisticated CSCL
         environments    like Knowledge      Forum     feature socio-cognitive   tools  that  embody     many    design  principles  for
         discussion-based learning.

       Endnotes
          (1)  Theme  unit  codes  were  abbreviated   as follows:  problem  of explanation   (PE), problem   of fact (PF),  referencing
               instructor (RI), referencing peers (RP), referencing self (RS), own ideas elaborated (OE), own ideas unelaborated (OU),
               source-based ideas  elaborated  (SE),   source-based ideas  unelaborated  (SU),  metacognitive  comment    (MC),  socio-
               affective connection (SAC), technical issues (TI).

       References
         Barab, S. A., Barnett, M., Yamagata-Lynch, L. C., Squire, K., & Keating, D. (2002). Using Activity Theory to
                  understand   the    systemic   tensions   characterizing   a  technology-rich     introductory  astronomy    course.
                  Mind, Culture, and Activity, 9(2), 76-107.
         Barab, S. A., Evans, M. A., & Baek, E-O. (2003). Activity Theory as a lens for characterizing the participatory
                  unit. In D. H. Jonassen (Ed.), Handbook of research for educational communications and technology
                  (pp. 199-214). New York: Macmillan Library Reference.
         Bereiter, C. (1994). Implications of postmodernism for science, or science as progressive discourse. Educational
                  Psychologist, 29(1), 3-12.
         Bereiter, C. (2002). Education and mind in the knowledge age. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
         Bracewell, R. J., & Witte, S. P. (2003). Tasks, ensembles, and activity: Linkages between text production and
                  situation of use in the workplace. Written Communication, 20, 511-559.
         Brown,   A.  L.   (1992). Design    experiments:    Theoretical   and   methodological     challenges   in creating  complex
                  interventions in classroom settings. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 2(2), 141-178.
         Budd,   R.  W.,   Thorp,  R.   K.,  &    Donohew,     L.  (1969).  Content   analysis   of    communications.    New   York:
                  Macmillan.

1-
Chi, M. T. H. (1997). Quantifying qualitative analyses of verbal data: A practical guide. The Journal of the
         Learning Sciences, 6(3), 217-315.
Collins, A. (1992). Toward a design science of education. In E. Scanlon & T. O'Shea (Eds.), New directions in
         educational technology (pp. 15-20). Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
Engeström, Y. (1987). Learning by expanding. Helsinki, Finland: Orienta-Konsultit.
Engeström, Y. (1993). Developmental studies of work as a testbench of activity theory: The case of primary
         care  medical  practice.  In  S. Chaiklin   & J.   Lave    (Eds.), Understanding    practice:    Perspectives on
         activity and context. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Engeström, Y. (2001). Expansive learning at work: Toward an activity theoretical reconceptualization. Journal
         of Education and Work, 14(1), 133-156.
Engeström,   Y.,   Miettinen,  R.,  &  Punamäki,     R-L.   (1999).  Perspectives     on  Activity  Theory.  New   York:
         Cambridge University Press.
Fujita, N., & Brett, C. (2007). Progressive online discourse: Identifying characteristics in graduate in-service
         teacher   education   courses.   Paper   presented  at  the Annual    Meeting   of  the American     Educational
         Research Association, Chicago, IL.
Garrison,   D. R.,  Anderson,  T.,  &   Archer,   W.  (2001).   Critical  thinking,  cognitive   presence   and computer
         conferencing in distance education. The American Journal of Distance Education, 15(1), 7-23.
Gunawardena,    C.  N., Lowe,    C.   A., &  Anderson,    T.   (1997).  Analysis   of a  global  online   debate  and  the
         development    of  an interaction   analysis model     for  examining    social construction  of   knowledge  in
         computer conferencing. Journal of Educational Computing Research, 17(4), 397-431.
Henri,  F.  (1992). Computer    conferencing     and content    analysis.   In A.  Kaye  (Ed.),  Collaborative    learning
         through computer conferencing: The Najaden papers (pp. 117-136). London: Springer-Verlag.
Hewitt,  J. G. (2004).  An  exploration   of  community   in   a Knowledge      Forum  classroom:   An  Activity  System
         analysis. In S. A. Barab, R. Kling & J. H. Gray (Eds.), Designing for virtual communities in the service
         of learning (pp. 210-238). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Hewitt, J. G. (2005). Towards an understanding of how threads die in asynchronous computer conferences. The
         Journal of the Learning Sciences, 14(4), 567-589.
Kuuti, K. (1995). Activity Theory as potential framework for human-computer interaction research. In B. A.
         Nardi (Ed.), Context and consciousness: Activity theory and human computer interaction (pp. 17-44).
         Cambridge: MIT Press.
Lee, E. Y. C., Chan, C. K. K., & van Aalst, J. (2006). Students assessing their own collaborative knowledge
         building. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 1, 57-87.
Leont' ev, A. N. (1981). The problem of activity in psychology. In J. V. Wertsch (Ed.), The concept of activity
         in psychology. Armonk, NY: Sharpe.
Merriam, S. B. (1998). Qualitative research and case study applications in education (2nd ed.). San Francisco,
         CA: Jossey-Bass.
Muukkonen, H., Lakkala, M., & Hakkarainen, K. (2005). Technology-Mediation and tutoring: How do they
         shape progressive inquiry discourse? The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 14(4), 527-565.
Oshima, J., & Oshima, R. (1999). Scaffolding for progressive discourse in CSILE: Case study of university
         undergraduate     programs.   Paper    presented   at  the  Annual    Meeting   of  the American     Educational
         Research Association, Montreal, Canada.
Rourke,  L.,   Anderson, T.,   Garrison,   D. R.,  &  Archer,    W.   (2001).   Methodological     issues in  analyses of
         asynchronous,   text-based    computer    conferencing      transcripts.  International    Journal  of  Artificial
         Intelligence in Education, 12(2), 8-22.
Scardamalia, M. (2002). Collective cognitive responsibility for the advancement of knowledge. In B. Smith
         (Ed.), Liberal education in a knowledge society (pp. 67-98). Chicago: Open Court.
Scardamalia,   M.,  &  Bereiter,   C. (1991).   Higher levels    of  agency    for children  in  knowledge-building:    A
         challenge for the design of new knowledge media. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 1(1), 37-68.
Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (2003). Knowledge Building. In Encyclopedia of education (2nd ed.). New
         York: Macmillan Reference, USA.
Schwartz,   M. S.,  & Fischer, K.   W.    (2003). Building  vs.  Borrowing:     The challenge    of actively constructing
         ideas. Liberal Education, 89(3), 22-29.
Sicilia, C., Bracewell, R. J., Park, R. J., & Tung, I-P. (2007). The challenges of teachers' constructivist practices
         in  a technology-rich   environment:     An  activity   theory  perspective.  Paper  presented   at  the Annual
         Meeting of the American Educational Research Association, Chicago, IL.
Sinclair, J. M. & Coulthard, R. M. (1975). Towards an analysis of discourse. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Stahl, G. (2003). Can shared knowledge exceed the sum of its parts? Paper presented at the Communities &
         Technology Conference (C&T 2003), Amsterdam, Netherlands.
Strauss, A., &  Corbin,  J. (1998).   Basics  of  qualitative  research:  Techniques     and procedures   for developing
         grounded theory (2nd ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.

                                                                                                                               1-
         Strijbos, J.-W., Martens, R. L., Prins, F. J., & Jochems, W. M. G. (2006). Content analysis: What are they
                 talking about? Computers & Education, 46(1), 29-48.
         van Aalst, J., & Hill, C. M. (2006). Activity theory as a framework for analysing knowledge building. Learning
                 Environments Research, 9, 23-44.
         Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher psychological processes. Cambridge, MA:
                 Harvard University Press.
         Wegerif, R. (1996). Collaborative learning and directive software. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 12,
                 22-32.
         Zhang, J., Scardamalia, M.,  Lamon,  M., Messina,  R., &  Reeve,   R.      (2007). Socio-cognitive dynamics of
                 knowledge  building  in the work  of  9- and 10-year-olds. Educational       Technology  Research  and
                 Development, 55(2), 117-145.

       Acknowledgments
         This research was funded  by grants from  the Social Sciences and  Humanities       Council of Canada  and  the
         Canadian Foundation for Innovation awarded to the second author. We also thank the anonymous reviewers for
         their insightful comments that helped to improve the ideas in this paper.

1-
