        A Metacognitive Strategy for Training Preservice Teachers:
 Collaborative Diagnosis of Conceptual Understanding in Science

                            Osnat Eldar, Oranim Academic College of Education &
                        The Weizmann Institute of Science,          Israel, eldar@oranim.ac.il
                           Bat-Sheva Eylon, The Weizmann Institute of Science, Israel
                                Miky Ronen, Holon Institute of Technology, Israel

         Abstract:  Instructional  models    for pre-service     teachers usually   are split  between    content
         courses  and pedagogical    courses  and   the  learners   are expected   to develop    the  pedagogical
         content  knowledge     (PCK)    on  their  own     during  their practical   experience     in teaching.
         Metacognitive  strategies   are often  used  in    the pedagogical   courses,  but  not  in  the content
         courses. This  study   investigated  how    the use    of metacognitive   strategies,   in a pre-service
         content course, contributes to the learning of content and pedagogy.

Introduction
         Instructional models for pre-service teachers usually are split between content courses and pedagogical
courses and   the learners  are  expected    to  develop    the    pedagogical  content   knowledge     (PCK)   (Shulman
1987,1990) on their own during their practical experience in teaching. Ball (2000) claimed that organization of
teachers' learning tends to fragment practice and leave to individual teachers the challenge of integrating subject
matter  knowledge   and pedagogy     in  the contexts    of  their  work, assuming    that   the integration  required  for
teaching is simple and happens naturally in the course of experience. In fact, this integration does not occur
easily, and often does not happen at all. Yet, being able to do this is fundamental to the core tasks of teaching,
and is critical to the ability to teach all students well. Sabar (1994) added that special frameworks must be
constructed to help the students do this integration. McDermott (1998) claimed that most teachers tend to teach
as they have been taught, thus, teachers should be given the opportunity to learn the content to be taught by
them in  the  manner  that they  are expected    to  teach  it. The    study reported  in this   poster aimed  to test this
supposition and find what scaffolding is needed to realize it.      The study was carried out in the context of a pre-
service optic course. The course employed a meta-cognitive instructional strategy aimed at developing the pre-
service students' deep  understanding     of content     and  at   the same   time develop    their   pedagogical content
knowledge about ways to interact in the future with their students using similar instructional strategy.

The research
         In this research we designed a course on optical geometry for pre-service science teachers.           The course
integrated a  metacognitive    instructional strategy    -- Collaborative    Diagnosis    of scientific   and pedagogical
conceptions (CDC) -- for learning the subject matter and for reflecting on their own learning and thinking. The
course is designed with the perspective of Knowledge Integration (KI) (Linn & Eylon, 2006) trying to help the
learners connect the pieces of knowledge they have, linking the new knowledge in optics to the old one they
posses, and linking pedagogical knowledge to pedagogical content knowledge (PCK). DiSessa (1988) argues
that scientific knowledge held by students is fragile and fragmented; we think that connecting the scientific
knowledge is not enough for becoming a good teacher, and that the connection should be also to pedagogical
knowledge. The goal of the research was to find out the contribution of the strategy to the learners':
   x     conceptual understanding
   x     ability to recognize the elements of the strategy
   x     understanding how these elements help the       students   in their learning,
   x     understanding how the strategy can help their future students.
         The study also examined whether it was necessary to scaffold the development of students' pedagogical
content knowledge.
         The  study consisted   of two   parts  that differed    in the amount   of   meta-cognitive    scaffolding of  the
pedagogical aspects of learning.     The first part of the study was carried out with a group of 20 pre-service
teachers from a multicultural background (Moslems, Jews, Christians). They carried out regularly collaborative
diagnosis  of conceptions  (CDC).    The  CDC    strategy   supports    meta-cognition  on   the learning  of  content, by
exposing the learners to different conceptions, and giving them an opportunity to discuss and reconsider their
ideas. The strategy consists of five stages:
         Stage 1 - Creating an artifact ­ An individual activity aimed to elicit learners' conceptions.
         Stage 2 - Compare and contrast - The learners are asked to find the differences between their
         individual artifacts.

                                                                                                                              3-
                 Stage 3 - Creating a mutual artifact - The learners are asked to reach a consensus and to create
                 the group artifact.
                 Stage 4 - The source of different conceptions - The learners are asked to analyze the conceptions
                 underlying the different artifacts.
                 Stage 5 - What to do next - The learners are asked to choose a pedagogical strategy for helping
                 the student from the previous stages.
       These stages are followed by Class discussion aimed to expose all the pre-service teachers to the conclusions of
       the groups, and to build a common knowledge-base on both subject matter and pedagogical aspects.
                 The collaborative work is facilitated by a computer-based environment allowing students to test their
       ideas and  compare    them to  their classroom   friend's  ideas. Class  discussion    is added  helping   to expose   the
       learners to the conclusions from the work of the different groups, and to build a common knowledge-base.
                 All participants were   administered   pre/post   content   tests, attitude   questionnaires   and   a posttest
       examining their understanding of the instructional strategy as well as their ability to use it.         Three subgroups
       were followed closely throughout the course and their class discussions were recorded.

      Results
                 We found that the learners advanced significantly in their understanding of the optical concepts but
       could  not characterize  the  instructional strategy or  understand   why    it worked    and how   it can be  used   with
       students.  We  found  different styles of   interaction during   the collaborative  stage   of the  CDC.    One  style  of
       interaction was driven by the wish to find the correct answer, and not to understand why the answer is correct or
       what led to the correct answer. Another style of interaction was driven by the wish to understand how the other
       group member thinks, or to explain to the group member ones own way of thinking. In these discussions we
       found  a  deeper  understanding  of  the physical  concepts    and   how the    correct   answer is connected    to those
       concepts.
                 In the second part of the study, carried out with a group of 100 pre-service science teachers, we revised
       the strategy by adding interventions that supported metacognition on the pedagogy as well. For example, one of
       the strategies involved habitual reporting and discussion of learning that occurred in the conceptual and the
       pedagogical areas. The learners were asked to answer two questions in the end of each lesson. What have you
       learned about optic during the lesson? What have you learned about teaching optics?            We found similar results
       in the learning of content as in the first part of the study, but there was a significant improvement in the learners
       understanding of the instructional strategy and the pedagogical approaches that were used in the course.
                 These  findings demonstrate  the    potential benefits  of using metacognitive      interventions in a content
       course, for the integrated acquisition of content and pedagogical content knowledge by pre-service teachers.

      References
       Ball, D.L.(   2000  ) Bridging  practices   intertwining  content and  pedagogy     in  teaching and   learning  to   teach
                 Journal of Teacher Education, 51( 3), 241-247.
       diSessa, A. (1988). Knowledge in pieces. In G. Forman & P. Pufall (Eds.), Constructivism in the computer age
                 (pp. 49-70). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
       McDermott, L.C. (1998)        Students' conceptions and problem solving in mechanics. Connecting Research in
                 Physics Education with Teacher Education
       Shulman, L. S. (1987). Knowledge and teaching: Foundations of the new reform. Harvard Educational Review,
                 57(1).
       Shulman,   L.S.  (1990).  Reconnecting   foundations    to the substance     of  teacher  education.   Teachers  College
                 Record, 91 (3), 301-310.
       Sabar, N.   (1994).   School   Focused   curriculum     Planning. In  Husein,    T. &     Postlewhaite,  N.   (eds.), The
                 International encyclopedia of education. Oxford : Pergamon press.
       Linn, M. C., Eylon, B. S. (2006).    Science Education: Integrating Views of Learning and Instruction. In P. A.
                 Alexander & P. H. Winne (Eds.)      Handbook of Educational Psychology second edition (pp. 511- 544)

3-
