           New Perspectives on Learning Through (Game) Design
  Elisabeth R. Hayes, James Paul Gee, Arizona State University, PO Box 871011, Tempe, AZ 85287-1011,
                               Email: Elisabeth.Hayes@asu.edu, James.Gee@asu.edu
                     Ivan Games, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 225 North Mills Street,
                                  Madison, Wisconsin 53706, games@wisc.edu
Robert J. Torres, New York University, 82 Washington Square East, New York, NY 10003, robjtorres@nyu.edu
      Kylie Peppler, Indiana University, 201 N Rose Ave., Bloomington IN 47405, kpeppler@indiana.edu
  Yasmin B. Kafai, UCLA Graduate School of Education, 2331 Moore Hall, Los Angeles, CA 90095-1521,
                                                 kafai@gseis.ucla.edu
Nichole Pinkard, University of Chicago, Center for Urban School Improvement, 1313 East 60th Street, Chicago,
                                        Illinois 60637, soulphd@gmail.com
      Eric Klopfer, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, MIT Building 10-337, 77 Massachusetts Ave,
                                     Cambridge, MA 02139, klopfer@mit.edu
     Hal Scheintaub, Governor's Academy 1 Elm Street, Byfield, MA 01922, hscheintaub@govsacademy.org
     Maryanna Rogers, Karin S. Forssell, Caitlin Kennedy Martin, Brigid Barron, Wanda Eugene (Auburn
         University), Shaundra B. Daily, Ugochi Acholonu, Lori Takeuchi, Sarah Walter, Kristen Briggs
  Stanford University, School of Education, 485 Lausen Mall, Stanford, CA 94305, Maryanna@stanford.edu

         Abstract: This session will explore different approaches to the use of computer game design
         in formal/informal learning environments. Game design is becoming a popular strategy for
         enhancing   young   people's   interest and  skills with  computer  technology,   and for purposes
         ranging from deepening their understanding of scientific principles to fostering critical media
         literacy.  The  participants   will present    research  findings  that highlight  similarities and
         differences in  tools, pedagogies,   purposes,  and   outcomes  of game   design  activities. Game
         design is often presumed to be appealing to learners who ordinarily might not be motivated to
         learn through traditional instruction, and we will give particular attention to the significance of
         race, class, and gender in student engagement and learning through design.

Objectives
         The objectives of this session are (a) to present research on a variety of approaches to using game
design in formal and informal learning environments, and (b) through comparison of these approaches, to elicit
more general insights into how game design might be used most effectively to achieve desired educational goals.

Importance
         The concept of learning through design has a long history in education, though until recently design
activities were more   of an   isolated practice than   widely used  in  schools (Haury,  2002). Recent     educational
reform movements have reemphasized the need to pay greater attention to design, particularly in the context of
science and technology-related learning (e.g., Denning, 2007; ISTE, 2007; National Research Council, 1996).
This emphasis is reflected in the broader scientific and business community, where "design thinking" is now a
valued capability (Kelley & Littman, 2001). The call for design-based learning is rooted in the belief that the act
of designing is fundamental to the work of all professions and more broadly, to the pursuit of desired social and
political ends. As a process, design activities engage students in active construction of new knowledge, as they
construct artifacts to achieve specific ends. This knowledge can pertain to a wide range of traditional academic
disciplines. As a goal, design or design thinking involves the ability to define and redefine ill-structured design
problems, engage in iterative problem-solving, and integrate skills and knowledge from across disciplines.
         Past educational approaches to design-based learning tended to emphasize "school situated design;"
that is, design  located  within  the   context  of   traditional academic  subject  matter  and ways    of  thinking.
Alternatively,  the symposium    participants    will describe   approaches to   learning by design    that utilize the
affordances of new media and popular culture, particularly computer games.        Many of these new forms of media
and culture involve more sophisticated language, tools, and thinking skills, such as simulation and modeling,
than what young people encounter in school. In addition, engaging in production with new media can serve as a
starting point for helping young people become more critical consumers of today's media culture (Gee, 2007;
Peppler & Kafai, 2007).
         These design approaches to learning involve not just new tools, but also new theories of learning. In the
past, learning through design was conceptualized in rather simplistic, individualistic terms, as engaging in and
mastering  a series of  linear steps used  to solve   a problem   (Roth, Tobin,  &  Ritchie, 2001).    In contrast, the
approaches discussed in this symposium are informed by situated theories of learning, in which learning is a

                                                                                                                          3-3
         function of the activity, context and culture in which it occurs. From this perspective, learning through design is
         best viewed as a collaborative process of creating artifacts that have meaning within a broader community. Each
         set of authors will    discuss a  different   approach  to structuring  design   activities and capturing the   learning
         trajectories of participants. Some key issues that will be addressed include:
             -     How can we leverage these popular cultural practices to achieve school and societal goals?
             -     What is the significance of race, class and gender in the content and process of learning through design?
             -     How  can    we understand    design  thinking not   only  as abstract, disembodied    thinking but  also as a
                   practice situated among many participating individuals and groups in collaboration?

       Symposium Organization
                   In this interactive symposium, we bring together a group of researchers who have investigated different
         approaches to learning through design in after school contexts. Different strategies, ranging from free choice to
         paired programming, have been used to introduce youth to design activities. Different methodologies to capture
         and understand social and cultural aspects of design learning have been used. We will start our session with an
         introduction to the topic of the symposium and a brief overview of participant presentations. We will then move
         to an interactive format in which conference attendees can visit and interact with presenters at poster stations
         and  discuss different   aspects   of design   approaches    and findings.  The    following  research studies  will  be
         presented.

        A Constructionist Approach to Learning through Designing Games: What Videogame
        Making Can Teach us about Literacy and Learning

                   Kylie Peppler, Indiana University & Yasmin B. Kafai, University of California - Los Angeles

                   Learning    through  designing    games   is seen   as  an   alternative and   complementary    pathway    for
         participation in today's media culture (Kafai, 1995; 2006). Using Constructionism (Papert, 1990) as a pedagogy
         we focus not only on the individual learner but also on the role of social participation. Here the individual, the
         artifact, and collaborative input of the community shape learning, participation, and sharing. In the case of video
         game production today, the community could be described as both the distributed online and offline community.
         Accordingly, a tool such as Scratch that will promote the developmental relationship between the individual and
         the community    will  enable  youth   to express their cultural  heritage, have   a  broad  communicative  value, and
         allow for an information and resource exchange (Maloney, Peppler, Kafai, Resnick & Rusk, 2008).
                   Our analysis draws from a three-year ethnographic study that documented youth designing games with
         Scratch  by  collecting  observations,  design   drawings,   log files and  interviews  (Peppler  &  Kafai, 2007).   An
         archival analysis of Scratch files revealed the range of different game genres produced within the clubhouse
         culture such as classic arcade, racing action-adventure, fighting, shooter games with the largest number falling
         into mixed genre. Over time, video game production became a high status marker, local and global game design
         experts emerged, and work in Scratch established membership within the community. In addition, we began to
         see peer-to-peer mentoring in video game design for the first time and there was increased appropriation of
         Scratch as a video game design tool (Ching & Kafai, in press). As a result, new types of hybrid genres emerged
         and individuals worked together in groups with increased frequency, with some youth specializing in aspects of
         game design akin to more professional settings. A case study of Jorge, a game designer, illustrates how youth
         integrate computation    and   the arts   into video game    design  practices,  express personal  interests, and  shift
         participation over time within the video game design culture (Peppler, 2007). Jorge's work in Scratch facilitated
         his understanding of how games are made by professional production specialists and also networked with other
         fans, like himself, that wanted to create amateur productions. Evidence of this is found in his online web-surfing
         activities and over 300 downloadable sheets of sprites found in Jorge's folder at the Clubhouse.
                   We argue that learning through designing games addresses technical, critical and ethnical aspects of
         participation. While many of the other design activities that took place concurrently in the clubhouse would well
         qualify clubhouse youth to be members of a participatory culture, for us the most important aspect relates to
         who is participating in the game design culture. We saw inner-city youth and English language learners engaged
         in  game  design activities   and  become     participants in gaming   communities.    Through   the general  scope   of
         Clubhouse game production and the extent of Jorge's game designs, we can find evidence that game-making
         activities can provide a pathway into participation. Furthermore, we also saw critical issues addressed in game-
         making    activities. Jorge's  games    dealt  with  a host   of  complex   interface  design   issues that reveal   the
         underpinnings of software interactions. Such understandings are crucial for today's citizenship, as more aspects
         of life have moved into the digital domain and youth needs an understanding about media ownership and control
         issues as well as technology design. Finally, we also addressed ethical concerns prominent in digital culture, as
         violation of copyright    can  be  just   one  mouse   click  away. We   argue   that game-making    activities offer a
         promising avenue for young people to develop ownership of media and a sense of appreciation what goes into

3-
creating them. In the Computer Clubhouse, there is an emphasis on repurposing media akin to a professional
context. But there is also a sense of transgression if other members were to copy someone else's work without
explicit acknowledgment. Jorge's Metal Slug variations are a good example of how the modifications within a
genre can be minimal but still reference its originator.
          It is   clear from    our analyses   that video   game  making   can   provide    a rich context  for   learning
programming, how to collaborate with others, becoming a member of an affinity group, developing sustained
engagement,     and more.     We  see the  approach  of   making  games   for   learning as an  appropriate   and healthy
counterpoint to a culture of consumption. While the boundaries between media consumers and producers are
perhaps not as distinct as they used to be, there is still a large rift between those who own and control media and
those that have the possibilities of creating them. To be a full member in today's participatory culture should
mean much more than knowing how to point and click; it should also mean knowing what goes into creating a
pointing device ­ be it a cursor or another object of your imagination.

The Importance of Design in Learning through Game Design

Elisabeth R. Hayes, James Paul Gee, Arizona State University; Ivan Games, University of Wisconsin-Madison
                                       & Robert J. Torres, New York University

          Often the primary goal of gaming making in education is to enhance young people's fluency with IT,
particularly programming.        Software used to make games is designed to simplify programming concepts so they
can be more readily grasped, and rarely incorporates explicit guidance in elements of game design specifically.
We  argue    that supporting    students' understanding   of  game  design itself can  be   a valuable starting point for
learning to think of complex interactions among variables, people, and technology.
          We will describe a new software tool, GameStar Mechanic, which is an RPG (Role-Playing Game)
style online game where middle and high school age players learn the fundamentals of game design by playing
roles as "game mechanics" charged with the making and "modding" (modifying) of games.                 The game is being
developed    and  tested   in a  collaborative project   between  a  for-profit game   company   and   a university. Our
discussion will draw on data from several after-school programs which included diverse groups of young people,
ranging   in age   from    fifth grade through   high    school, and with  varied     socioeconomic,   racial and  ethnic
backgrounds.
          In this paper, we will report on one aspect of our findings, the evolution of "design thinking" among
participants. Using case studies of selected participants, we will illustrate changes in their abilities on several
indicators: (a) acquisition of specialist language associated with design, (b) ability to design a dynamic system
of rules  that  results in a  playable game,   (c)  development   of specific   game  design  skills and knowledge,   (d)
participation in a broader affinity space of (emerging) game designers, and (e) engagement in an iterative and
collaborative process of design.      We will discuss the implications of this work for the use of game design in
education, and for design-based learning more broadly.

Using School-based Game Design Projects to Engage Girls in Game Design

                                        Nichole Pinkard, University of Chicago

          This paper describes an explicit effort to increase middle school girls' facility and engagement with
game design by embedding initial exposure to game design within an in-school class.              The motivation for this
work stemmed from the analysis of an after-school video game pod (special interest group) that resulted in an
all-boys  program   with   girls floating in and    out.  The few  girls who    stuck with  the program  were   attending
mostly because of parental desire.     The lack of girls' engagement led to an examination of the activity structure,
teacher bias, peer culture and the role of competition in the pod. This examination informed a questionnaire that
asked all sixth and seventh grade students about interest in creating video games and barriers to participating in
the existing after-school video game program.         While boys expressed more interest, over 65 percent of girls
expressed interested in creating games.      However, the most common barriers listed by girls for not participating
were conflicts with other after-school activities and the assumed "boy" culture of the pod.
          In response to the questionnaire and in an attempt to deepen connections between in-school and after-
school new media programming, the after-school and school staff designed a 8-week intervention where all 6th
grade students would take a simulation/game design course and then be required to work in project teams to
create a game or simulation to demonstrate their understanding of global warming.           The winning projects would
receive ipods. The course design team used lessons learned from Carnegie Mellon's redesign of their computer
science program to attract and retain more female computer science majors as basis for the design of the class
projects. The author was responsible for teaching game design using the StageCast environment and the science
teacher for teaching global warming science content.        StageCast was chosen because it allows users to focus on

                                                                                                                              3-
         the storyline and learn to program by example without having to spend an inordinate amount of time focusing
         on the syntax of programming.
                   The course offered the opportunity to examine the following questions: How do girls engage game
         design when taught as part of in-school class? What is the quality of the games girls design?    How do the games
         designed by girls differ from those designed by boys? What influences girls' selection of partners for the class
         project? How does the exposure to game design in the school day impact girls' decision to join the video game
         afterschool pod? Data collected included both classroom observations from the course and the video game pod,
         student interviews, computer log files, student assignments, and final projects.      While the presentation will go
         into further  detail, the course  resulted in two all girls group   having  the top  two winning games,   the gender
         balance shifting to 60/40 in the video game pod and more girls continuing to use StageCast beyond the course.

        StarLogo       TNG       ­  Making      Content-Centered            Game      and    Simulation    Development
        Accessible to Students and Teachers

                   Eric Klopfer, Massachusetts Institute of Technology & Hal Scheintaub, Governor's Academy

                   The gap between modern scientific practice and school science is widening as the tools and technique
         of scientists rapidly  advance   beyond   our  realms of   direct experience.   Scientists use computer models and
         simulations to understand systems across a range of temporal and spatial scales from the evolution of species
         across continents to the radioactive decay of elements with half-lives measured in microseconds.
                   In order to provide a curriculum that makes simulations accessible to teachers and engaging to students,
         we   look towards   the intersection between   games   and  simulations.    StarLogo TNG provides two important
         supports  for learning  not previously  available.  First, the programming     is done  with graphical  programming
         blocks instead of text-based commands.       StarLogo TNG's second advance is a 3D representation of the world.
         This provides the ability to model new kinds of physical phenomena, allows students to take the perspective of
         an individual agent in the environment, and enables a much richer set of interactions.
                   In this  presentation, we  will  describe how    Starlogo TNG    was  used  in a game  development-based
         physics unit. StarLogo TNG basics were introduced through a series of task-oriented activities called Modeling
         Change.   Beginning physics students have a hard time believing that the vertical and horizontal motions of a
         projectile can be independent of one another.       A game programming task was used to introduce the idea of
         simultaneous   but    independent change.    Students saw   that  changes  in  color, size and  location which  they
         programmed separately, could be run simultaneously. When students programmed vertical motion in the manner
         describe above, they were not satisfied.      Their agents seemed to float up and down.      To get realistic vertical
         motion,   students needed   to  use procedures  for   accelerated  change that  were  developed through   a series of
         programming challenges.      Assessments (using traditional physics tests, and analysis of student work) showed
         that the programming experience helped students learn vectors and see horizontal and vertical components of
         motion operating separately and simultaneously in projectile motion.

        Collaborative Game Design: Analysis from a Middle School Programming Project

         Maryanna Rogers, Karin S. Forssell, Caitlin Kennedy Martin, Brigid Barron, Wanda Eugene, Shaundra B. Daily,
                                   Ugochi Acholonu, Lori Takeuchi, Sarah Walter, Kristen Briggs

                   Creative technology projects such as game design can serve to engage learners, but it is often difficult
         to determine what students are learning from this activity. In this paper, we will present the results of a two-
         week design experiment in which 47 middle school students worked in pairs to design and develop computer-
         based games using a drag and drop introductory programming environment. Our goal was to expand students'
         technological fluency in areas such as programming, troubleshooting, and design and to foster important 21st
         century skills such as planning and collaborating.
                   We collected rich accounts of students' collaborative design experiences in an attempt to look at student
         learning, including conducting artifact-based interviews with individual students after the completion of their
         projects, surveying    students  about their  general and  project-specific  technology  experiences,   and obtaining
         copies of their games during different stages of development.
                   In this presentation we describe the workshop implementation and our research methods, data analysis,
         and  results  to date.  Our analysis   focuses on   learner's perceptions   of  the knowledge,  skills, and  affective
         orientations  that are  important during   game design.    We  developed   a  coding  scheme to categorize  students'
         descriptions along these dimensions. Six broad categories emerged: Affective stance, collaborative orientation,
         design process, project management, access of learning resources, and specific knowledge/abilities. We used
         survey data to create profiles of students based on their reports of satisfaction with their final game product,
         their learning, and their collaborative experience. We then compared these profile groups with respect to the

3-
number and the type of dimensions that students reported as important to successful participation in a long-term
game design project. Despite differences in satisfaction levels, students have similar ideas; results suggest that a
positive affective  stance reflected  in  patience  and  persistence, as well as project management     skills such as
planning and strategies for working with teammates, are recognized as important across student groups.

References
Denning, P.J. (2007). Computing is a natural science. Communications of the ACM, 50(7), 13-18.
Ching,  C.  C., &  Kafai,  Y. B.  (in press).  Peer pedagogy:   Student  collaboration   and reflection in a   learning
         through design project. New York: Teachers College Press.
Gee, J. P. (2007, July). Getting young people to think like game designers. MacArthur Foundation
Spotlight on Digital Media and Learning [online]. Retrieved August 20, 2007 from:
         http://spotlight.macfound.org/main/entry/gee_think_like_game_designers/
Haury, D. L. (2002). Learning science through design (ERIC Digest). Columbus, OH: ERIC Clearinghouse for
         Science, Mathematics, and Environmental Education.
International Society for Technology in Education (ISTE). (2007). National Educational Technology Standards
         for Students: The Next Generation. Retrieved November 5, 2007 from http://cnets.iste.org/.
Kafai, Y. B. (1995). Minds in play: Computer game design as a context for children's learning. Hillsdale,
         NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Kafai, Y. B. (2006). Playing and making games for learning: Instructionist and constructionist perspectives
         for game studies. Games and Culture, 1(1), pp. 34­40.
Kelley, T. with Littman, J. (2001). The art of innovation: Lessons in creativity from IDEO, America's leading
         design firm. New York: Currency Books.
Maloney, J., Peppler, K., Kafai, Y., Resnick, M., & Rusk, N. (2008). Programming by Choice. Urban Youth
         Learning Programming with Scratch. Paper to be presented at the SIGCSE 2008 Conference, Portland,
         Oregon.
National Research Council.    (1996).     National science education standards.  Washington. DC: National
Academy Press.    [Available online at: http://www.nap.edu/readingroom/books/nses/html/]
Peppler, K.  &  Kafai,  Y. (2007).    From   SuperGoo    to Scratch:  exploring creative digital media  production  in
         informal learning. Learning, Media and Technology, 32(2), 149 ­ 166.
Papert,  S. (1991). Situating  constructionism.    In I. Harel, & S.   Papert (Eds.), Constructionism   (pp.   1 - 12).
         Norwood, NJ: Ablex Publishing.
Resnick,  M.,   Kafai, Y., Maeda,     J., et al. (2003). A  Networked,   Media-Rich   Programming    Environment    to
         Enhance Technological Fluency at After-School Centers in Economically-Disadvantaged Communities.
         Proposal      to     the   National       Science    Foundation      (funded     2003--2007).     Available:
         http://www.media.mit.edu/~mres/papers/scratch.pdf
Roth, W-M, Tobin, K., &     Ritchie, S.   (2001).  Re/Constructing elementary science.   New York: Peter Lang.

                                                                                                                          3-
