        Design Thinking in Gamestar Mechanic: The role of gamer
     experience on the appropriation of the Discourse practices of
                                              Game Designers
      Ivan Alex Games, Kurt Squire, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 225 N. Mills, Madison WI 53705
                             Email: games@wisc.edu, kdsquire@education.wisc.edu

          Abstract: This paper explores the pedagogical potential of Gamestar Mechanic, a computer
          game where players learn the principles of game design by making, sharing and reviewing
          games in the context of an online community of designers. The game has been designed to
          foster the appropriation of complex language and literacy skills by middle school children. By
          relying on think aloud interviews and a discourse analytic framework, this paper explores the
          language practices germane to the game designer Discourse enacted by players as they tackle
          a game design challenge.

Context for the Study
          Thinking as a designer has been recognized as an important asset to learners in a world defined by the
globalization of economy and intense pressure on them to produce new knowledge, innovate, and solve complex
problems (Kolodner, Crismond, Gray, Holbrook, & Puntambekar, 1998; New London Group, 1996). Adopting a
designer perspective entails an epistemological shift by the learner from the teacher-driven transmission view
commonly promoted by schools, to a conception of knowledge as a dynamic construct that emerges from a
dialog between the designer, the designed and a larger community of design practitioners (Schön, 1995).
          Game design, which sits at the intersection of computer science, graphic arts, interactive storytelling,
has been hypothesized to be an intellectually valuable design practice as it could provide avenues for youth to
develop computational literacies, software design skills, models of systemic thinking, and specialist language
and literacy skills (Games, Learning, & Society, 2005). Game design is an eminently social activity, where the
task is distributed   among  teams   of  designers, programmers    and artists. As  a consequence,   effective game
designers must recruit a variety of oral and written language practices, using a variety of media in order to
communicate     game   ideas across  teams,   defend specific  design decisions,  or  present insights learned from
designs in the form of post-mortems (Grossman, 2003) among other things.
          The popularity of computer and video games, particularly with low-income boys disaffiliating from
school,   make  it an intriguing domain   for  exploring language  and  literacy development.   Recent  research on
literacy learning documents the prominence of the fourth grade slump (Gee, 2004; Hart & Risley, 2003), a
phenomenon     whereby    seemingly   well    performing students  (particularly disadvantaged   students) in  early
literacy, fail to  do  so in  later grades    where  specialized language is    introduced. This problem   becomes
compounds throughout late elementary and middle school, developing into what some have called "the eigth
grade" cliff, a point at which students failing complex literacy tasks such as inference, comprehension, writing,
and  domain-specific   reading   disaffiliate and drop out of  school  (Chall,  Jacobs, &   Baldwin, 1990; Chall  &
Jacobs, 2003; de León & Carnegie Corporation of New York, 2002). These phenomena have been cited as key
reasons   for students dropping  out  of school,  which,  with almost  40% of    male students dropping  out   before
graduation, is a pressing national concern (Ewell & Wellman, 2007).
          The study in this paper happens in the context of Gamestar Mechanic, an online role-playing game that is
about designing video games to help students practice and learn complex language and literacy skills. Gamestar
Mechanic is designed to initiate players into the Discourse of game design, through a series of well ordered game
scenarios and encompassing curricular activities that are designed to emulate the key learning practices operating
in game design communities. The game is currently under development in joint collaboration between GameLab, a
New York based Videogame Company and the Games, Learning and Society group at University of Wisconsin-
Madison. It is currently funded under the Macarthur Foundation's Digital Media Learning Initiative, a $50 million
effort aimed at understanding the effects of digital media in young people's lives.

About Gamestar Mechanic
          In Gamestar Mechanic, players take on the role of "game mechanics", characters that are brought to a
fantasy world where the economy, culture and lifestyle are fueled by well-functioning games. In the plot of the
game however, a catastrophe has taken place resulting in that the overall system upon which the world functions
has been broken, and the elements which once comprised well made games have fallen to disrepair. Mechanics
must interact with world elements in the form of game creatures (e.g. heroes and enemies) through which they
can make and repair games and gradually restore harmony to the world (Salen, 2007). Players advance in the
game by participating in a series of game design challenges, which introduce them to the parameters and rules

                                                                                                                        1-
         that define the behavior of each creature, and its relationship to the game system as a whole. Players can also
         gain the ability to access and manipulate these parameters and behaviors through the use of a web-based game
         editor. By using this tool, players can modify character properties such as speed, strength, and response to other
         creatures, as well as systemic characteristics of the games they will be part of, such as the design of game levels
         and game rules, allowing players to produce complex interactions in their games (see Figure 1).

                            Figure 1. A game design by Marc, one of the workshop participants in an early version of the
                                                      Gamestar Mechanic Game Editor.

                  In  some    ways,  Gamestar   Mechanic    may   seem   similar to  constructionist    approaches aimed  at
         facilitating computing as a form of literacy (DiSessa, 2000; Resnick, 1994). However, a fundamental difference
         between these approaches and the Gamestar Mechanic approach is that in constructionist tools such as Logo or
         Boxer, the  emphasis    has commonly   been  placed   on teaching  students the  fundamentals   of programming,  in
         hopes that once familiar with the tools, they will appropriate them in their own designs. Conversely, Gamestar
         Mechanic places an emphasis on teaching what James Gee calls the Discourse of game design, a term which
         refers to ways of doing, talking, thinking and using tools that game designers enact in professional practice
         (Gee,  2005). In  other  words,  while  constructionist  approaches  to computational   literacy   have emphasized
         learning to make meaningful creations with computers, the approach proposed in Gamestar Mechanic focuses
         on learning how to make those meaningful creations through games.
                  In order to give the game this emphasis, design challenges within it are framed within the context of a
         metagame consisting among other things of an overarching narrative and rule system that help define player
         characters' identities,  goals, and   paths of advancement   and   status  within an  online   community   of game
         mechanics. The challenges are constructed in ways that require players not only to design games, but also to
         engage players in written discourse with other members of the community.
                  This paper explores the way in which previous gaming experience by middle school players influences
         their adoption of the language and literacy practices of game designers in the context of a Gamestar Mechanic
         design challenge.  By   relying on  a discourse-analytic methodology,   it  aims to illustrate the ways in which  a
         gamer identity mediates the adoption of a game design Discourse through play.

        Theoretical Framework and Research Questions
                  This paper examines learning from a social-constructivist framework of learning. The central interest
         of this study is to understand the appropriation and enactment of a Discourse by players. That is, how players
         adopt and enact ways of design thinking and doing, and to explore the utility that these habits may have in other
         spheres of life. Within this framework, language is central to the learning of individuals and communities, since
         it mediates the negotiation of meaning between individuals, tools, and context (Scardamalia & Bereiter, 1996,
         Vygotsky, 1930). Lemke (1990) for example, uses the term "talking science" to address the ways in which
         scientists use language to communicate findings and disseminate knowledge across their communities. At the
         same time, a socio-constructivist view of learning within games characterizes it as conceptual change that is
         achieved through the gradual appropriation of a discursive identity by the learner (Shaffer, 2007). Gee calls
         identities such as these  big   `D' Discourses (Gee,  1999, 2005),  an  umbrella  term that  encompasses   multiple
         sociocultural theories of knowledge (Hutchins, 1995; Lave & Wenger, 1991), and refers to "ways of knowing,
         talking, doing and being in the world" practiced by people affiliated to a certain identity. The term stands in
         contrast with little `d' discourse,  which  refers to instances of language-in-use  through    which people   situate
         meaning and construct reality for themselves and others at any given time.
                  This project takes advantage of a learning-through-design instructional framework (Kolodner, et al.
         1998; Perkins, 1995) as a means to foster the emergence of a game design Discourse in children. In this design
         approach, learning is achieved through an iterative process enacted through the production of public artifacts in

1-
problem-based     contexts.  Such   approaches   also  emphasize  experience    as  central  to learning,   and   rely on
presenting students with learning scenarios where ill structured problem solving tasks are framed within the
context of close to real-world situations. An example of these frameworks is Learning by Design (Kolodner et
al, 1998), which blends insights from case-based reasoning pedagogy (Riesbeck & Schank, 1989) with problem-
based learning (Barrows, 1998). This framework presents learners with a sequence of modules where they must
tackle challenges centered on the design of real world artifacts, which in Gamestar Mechanic are embodied in a
series of  game   design   challenges.  In these challenges  players   are required   to engage    with  specific design
problems that require the enactment of a designer Discourse for their solution. These challenges are constructed
to introduce learners to key ideas and language in the Game Designer Discourse, and require players to put them
into practice as they tackle their game designs. For example, the introductory statement for a challenge could be:

          "A core mechanic represents the essential moment-to-moment activity of the player, it is what
          the player will be doing over and over as he plays the game. For this challenge, make a game
          where the core mechanic is to collect things. When you're done with your design, write the
          instructions for your game so that others can play it."

          In this statement, introduces the player to the game design concept of core mechanic, a specialist term
that  refers not  only  to a fundamental   component   in games   (the  central activity of  the  player), but  that also
emphasizes    the need  to   design mindful  of  the  systemic  relationship between    game    elements  (e.g. a collect
mechanic would be useless in a game with nothing to collect).
          Alongside    design-based  frameworks    the work  on  constructionism    has  served   an   important  role  in
informing this study (e.g. Harel & Papert, 1992). Constructionist approaches emphasize not only the design
process   as a  way  to  enact the  public  construction  of knowledge     (Papert,   1991  p.1),  but also  the  role of
epistemological pluralism (p.10), which refers to the need to acknowledge the existence and value of multiple
ways of knowing beyond those traditionally accepted by schooling. Given that one of the most fundamental
ways   of  learning  within  Gamestar    Mechanic    comes  through  the   completion    of design   challenges,  where
meaning making happens with a mixture of both the grammar of traditional texts, and the design grammar of
games, these frameworks became useful in the attempt to understand the players' design strategies and process
towards their design goals.
          Close to these approaches, the third theoretical framework this study relies on is DiSessa's work on the
Boxer   programming     language  (DiSessa,  2001).   In Boxer,  DiSessa   and  colleagues   designed   a  programming
language that removes the abstraction and complexity inherent to most commercial languages, with the purpose
of letting   novice  computer    users engage   in an  experiential approach    to  learning through    simulations,   by
constructing    models  in which  patterns  of design  and knowledge    can   emerge.   In  his view,  one  of  the  most
important benefits that programming can bring to learners is the ability to create simulations that will help them
learn complex concepts in more experiential ways (P.35). While Gamestar Mechanic fully aligns with these
views, it differs from this and other constructionist approaches to computational literacy in that it doesn't have
their underlying assumption that the activity of construction itself will motivate learners to use tools such as
Logo or Boxer. Conversely in Gamestar Mechanic, the assumption is that videogames have become a widely
disseminated medium that many children are familiar with, and enthusiastic about. Gamestar Mechanic attempts
to harness this enthusiasm by fostering a community where game design principles and patterns are learned
through active participation in play, and construction plays a more supportive role.
          The notion of thinking through simulations put forth by DiSessa has been echoed by researchers in the
field  of games   and   learning  (Gee, 2003,  Squire,   2006). This field   recruits a  diversity of  learning   science
frameworks to analyze the learning that takes place in the context of game play. These include situated learning
(Lave  and   Wenger,    1999), Connectionist   cognitive  models  (Gee,  2003),   socioconstructivist   perspectives   on
technology-supported learning (Bonk & Cunningham, 1998; Vygotsky, 1930), and models of knowledge based
on the professions (Schon, 1995; Shaffer, 2006). Research into games and learning suggests that by playing
videogames,     players learn  to see   them as  designed  objects  (Gee,    2003  P.42)   which   represent complexly
interrelated and context-dependent meanings that designers build using symbols that are given structure through
a design grammar (p. 30). Players also learn to see games as forms of text representation where aspects of
printed   texts such as genre  are  also present   (Gee, 2005   P.108). If in line  with   this view   games should    be
considered a form of new literacy, game play could be said to be analogous to reading, and design to writing.
This notion becomes even more compelling if one considers that several scholars have put forth the notion of
written text as a designed object in recent years (Kress, 2003). Given that reading and writing are the most used
literacy practices in schools today, one could then imagine that some aspects of the discourse of game designers
could serve as a basis to help students participate more effectively in their school lives.
          In line with this theoretical framework, the four guiding research questions posited for this study were
the following:

                                                                                                                              1-
             1.    How and to what degree does language reveal the enactment of a game design Discourse by students in
                   the context of Gamestar Mechanic?
             2.    What aspects of the game designer Discourse play out in the solution of a Gamestar Mechanic Game
                   Design Challenge?
             3.    In what way does Gamestar Mechanic facilitate learning through games and simulations?
             4.    What similarities and differences between the Discourse of game design and the discourse of School
                   emerge in the context of Gamestar Mechanic?

        Research Site and Participants
                   One of the central aims of pedagogies such as the one furthered by Gamestar Mechanic is to bridge the
         gap that exists between the learning and literacy practices of formal education settings and those of informal
         learning communities. Given that videogames nowadays find their principal venues in the second category, the
         current study focused on the use Gamestar Mechanic and its associated curriculum in out-of-school settings.
                   Participants were recruited from a variety of after school programs in a several cities in the greater
         Madison-Milwaukee Wisconsin area, as well as from the general community, through flyers which invited them
         to participate in a short workshop where they would learn to make games by playing games. The project began
         in January 2007, and to this date three instances of the workshop have taken place, two of the workshops took
         place  in a computer  lab  at the  University  of Wisconsin-Madison,     and  one at  a High    School in a  suburb  of
         Milwaukee.    Given  that the  main  populations  of interest to the  project are middle    and high  school students,
         particularly those from low-income households, thirty participants between the ages of 12 and 16 years both
         backgrounds in order to help us identify differences in the interactions with Gamestar Mechanic between low
         and high-income groups.

        Methods:
        Data Collection
                   The background information for all participants was obtained by a series of ethnographic interviews
         (Spradley, 1979) done individually with before the start of each workshop. Since a core interest of this study
         was to  assess  the relationship  of previous  gaming   experience    to the adoption   of  the language  and   literacy
         practices that Gamestar Mechanic aims to foster, through the interview background data was collected on the
         participants' number   of years   as a player, number   of games    played,  favorite games,    and ease  of access  to
         videogames at home or in other contexts. Also, in-workshop activities such as game design discussions, play
         sessions and collaborative design challenges were documented via video recordings and field notes.
                   In addition, in order to assess the language and literacy practices of players, samples of oral and written
         language skills were collected before and throughout the workshop in the form of game labels, blog entries,
         level messages and digital voice recordings of design discussions.
                   Finally, a hybrid data collection approach mixing video capture of the participant's computer screen
         during the design process, mixed with a think aloud interview of participants during the process was used in this
         study. This   approach has    recently gained  popularity to  assess  participant problem   solving   and information
         search strategies in human-computer interaction (Benbunan-Fich, 2001). Given that the intention of this study
         was to understand the use of language used by the participants to explain their design process during a Gamestar
         Mechanic challenge, the focus of the analysis was on meaning making practices rather than on the cognitive
         aspects of the problem solving process itself, the think aloud takes the form of an interview as opposed to a
         protocol  in  the traditional sense. In order  to add  reliability to the  analysis,  aside from  notes   taken by  the
         researcher, both the participant and the computer screen wee recorded during the think aloud, using a digital
         camera    and a   CamStudio    (http://camstudio.org), screen  recording   tool   and  the  data  were  analyzed   and
         corroborated with four other research team members.

        Data Analysis
                   This presentation will focus on the language and literacy practices enacted by players as they tackled a
         Gamestar    Mechanic  design   challenge. The  data  collected  from  the  interviews,  field  notes, video  and audio
         recordings was consolidated using a case study methodology (Stake, 1995) with the purpose of providing a
         "thick description" that would serve as a context to frame the think aloud interviews used during the challenges.
                   The think aloud data were analyzed using a Discourse analysis methodology (Gee, 1996, 2005), which
         focuses on the situated meaning making practices that people enact through language-in-use. The interpretation
         of this analysis relies on seven building tasks of language (Gee, 2005 P.10) that people use to construct reality at
         any given time. These are (1) significance, using language to make certain things more relevant than others, (2)
         activities, using language to get recognized as engaging in a certain activity, 3) identities, using language to get
         categorized as enacting a certain role or identity, 4) relationships, using language to signal a sort of relationship
         between two people, 5) politics, using language to convey a perspective on the distribution of social goods, 6)
         connections,  using  language   to highlight  the relationships  between   two  incidents   or  concepts, and   7) sign

1-0
systems, privileging certain ways of communicating through symbols over others. Depending on their relevance
to a particular  sample  of  language, some    or  all of these  building tasks    provide a lens  through   which   to
understand language practices used in a context of interest, -in this case game design- as a means to generate
claims on theory.

Preliminary Findings
          For the sake of space, this section will concentrate on presenting a sample of the project's preliminary
findings by based on a few excerpts from the think aloud interview conducted with a participant tackling a design
challenge in a Gamestar Mechanic workshop. The challenge consisted in building a game using only four creatures
from a set of 16 possible choices within a time limit of 15 minutes. The participant also had the opportunity to
swap one of his initial creature choices for a new one at any point in the design, if he wished to do so. Before each
excerpt, a brief description of the participant's background is presented for contextualization. The excerpts present
two segments of the protocols where the researcher observed significant design changes being enacted. In line with
the methodology suggested by Gee (2003), the transcripts of these interactions are presented coded into lines,
which  represent spurts of  speech  separated  by  silences, and stanzas, which    group lines into structures  with a
specific theme or idea in order to provide context to the analysis. Emphasis, silence, tone and other linguistic
elements are transcribed using the standard notation proposed by Gail Jefferson (Jefferson, 1984).

Discourse Analysis I: Orality, Argumentation and Problem-Solving in the "design game".
          The following  transcript presents   the think  aloud  protocol for Marc,   a  Caucasian  thirteen year-old
middle school male from a low-income household in the Madison-Wisconsin Gamestar Mechanic workshops.
In the interview at the beginning of the workshop, Marc self-identified as a gamer and stated that he owns a
PlayStation 2 console and a variety of game titles. Even though he comes from a low-income working class
family, his family seems to value his interest in gaming, as he has access to cable at home and is an avid viewer
of G4, a channel devoted to videogames. In his preliminary interview, Marc also expressed a deep disaffiliation
with school and samples of his reading and writing demonstrated low school-based literacy skills. For example,
a description of a game he made, taken from the game's label, reads:

          "The presoners [sic]
          There was a war a big war[sic] It tuck [sic] out a lot of sogers [sic] but some servived [sic] but
          got capshered [sic] in the prison"

          Following is the transcript of an interaction that took place at the beginning of Marc's design task just
after he researcher had finished reading the instructions for the task:

          Stanza 1
          R1: You can choose four creatures from, from your palette.
          R2: And you need to make a game out of those four creatures
          R3: And if for whatever reason the four creatures that your chose do not make a game
          R4: Then you need to, you can swap [one, just one
          Stanza 2
          M1: Hold on] I think umm, a major (.) point=Is this a character? ((Hovers mouse over the
          block and coin character and sets it to rest on a life meter character))
          R5: [Uh]Um, y:::es, all of those[ are characters.
          M2: How] dare you?! ((uses mock tone))
          Stanza 3
          M3: I'd have my main character, which would be one of the heroes (hovers the mouse from
          the shooting hero to the play area).
          R6: uh::huh..
          M4: A::nd I'd put him somewhere and then I'd have (1.0) blocks
          M5: Some evil people,
          R7: Okay.
          M6: And have something to tell where your health is.

          Recall that the seven building tasks of language laid of by Gee provide analytical tools to understand
the way people situate meanings and structure reality for themselves and others during communication. Since
the goal of this paper is to study the way participants enact the game designer Discourse, it should just briefly be
mentioned that in Stanza 1, the researcher lays out the rules of the design challenge, bringing emphasis to the
role that creature selection plays  on its   completion   (Line R4). This  becomes    particularly  interesting in the
context of the participant's response to these instructions. Notice that between line R4 in Stanza 1 and M1 in

                                                                                                                          1-1
        Stanza  2 there is an   overlap   between  the  researcher's statement   and Marc's  response   at the  point where
        emphasis on the creatures is being placed. Marc's response in line M1, illustrates the way that he negotiates the
        Discourse of game designers using aspects of the gamer Discourse he has so much experience on.
                He does so by engaging in the seven building tasks in the following order:
                1) Marc uses significance, which refers to using language as a way to make certain ideas salient over
        others, with the purpose of establishing what Toulmin (2003) calls the warrant of an argument; that is, he is
        clarifying the rules of the game design "game" he will be playing.
                2) While the researcher's statements about the rules of the design task in lines R3, R4, and R5 are
        meant to demarcate a level of seriousness in the challenge, Marc challenges this approach through a rhetorical
        move   which  combines   his  query  about  rules (line MI)  with his response  in a tone of  mock  surprise  at  the
        limitations imposed   by the  researcher  (line M2).  He  uses this  move to   demarcate  the playful  nature of  the
        activity, in other words this is a low stakes space, a game about making games.
                3) By using this strategy, he is also enacting the third language task of signaling a specific identity for
        the speaker, a hybrid gamer-as- designer identity, for the warrant that he is establishing is not for an argument in
        the traditional sense of the word, but rather for what counts as a valid game design-as-argument in the context of
        a design game.
                4) With mock tone when he says "How dare you?!" Marc is engaging in the fourth task of language,
        establishing a relationship to others. In this case he is attempting to establish the sense of camaraderie and low
        deference   commonly    practiced in the gamer    Discourse, thus signaling  a more  peer-level  relationship to  the
        researcher than what he would have had with an adult in an academic context.
                  5) Another interesting aspect of this interaction is the emphasis Marc is placing on certain creatures of
        the set. Different creatures are designed to have a greater or lesser impact on the overall game system. For
        example, adding an enemy creature introduces a high level of complexity by being able to move, chase, or
        damage the player's character, while a score counter serves a mainly informative function, telling the player the
        total points accumulated during the game.
                In this case, Marc enacts the fifth task of language by attempting to build a common perspective with
        the researcher, regarding the political value of the social goods of the task, which for the challenge are the game
        creatures to be used in his design. He does so by focusing the researcher's attention on those creatures with a
        lower degree of complexity (line M1) and in doing so suggests that they should not be considered in the same
        status as creatures for the purpose of the design challenge given their low game value.
                6) For the language task of drawing connections or disconnections between meanings, he is attempting
        to disconnect the block and life meter from other creatures, in an attempt to "legally" bend the rules of the
        design challenge,  a  common    gamer   and game   designer  behavior  which   scholars call transgressive behavior
        (Salen & Zimmerman, 2003), a strategy commonly used to produce new play strategies in games.
                7)  For the   final language-building   task, which  consists on privileging or  disprivileging certain  sign
        systems as  a way    to convey    knowledge,   Marc's   emphasis  on  complex  creatures  grants them   privilege as
        symbols that will contribute more substantially to the game-as argument than less complex ones.
                Even when Marc's ability to use some design grammar elements of Gamestar Mechanic to sustain an
        argument illustrates an important language practice that can take place in the game, when one frames the previous
        analysis in the context of the interaction in Stanza 3 the argumentative exchange in lines M1, R5 and M2 takes on a
        whole new meaning, since it plays a key role in understanding Marc's design choices further in the challenge.
                After establishing a common ground with the researcher that the coin and health meter characters each
        count as one of his four possible choices, Marc is now placed in a crucial decision-making position within the
        task. He makes this position overt by declaring his choices of creatures before placing them in the play area
        (Lines M3, M4, M5 and M6). In doing so, Marc is again enacting his gamer-as-designer identity (Task 3), for by
        declaring ahead of time the choices of creatures he will use for his design he makes overt a heuristic by which
        he will approach the problem-solving process for this challenge.
                The   details of this  strategy  become   particularly evident  from  the  order in  which  he  declares  the
        creatures he will use, and highlights his views of the relative importance of each creature to the design of his
        game (Task 1). The first creature chosen by Marc is the avatar, a creature that embodies the player in the virtual
        world of the game (Line M3). The choice of this character provides important insight into Marc's previous
        question regarding the coins and heart meter. Within the avatars one can choose are some that can shoot and
        others that can't. Those characters that can shoot are designed to move more slowly than those who can't. By
        choosing a shooting character, Marc is declaring what game designers call the "core mechanic" of the game (i.e.
        the fundamental way in which the player will interact with the game system, see Salen and Zimmerman, 2003)
        and given the highest value to shooting over other possible core mechanics for the game.
                The intention of his question about the coins and heart meter becomes clearer in this context, since for
        a mechanic of direct enemy engagement such as shooting, the heart meter would provide a higher strategic value
        to the player than the coin, as is discussed later in this paper. Conversely, if a non-shooting character had been
        selected, the coins and a meter to indicate how many had been picked would be more logical choices.

1-
         Marc's second and third creature choices of blocks (M4) and "evil guys" (i.e. enemies, M5) provide more
evidence of his general solution strategy. In choosing these creatures, he is adding three fundamental elements to his
game, namely a) a space layout and structure in which the game will take place, b) a win condition (through the goal
block), c) an oppositional force or challenge. In fact, this composition as a whole reflects several recent theories of the
fundamental nature of game design put forth by videogame scholars. In particular, the notion by Jenkins and Squire
(2002) that a defining characteristic of games is their nature as spaces contested between opposing forces, a state of
affairs that Marc's selection of game components accomplishes.
         His  final selection,    the  health  meter,  reflects Marc's   understanding  of the   systemic  relationships
between different elements of the game. In choosing of this creature, he is making overt a mindfulness of the
player's role in the game,     an  element  commonly     overlooked   by novice  game   designers that  often  results in
either unplayable or bad games. In choosing the meter, Marc is acknowledging the importance of providing
feedback to players that may help them devise winning strategies.
         In order to verify whether this strategy a simple approximation to a solution or a well thought plan, a post-
design interview   regarding   his design   strategy   was conducted, and  revealed that his approach   was   even more
structured than  a  heuristic, and    could arguably   be  seen more  like  an algorithm guided   by  well thought  out
experience and deduction. Given Marc's extensive game play experience, he explained that his design had been
influenced by a similar game structures found in other games he had previously played, particularly by the Hades
level in God of War II (God of War II, 2008). Marc's final design for this game is one where the player starts at the
bottom of the level and must jump from block to block trying to reach the goal block at the top. Even though God
of War is a far more complex game in terms of its graphics and elaboration that at the surface level does not look at
all like Marc's game, an experienced game designer would most likely note that the mechanic in the level called
Hades is fundamentally the same as this game. These deep structures, which architects and software engineers call
design patterns (Alexander, Ishikawa, Silverstein & Jacboson, 1977) represent design practices that embody time-
proven solutions (heuristics and algorithms) to certain problems within a professional field, in this case within the
Discourse of Game Design. If one were to accept the notion that the transfer of learning can be understood as the
gradual appropriation of the Discourse of more expert members of a community (Shaffer, 2006, Gee, 2003), then
in using this design strategy he is enacting such a Discourse.

Conclusion
         Going back to the guiding questions of this study, the preliminary analysis of interview data through
case studies and discourse analytic approaches to language-in-use, one can begin to elucidate the way in which
learners can  appropriate  and     enact   the game    designer   Discourse in  the  context  of Gamestar     Mechanic.
Regarding language practices, one can begin to see that the argument by psycholinguists such as Bruner (1986)
and Gee (1996) regarding the falseness of the notion of literacy as superior in sophistication to orality seems to
be supported by the data. It also becomes evident that language can play as sophisticated and powerful a role in
videogame design as it does in academic tasks. Even though an assessment of his written skills would show
Marc as a student whose language skills are very low, giving him access to the design grammar of Gamestar
Mechanic games provided him with a medium through which he could harness extensive gaming experience to
support his argumentation and meaning construction processes, an idea in line with several theories of literacy
development and assessment (Valencia and Pearson, 1987).
         As  important   perhaps,   is the  fact  that through  the game  designer  discourse the adult  evaluator  was
placed in a more peer-level role with Marc. Framed within the playful nature of the game design activity, this
stance allowed the emergence of a space of safety and exploration that stands in stark contrast with the current
Discourse of high-stakes and standardized knowledge fostered by schools. By using the editor's symbol systems
(the creatures) to construct evidence for an argument (or in the case of Marc a game design-as-argument) is also
a powerful  move    used by    professionals   to highlight  this evidence  and give it  credibility to their arguments
within their communities of discourse (Goodwin, 1994). At the same time, the strategies that Marc had to use to
tackle design challenges such as the one presented in this article, indicate a level of planning, logic and problem-
solving sophistication equivalent to those of academic tasks. Future research should explore these tasks as a
form of assessment in more detail before any conclusions can be reached.

References
Alexander, C., Ishikawa, S., Silverstein, M., & Jacobson, M. (1977). A Pattern Language: Towns, buildings,
         construction. New York: Oxford University Press.
Barrows, H. S. (1998). The essentials of problem-based learning. Journal of Dental Education, 62(9), 630-633.
Benbunan-Fich, R. (2001). Using protocol analysis to evaluate the usability of a commercial web site.
         Information & Management, 39(2), 151-163.
Bonk, C. J., & Cunningham, D. J. (1998). Searching for learner-centered, constructivist, and sociocultural
         components of collaborative educational learning toolsLawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Bruner, J. (1986) Two modes of thought. Actual Minds, Possible Worlds, , 11-43.

                                                                                                                              1-
         Chall, J. S., & Jacobs, V. A. (2003). Poor children's fourth-grade slump. American Educator,
         de León, A. G., & Carnegie Corporation of New York. (2002). The urban high school's challenge: Ensuring
                 literacy for every childCarnegie Corp. of New York.
         Ewell, P., & Wellman, J. (2007). Enhancing student success in education: National Postsecondary Education
                 Cooperative (NPEC).
         DiSessa, A. (2000). Changing minds: Computers, learning, and literacy. Cambridge: MIT Press.
         Games, Learning and Society (2005) Videogames and the future of learning. Phi Delta Kappan, 87(2), 104-111.
         Gee, J. P. (2000). Discourse and sociocultural studies in reading. In M.L. Kamil, P.B. Mosenthal, P.D.
                 Pearson,& R.Barr (Ed.), Handbook of reading research (pp. 195-207). Manweh, NJ: Erlbaum.
         Gee, J. P. (2005). An introduction to discourse analysis : Theory and method (2nd ed.). New York: Routledge.
         Gee, J. P. (2004). Situated Language and Learning: A Critique of Traditional Schooling. New York: Routledge
         Gee, J. P. (1996). Social linguistics and literacies : Ideology in discourses (2nd ed.). London ; Bristol, PA:
                 Taylor & Francis.
         Gee, J. P. (2003). What video games have to teach us about learning and literacy (1st ed.). New York: Palgrave
                 Macmillan.
         Goodwin, C. (1994). Professional vision. American Anthropologist, 96(3), 606-633.
         God of War II. (2008, March 2). In Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia. Retrieved 02:44, March 2, 2008, from
                 http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=God_of_War_II&oldid=195221786
         Grossman, A. (2003). Postmortems from game developer CMP Books.
         Harel, I., & Papert, S. (1992). Software design as a learning environment. Taylor & Francis.
         Hart, B., & Risley, T. R. (2003). The early catastrophe: The 30 million word gap by age 3. American Educator,
                 22, 4­9.
         Hutchins, E. (1995). Cognition in the wild. Cambridge: MIT Press.
         Jefferson, G. (1984). Transcript notation. In J.M. Atkinson & J. Heritage (Eds.) Structures of Social Interaction:
                 Studies in Conversation Analysis, 134-162. New York: Cambridge University Press.
         Jenkins, H. & Squire, K. (2002). The Art of Contested Spaces. In L. King (Ed.), Game on: The History and
                 Culture of Videogames.New York: Universe.
         Kafai, Y. B. (1998). Children as designers, testers, and evaluators of educational software. Morgan Kaufmann
                 Series in Interactive Technologies, , 123-145.
         Kolodner, J. L., Crismond, D., Gray, J., Holbrook, J., & Puntambekar, S. (1998). Learning by design from
                 theory to practice. Proceedings of the International Conference of the Learning Sciences, , 16­22.
         Kress, G. (2003). Literacy in the new media ageRoutledge London.
         Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge: UK:
                 Cambridge University Press.
         Lemke, J. L. (1990). Talking science: Language, learning, and valuesAblex Publishing Corporation.
         New London Group, s. (1996). A pedagogy of multiliteracies: Designing social futures. Harvard Educational
                 Review, 66(66), 60-92.
         Papert, S. (1991). Situating constructionism. Constructionism, , 1-11.
         Resnick, M. (1994). Turtles, termites, and traffic jamsMIT Press Cambridge, Mass.
         Riesbeck, C. K., & Schank, R. C. (1989). Inside case-based reasoningLawrence Erlbaum Associates.
         Salen, K., & Zimmerman, E. (2003). Rules of play: Game design fundamentalsMIT PR.
         Salen, K. (2007). Gaming literacies: A game design study in action. Journal of Educational Multimedia and
                 Hypermedia, 16(3), 301-322.
         Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (1996). Computer Support for Knowledge Building Communities. In C.
                 Koschman (Ed.), CSCL:Theory and Practice. Manwah: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
         Schön, D. A. (1995). The reflective practitioner: How professionals think in actionAshgate Pub Co.
         Shaffer, D. W. (2006). How computer games can help children learn. New York, NY: Palgrave Macmillan.
         Squire, K. (2006). From content to context: Videogames as designed experience. Educational Researcher,
                 35(8), 19.
         Stake, R. E. (1995). The art of case study researchSage Publications Inc.
         Toulmin, S. E. (2003). The uses of argumentCambridge University Press.
         Valencia, S. & Pearson, P.D. (1987) Reading Assessment: Time for a Change. The Reading Teacher 40(8), pp
                 726-732.
         Vygotsky, L. S. (1930). Mind in society. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

       Acknowledgments
         The authors would like to acknowledge Dr. James Paul Gee and Dr. Elizabeth Hayes for their guidance and
         support throughout this project, as well as to the John  D. and Catherine   T. Macarthur Foundation    for     their
         sponsorship of the Gamestar Mechanic Project and all research involved.

1-
