                        Developing and applying design principles for knowledge
                                                     creation practices

                                               Organisers of the symposium

                           Liisa Ilomäki,  Sami Paavola, Department of Psychology, University of Helsinki,
                                       P.O. Box 9, FIN-00014 University of Helsinki, Finland,
                                       Email: liisa.ilomaki@helsinki.fi, sami.paavola@helsinki.fi

                                                     A general introduction

                                                     Sami Paavola and Liisa Ilomäki,
                Department of Psychology, University of Helsinki, P.O. Box 9, FIN-00014 University of Helsinki,
                                      Finland, liisa.ilomaki@helsinki.fi, sami.paavola@helsinki.fi

                Learning    sciences,   especially   when    connected    to  developing      new  educational   technology,    have
        characteristics of design   sciences. It can  be  argued  that design  sciences    require methodological    and  theoretical
        outlook which    differs  from traditional   models  of science  (Simon    1997).   One   central way    of developing  new
        methodological solutions is the use of design principles to guide the design of educational practices and technology.
        Various ways    of developing     design  principles  have  been   suggested,     both top-down,   i.e. theory  driven  (e.g.
        Scardamalia  2002;   Kaptelinin   at  al 1999),   and bottom-up,     i.e. empirically   informed  (Kali  2006;    Arnseth  &
        Ludvigsen) approaches.
                This    symposium    discusses   the role of  design   principles,    and analyzes  their uses   in  a research and
        development   project, KP-Lab     (Knowledge    Practices Laboratory;     see www.kp-lab.org).    The   KP-Lab  project is a
        large, five-year project supported by EU, aiming at developing and making research on the "trialogic" knowledge
        practices and technology, and what can be called knowledge creation metaphor of learning (Paavola et al. 2004).
        The trialogical approach aims at understanding how people collaboratively, in long-term processes, develop novel
        epistemic things and transform their knowledge practices in education and at workplaces, and how students in higher
        education act   similarly by  cross-fertilizing professional   and educational    practices and   solve  complex,  authentic
        problems with the help of innovative knowledge practices and educational technology.
              The aim of the KP-Lab project is to develop the trialogical approach to learning and related pedagogical
        scenarios and technology. In order to do that, general design principles have been developed based on theoretical
        models concerning collaborative knowledge creation processes as well as experiences of research on collaborative
        learning environments. These design principles illustrate the general characteristics of the trialogical approach on
        learning, but they are re-evaluated and refined during the project. In this symposium, we will continue the discussion
        about design principles, the definitions, focus and scope. The following central design principles (DPs) were defined
        at the beginning of the project to describe trialogical learning:
        DP1. Organizing activities around shared objects: a central idea of trialogical learning is that work and learning are
        organized around developing shared knowledge objects;
        DP2. Supporting interaction between personal and social levels: people integrate their own personal work and group
        work for developing shared objects, combining participants' expertise and contribution into the shared achievement;
        DP3. Eliciting individual and collective agency: the responsibility for creating shared new knowledge objects is
        shifted from educators to learners;
        DP4. Fostering   long-term   processes   of  knowledge  advancement:      trialogical  learning requires sustained, focused
        work on topics of interest;
        DP5. Emphasizing development through transformation and reflection between various forms of knowledge and
        practices: declarative, procedural as well as tacit knowledge and practices are externalized, reflected, conceptualized
        and transformed during the process;
        DP6. Cross fertilization of various knowledge practices across communities and institutions: knowledge work in
        KP-Lab engages people in solving complex, authentic problems and producing objects also for purposes outside the
        educational institution;
        DP7. Providing flexible tool mediation: knowledge creation should be supported by dedicated tools for mediating
        collaborative activities and enhancing aspects highlighted in the other design principles
                We describe, first, the development of design principles in the project in a theoretical paper, and then the
        use and development      of these principles for  analyzing and   implementing     knowledge-creation    type  of activity in

3-
three educational   contexts.   The  focus is  on collaborative knowledge    practices and    on the role of  technology to
support    them.  The   special emphasis   is  on  the methodological    implications  for using   and   developing design
principles, in interaction between the theoretical approach and the empirical findings.

References
Arnseth, H. C. & Ludvigsen, S. (2006). Approaching institutional contexts: systemic versus dialogic research in
           CSCL. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 1(2), 167-185.
Kali, Y. (2006). Collaborative knowledge-building using the Design Principles Database. International Journal of
           Computer Supported Collaborative Learning, (1)2, 187-201.
Kaptelinin, V., Nardi, B.A., & Macaulay, C., (1999). The Activity Checklist: A Tool for Representing the "Space"
           of Context." ACM /Interactions, Methods & Tools, July 1999.
Paavola, S., Lipponen, L., & Hakkarainen, K. (2004). Models of Innovative Knowledge Communities and Three
           Metaphors of Learning. Review of Educational Research 74(4), 557-576.
Scardamalia, Marlene (2002). Collective Cognitive Responsibility for the Advancement of Knowledge. In B. Smith
           (ed.). Liberal Education in a Knowledge Society. Open Court, Chicago, pp. 67-98.
Simon, H.A. (1997). The Sciences of the Artificial (3rd ed.). Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press, 1997

                   Design and evolution of design principles for knowledge
                     creation ­ The dynamics of theory and practice
                     Sami Paavola, Department of Psychology, University of Helsinki, P.O. Box 9,
                         FIN-00014 University of Helsinki, Finland, sami.paavola@helsinki.fi
                 Christoph Richter, Upper Austria University of Applied Sciences, FH-Hagenberg/CBL,
                   Hauptstrasse 117, A-4232, Hagenberg, Austria, Christoph.Richter@fh-hagenberg
                            Anders Mørch, InterMedia, University of Oslo, P.O. BOX 1161,
                           Blinden, N-0318 Oslo, Norway. anders.morch@intermedia.uio.no

           In our  presentation   we describe   how  design  principles  for the trialogical  approach    to learning were
developed and formulated during the early stages of the KP-Lab project, and an overall methodology related to this
development.     The  trialogical approach    aims  at developing pedagogical    models,   novel   practices  and tools  for
organizing learners' activities around shared, novel objects (like texts, conceptual artifacts, digital/computational
artifacts, multimedia   products,   practices) that are created for some   meaningful   purpose    and   subsequent use. A
background     for this approach   can be  found    on the knowledge    building approach     (Bereiter, 2002), and on  the
experiences    of  developing   and  doing  research   on  collaborative learning   environments,    but  broadening  these
approaches with socio-cultural perspectives (e.g. Engeström, 1987); in short, on models representing the so-called
knowledge-creation metaphor of learning (Paavola et al., 2004).
           One challenge for the KP-Lab project has been that it builds on the idea that also the theoretical framework
(the trialogical   approach on  learning)  will be  developed   during the project. This   is typical for the design-based
approach; in the KP-Lab project not only practices and tools but also the theoretical approach is emerging. The aim
is to produce innovations also theoretically because along with novel knowledge practices and new technology the
theoretical conceptions must be developed. There is no ready-made theory for understanding technology mediated
trialogical processes. The trialogical approach is an `epistemic object' (Knorr Cetina, 2001), that is, an open-ended
knowledge object which is defined in more detail during the project. The work with these kinds of epistemic objects
requires a new kind of methodological solutions also in relation to the theory development.
           How then to formulate design principles for something which does not yet exist (in our case, a full-blown
conception of the trialogical approach to learning)? Candidate solutions are either to start from some framework or
theory (which is implemented in practice) and with the help of that derive (deductively) design principles for that
kind of a framework, or to try to derive design principles inductively from existing knowledge practices (cf. Arnseth
& Ludvigsen, 2006). Both approaches in themselves are, however, problematic if the aim is to capture and develop
new innovative knowledge practices and tools. A theory-driven approach aims at implementing existing theoretical
ideas and is not sensitive to new, emerging practices nor to problems of practical implementation of theoretical
ideas. A practice-driven approach easily confirms already existing practices, and do not necessarily provide good
basis for new design ideas, or emergent practices.

                                                                                                                             3-
                   We  analyze   tensions  with   a  project like KP-Lab     between   a  "theory-driven"   and    a "practice-driven"
         approach    towards  an overall  knowledge-practices     oriented   methodology    for   the project,  and  study  how  these
         tensions  are solved    or  handled. Designing     new   technology  requires    conceptual    understanding    and  powerful
         abstractions of those knowledge practices which are supported with new technology. On the one hand, this kind of a
         conceptual understanding is the result of the research on emerging knowledge practices. We analyze the KP-Lab
         methodology     as such  an abductive  process    (see  Paavola, 2006)    where   theories   and conceptualizations   are  not
         produced primarily for the purpose of testing them, or for the purpose of explaining things, in a strict sense, but in
         order to guide further activities like the design of tools and the promotion of innovative practices. This kind of a
         methodology     focuses on  the  dialectics between    theory and   practice. On   the one   hand, theory-informed    design-
         principles and first versions of trialogical approach have given guidance to ways of framing trialogical knowledge
         practices and the development of supporting tools. On the other hand, knowledge practices of real cases have then
         informed the specification and modifications of design principles. We analyze how this kind of a design approach
         can be seen in relation to other design approaches like participatory design, and theory-based or theory-informed
         design especially from the point of view of theory development.
                   In the end   we  present a  trialogical  "checklist". The  basic   idea  of  a "checklist"   is borrowed   from   the
         "Activity   checklist" (see Kaptelinin   et al., 1999).  This checklist   has its basis  on  a framework     describing basic
         features of activity theory, and how they can help to focus questions concerning design and evaluation of tools from
         the perspective of activity theory. Analogous, KP-Lab design principles provide a basis for a trialogical checklist but
         instead  of  producing  a  checklist for human-computer       interaction in  general,   which is  the aim   of  the Activity
         checklist, it aims at specifying a checklist for collaborative knowledge practices for developing shared artifacts and
         practices further.  It specifies central   aspects  and  guiding questions    of technology    and pedagogical     design  and
         evaluation for the trialogical approach to learning, and has been produced within the KP-Lab project on the basis of
         theory informed design principles and empirical findings concerning their use.

       References
         Arnseth, H. C. & Ludvigsen, S. (2006). Approaching institutional contexts: systemic versus dialogic research in
                   CSCL. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 1(2), 167-185.
         Bereiter, C. (2002). Education and mind in the knowledge age. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
         Engeström, Y. (1987). Learning by expanding. Helsinki: Orienta-Konsultit.
         Kaptelinin, V., Nardi, B.A., & Macaulay, C., (1999). The Activity Checklist: A Tool for Representing the             "Space"
                   of Context." ACM /Interactions, Methods & Tools, July 1999.
         Knorr   Cetina,  K. (2001). Objectual    Practice.  In Schatzki  T.R.,  Knorr    Cetina, K   & von   Savigny    E. (eds.). The
                   Practice Turn in Contemporary Theory. pp.175-188. London and NY: Routledge
         Paavola, S. (2006). On the Origin of Ideas: An Abductivist Approach to Discovery. Philosophical Studies from the
                   University of Helsinki 15. Introduction: http://ethesis.helsinki.fi/julkaisut/hum/filos/vk/paavola/
         Paavola, S., Lipponen, L., & Hakkarainen, K. (2004). Models of Innovative Knowledge Communities and Three
                   Metaphors of Learning. Review of Educational Research 74(4), 557-576.

                             Conceptual mapping as a form of trialogical learning
                                                             intervention
                                     Kari Kosonen, Liisa Ilomäki, Minna Lakkala, Department of Psychology,
                                 University of Helsinki, P.O. Box 9, FIN-00014 University of Helsinki, Finland,
                              Email: kari.kosonen@helsinki.fi, liisa.ilomaki@helsinki.fi, minna.lakkala@helsinki.fi

                   Collaborative conceptual mapping of complex, multifaceted or ill-defined phenomena plays a prominent
         role among    pedagogical   methods   used  in   higher  education.  It opens   an opportunity    to  share  responsibility in
         collective efforts to capture the meaning of central concepts and essential relations in the target domain of learning.
         Collaborative conceptual modelling in its core can be characterized as a pedagogical method, which has technical,
         social (Patterson,  Dansereau,   &   Newbern,    1992)  as well  as epistemological    and   cognitive dimensions    (Farrand,
         Hussein, & Hennessy, 2002; O'Donnell, Dansereau, & Hall, 2002). It supports object centred inquiry, development
         of critical thinking skills and social sharing of knowledge by allowing participants to construct various conceptual
         relations around target phenomena (Nesbit & Adesope, 2006). Collaborative conceptual mapping can be a practice
         that supports knowledge creation metaphor (Paavola, Lipponen & Hakkarainen, 2004) and trialogical learning.

3-0
          In the present   study,   collaborative conceptual   mapping    was   investigated  as   an activity embedded    in a
pedagogical practice. We focused on investigating how design principles can be used in analysing collaborative
conceptual modelling in a higher education course. The creation of concept maps was not a goal itself but as an
intermediate part of an overarching learning activity. Research questions addressed in the study were the following:
1) How were the central principles of the trialogical approach realized in the students' collaborative conceptual
mapping   activities and   their  outcomes;   and 2)   How   were  the   technical tools  used  to mediate    the collaborative
conceptual mapping activity and what recommendations can be made to develop the tools further?

Setting
          The investigated    course  was voluntary    for students   at the Department   of  Psychology.   It acquainted    the
students with qualitative research methods as well as provided them with support for the advancement of their mas-
ter thesis. The course was a combination of face-to-face meetings with students' presentations and discussions, work
in pairs for constructing concepts maps (with CMap-Tools, see http://cmap.ihmc.us/) during the meetings and stu-
dents' own time, and students' preparatory work before the meetings, working also through a virtual collaboration
tool Future Learning Environment (FLE3, see http://fle3.uiah.fi). The schedule for the course was launched on the
basis of this initial discussion and expressed problems, related to the student's own research interests.
          During the course, the participants prepared a presentation on their own theme so that presentations were
held in each meeting throughout the course. Each meeting was organized around a one issue so that those students
that were interested in the same theme had their presentations in the same meeting. The concept maps were re-
organized    and re-written   after  each course  meeting    on   the basis  of  the new  information      encountered  by   the
participants as well as shared through FLE. Between the meetings, the participants were supposed to keep track of
the FLE environment of the course, insert there their own comments as well as supplementary materials. The last
meeting focused on the results of the course. Concept maps were compared and discussed; the situation of students'
own work was discussed and the general results of the course were evaluated.

Methodology
          The data collected from the case consisted of teachers' written teaching logs, sent through e-mail; students'
written   self-reflections after the  course; as  well  as the contents   of the database  in   FLE3   systems,   including the
successive versions of students' concept maps. The activities in the course were reconstructed from the participant's
descriptions and the database structure and contents, using an investigative approach that may be characterized as
exploratory  case  research    (Yin,  2003).  Various   data sources  and   analysis methods    were   combined,   in  order  to
provide a multi-faceted and comprehensive picture of the course practices and the use of tools.

Results
        The results of the study indicate that the conceptual mapping activity served various purposes in the students'
activity, considered  from    the perspective  of trialogical  approach    on learning.  First, it created  a  concrete shared
mediating object for collaborative working. Collaborative conceptual mapping allowed the student pairs to explicate
for each other their conceptions of the abstract and intangible topic of the course, qualitative research methods. The
collaborative  creation    of shared  external representations    can  be  concluded   to mediate     the  interaction between
individual and social levels because their creation required the students to share their ideas and also to mirror the
outcomes with their own understanding. The maps supported the transformation and reflection between various
forms of knowledge because the students were able to, first, explicate their previous understanding into the first
versions of the maps, and then elaborate the maps based on the new knowledge provided by other students' presen-
tations and  teachers'  explanations.   The   iterative updating   of  the conceptual    maps   served  long-term   knowledge
advancement.     Each student    pair produced    2-4  versions of  their  concept   maps during    the   course; according   to
preliminary analysis the level of, coherence and scientific accuracy of the concept maps increased. Flexible tool
mediation was partly actualized by the         CMap-Tool     that has  sophisticated  functionalities   to support  conceptual
modeling; it was itself easy to use but to save the produced maps to university's system or uploading them into
FLE3 was difficult. It turned out that the integration of various technical tools simultaneously did not succeed very
well. More detailed results are presented in the symposium.

References
Eitel, F. (2000). Do we face a fourth paradigm shift in medicine-Algorithms in education. Journal of Evaluation in
          Clinical Practice, 6, 321-333

                                                                                                                                 3-
         Farrand, P:, Hussain, F., & Hennessy, E. (2002). The efficacy of the mind map study technique. Medical Education,
                 36, 426-431
         Paavola, S., Lipponen, L., & Hakkarainen, K. (2004). Models of Innovative Knowledge Communities and Three
                 Metaphors of Learning. Review of Educational Research 74(4), 557-576.
         Nesbit, J.  &  Adesope,  O.   (2006).    Learning With   Concept    and Knowledge     Map: A  Meta-Analysis.     Review   of
                 Educational Research, 76, 413-448
         O'Donell, A.M., Dansereau, D.F., & Hall, R.H. (2002). Knowledge Maps as Scaffolds for Cognitive Processing.
                 Educational Psychology Review, 14, 71-86
         Patterson,  M.  E., Dansereau,     D.F., &  Newbern,    D. (1992).   Effects of  communication      aids and strategies  on
                 cooperative teaching. Journal of Educational Psychology, 84, 453-461

                      From design principles to educational practices: a project in
                                                    secondary education
                        Jerry Andriessen, Crina Dam a, Mirjam Pardijs, Patrick Sins Utrecht University, Department of
         Educational Sciences, Research Centre Learning in Interaction , PO Box 80.140, 3508 TC Utrecht, The Netherlands
                            Email: J.E.B.Andriessen@uu.nl, C.I.Damsa@uu.nl, M.Pardijs@uu.nl, P.H.M.Sins@uu.nl

        Introduction
                 The    knowledge  creation   approach    to learning  (Paavola,  Lipponen  and  Hakkarainen,     2004)   proposes a
         reconceptualization of the way in which learners and institutions organize knowledge work. This approach depicts
         learning as a collaborative activity aimed at creating new knowledge. The design of educational settings that applies
         these innovative ideas involves the development of new pedagogical methods and technological tools, based on
         design principles grounded in the knowledge creation approach on learning.
                 In the current proposal we present a design-based approach to implement a number of principles, derived
         from the knowledge creation perspective of learning, in the context of a secondary school (UniC) in the Netherlands.
         UniC's  pedagogical    vision  is  characterised  by  the  encouragement    and   the support of    the  students' personal
         development and interests as a basis for learning. In addition, UniC stimulates collaboration between students and
         meaningful   learning. Both    the school's  and  the   researchers' interests in developing   empirical   support  for the
         effectiveness of this approach constituted a potentially fruitful ground for collaboration. The results obtained from
         studying students' and teachers' practices will feed back into the continuous iterative development of the design
         principles. Also,  the results will provide  a new    insight  into the way  knowledge     creation is  enacted  within this
         specific context, and will lead to suggestions to improve our approach in practice.
                 At UniC, a multi-disciplinary team consisting of these researchers, teachers, students, dean, and external
         experts was set-up aimed at the redesign of this learning module based on principles of the knowledge creation
         metaphor, which was found to match UniC's general pedagogical approach and aspiration. These principles are not
         a unified list of ideas that can be built into any educational setting. Some of them are useful as guiding ideas for the
         construction   of educational  scenarios;  others   are more  like  emergent   consequences   of the   implementation   and
         enactment   of knowledge  creation.   Generally   speaking,  the principles  can  be  seen as an evolving    set of general
         guidelines to be adapted to situational demands. The principles that were employed are: (1). Trialogical activity
         around shared objects, (2) Interaction between the personal and social levels, (3) Cross-fertilization of knowledge
         practice, (4) Flexible tool mediation for trialogical activity, (5) Development through transformation and reflection.

        Aim of this study
                 In this study we attempt to gain more insight into the practices relating to the implementation of design
         principles that are based on the knowledge creation perspective on learning in a particular educational context. We
         aim at investigating how the design principles can be built in collaborative work in a functional manner and what the
         implications are for the various actors involved in this design project.

        Methodology
                 The approach we employed in this study is a combination of design-based research (Brown, 1992; Collins,
         Joseph, & Bielaczyc, 2004) with qualitative analysis methods. An existing learning module with a duration of eight
         weeks was re-designed using the design principles as conceptual tools. Several weeks before this module would
         commence,    project partners  had  several meetings    to get acquainted   with  each other, pedagogical    approach   and

3-
practices  at UniC    and with  the  design  principles     of knowledge     creation. In  addition,  a preliminary     curricular
approach was taken to guarantee a high-quality implementation start of the project at UniC, also by involving both
students and their parents. During the project partners organized several informal meetings which served to improve
the design    of  the  learning  module   based     on  experiences     of  teachers   and   researchers  encountered        during
implementation of the module and based on the design principles. To accomplish this aim, the multi-disciplinary
team at  UniC    had  to create conditions   for   reflecting  on  and  advance  their  practices  in   face   of the  interchange
between the different modes of knowledge. The ultimate goal this community wanted to achieve was that students
would create their own knowledge during technology-supported authentic projects in which they collaboratively
work in small groups around knowledge object.
          The  new   design  of the module      was introduced    to twenty-nine  students    and  to  their   parents, during  an
introductory meeting. Students formed 8 groups of three or four, based on preferences for a certain topic. Six of the
groups envisioned objects for which they gained the interest of internal or external stakeholders. In a final session,
students had to present their results to the stakeholders, the other students, teachers, and researchers. Technological
support was provided by FLE3 (Future Learning Environment), which was introduced during a demo session in the
first module session. Qualitative data obtained from verbal transcripts and observations were analyzed employing a
multiple-method approach, which involved content analysis of the discussions and interviews, analysis of documents
produced by students and a context analysis for describing the pedagogical and institutional context. Central in the
analyses was how the design principles were actualized at the level of student and teacher practices.

Results
          Principle 1 (focus on shared objects): A diversity of objects was created throughout the module. As the
module progressed, it became clear that simply stating the final object was not enough for it to be the focus of the
group. Groups had to actively concretise their object. Teachers identified and acknowledged the need for object-
relatedness of students' practices and consequently started to focus on the object in their guidance of student groups.
          Principle 2 (personal and social levels): The shared nature of the object directed groups towards employing
collaborative  activities and   engaging  in    an intensive   interaction.  Although   groups    often divided    tasks between
students, an essential next step was sharing the results of these individual actions with the other group members.
Only then could they be used to further develop the shared knowledge object.
          Principle  3   (cross-fertilization): There   are    various  interpretations   of  the  concept     of authenticity   in
education. In our case we introduced the concept of the client or other stakeholders, who besides the teacher, was
interested in  employing    and  further advancing      the groups'  product.   These   cross-boundary    activities    were  both
motivating for students but also created gap closing tensions.
          Principle  4  (technology):  Groups      used FLE3      predominantly  as   object  repository,    storing   background
information, preliminary and final objects into their group space. Although teachers were allowed into the groups'
space, they did not utilize this functionality.
          Principle 5 (knowledge transformation): Several features of the module contributed to the occurrence of
observable transformations. These transformations concerned, on the one hand, the conceptualisation and perception
of  the shared   object  and, on the   other    hand,   transformations    with regard    to ways   of  working    related   to the
development    of the  object.  Both external    influences    (such as  the client),  as well  as  groups'    emerging   insights
contributed to the occurrence of these transformations.

Conclusion
         What    occurred  at UniC   can be     called practice   bound  hybridization    of concepts   (i.e., design   principles)
borrowed   from   the   knowledge   creation    model.   Since    collaborative design    practices  at UniC      will  take place
longitudinally, spanning several modules, the school can be advised and supported based on the results reported.
Regarding the redesign of the learning module according to the design principles, the outcomes indicate that the
educational   practice   was  enriched by   the    interplay   of design principles    and   experiences  obtained      from  their
implementation. At this point, the project team is able to move forward and learn from the issues that are raised
above and achieve more focus on shared objectives. Further implication of the results, and the way these results
feedback both into the redesign of the course and development of the design principles will be discussed.

References
Brown,    A.  L.  (1992).  Design   experiments:      Theoretical   and  methodological      challenges  in    creating  complex
          interventions. Journal of the learning Sciences, 2, 141­178.

                                                                                                                                    3-3
         Collins, A., Joseph, D., & Bielaczyc, K. (2004).  Design research: Theoretical and methodological issues. Journal of
                  the Learning Sciences, 13 (1), 15-24.
         Hakkarainen,  K.  (2006).  Scientific challenges  of Knowledge-Practices   Laboratory   (Working    paper  of  KP-Lab
                  project). Retrieved on May 5th 2006, from KP-Lab project website: http://www.kp-lab.org
         Paavola, S., Lipponen, L., & Hakkarainen, K. (2004). Models of Innovative Knowledge Communities and Three
                  Metaphors of Learning. Review of Educational Research 74(4), 557-576.

                         Turning Debriefings into Knowledge Creation Practices
                         Klas Karlgren, Anders Dahlström, Sari Ponzer, Department of Clinical Science and Education,
                         Södersjukhuset, Karolinska Institutet,  Sjukhusbacken 10, 11883 Stockholm, Sweden
                       Email: klas.karlgren@ki.se, anders.dahlstrom@sodersjukhuset.se, sari.ponzer@sodersjukhuset.se

        Introduction and Background
                  The KP-Lab project seeks to understand how people create knowledge and transform their practices by
         developing and advancing common objects of activity (Paavola & Hakkarainen 2005). Its "trialogical" approach
         suggests a new metaphor of learning which can influence the design of educational settings and tools. We report
         results from  a specific  educational context: medical  simulation training of interprofessional    teams  involved  in
         critical care. Such training usually involves a debriefing component following participation in simulations in which
         participants receive feedback  on   their performance.  These are  often viewed as   an  essential, or even   the most
         important, part of simulation  courses    (DeVita et al 2005, Harrison   & Gaba   2005). Merely     taking part in  and
         practicing in simulations is not enough (Satish & Streufert 2002), or as Beaubien & Baker (2004) put it, "Perfection
         can only be achieved through practice with feedback". Therefore, in simulation courses more time is often spent on
         giving feedback in debriefings than on the simulations themselves.
                  In the literature, debriefings are often described as situations where feedback is something that participants
         "get" from instructors (Østergaard et al 2004), or something that participants are "provided with" (Baker et al 2005,
         Gaba 2004). Feedback information about "any lacking competency is communicated to trainees" (Satish & Streufert
         2002). Such descriptions seem to imply that the role of the participants is that of a passive recipient of feedback
         information and observations from instructors.
                  A related issue concerns assessment of medical teamwork which in general is carried out by especially
         trained observers or "teamwork experts" rather than practitioners themselves (Shapiro et al 2004, Thomas et al
         2007, Weinger et al 2004). There are practical and methodological reasons for this, nevertheless, our goal has been
         to support course participants in becoming better at doing own analyses and assessments of team performance.

        Aims of the study
                  Our aim has been to support course participants in actively participating in doing observations and analyses
         of teamwork and communication processes during post-simulation debriefing sessions using video recordings. In
         attempting to reach this aim we investigate how trialogical design principles can be used to design conditions for
         such activities during debriefings.

        Methodology
                  New practices, a conceptual tool, and, software have been designed with inspiration from a knowledge-
         creation metaphor of learning and the design principles. The trialogical approach to learning has suggested a group
         of design principles (DPs) of which the following will be primarily discussed: DP1: Focus on trialogical activity
         around   shared  objects; DP2:  Interaction    between  personal  and  social  levels;  DP5:  Development       through
         transformation and reflection between various forms of knowledge
                  The proposed practices and the conceptual tool have been introduced in a simulation course. Various data
         sources and analysis methods have been combined including intensive questionnaire data collection during courses
         and interaction analysis  of video  recordings from  simulations and  debriefings to   study qualities in  use that the
         designs may bring about.

        Discussion
                  Focus on Trialogical activity around shared objects. An objective was to encourage course participants in
         becoming engaged in doing observations and creating analyses of the performance of the teams in the simulations.

3-
The courses were designed so that participants would iteratively analyze their performance in the simulations and
means were taken to make the analyses more explicit by providing shared conceptual tools for this purpose. Efforts
were made to focus course participants' reflection and discussions about exercises on a number of key issues by
providing a model specifically designed for this purpose. Introducing the model as a starting point for observations,
reflection, and analysis reminded participants about the central issues and structured their discussionsAt some point
they now needed to relate to the categories of the model which thereby appeared to structure discussions and the
model ensured that participants addressed issues which otherwise risked being overlooked
        Interaction between    personal  and social levels. To  make  all participants more  active,   we  modified  and
extended the debriefings: participants first did individual analyses after each simulation followed by analyses with
the team which finally attempts to reach agreement. Interesting discussions and negotiations took place when the
participants discovered that they had differing observations or opinions when trying reach a common understanding.
        Development   through   transformation   and reflection. The  courses  began   with lectures    and  then  certain
activities were iterated over and over again; first a simulation, then a debriefing session, and finally a video session.
During  simulations there was   minimal  time  for analysis but afterwards  participants  were able    to spot  unnoticed
incidents and  behavior on  the video   recordings and  discuss these lengthily. To  address the    challenge   of further
supporting transformations between theoretical knowledge, practices and "tacit" knowledge, knowledge-practices
were created   where   each   individual  course   participant  assessed  a number     of aspects    of   teamwork   and
communication issues by continuously scoring their own as well as the entire team's performance.
        The   knowledge-creation    metaphor   and  the trialogical design  principles have  inspired     by highlighting
certain aspects rather than others and gave valuable hints about in which direction the design and development of
educational practices should  proceed.  Emphasis   was  put on  knowledge   creation   activities: the participants were
encouraged to actively engage in making observations and creating analyses about teamwork and communication
rather than just being recipients of feedback. The course instructors are experts in these knowledge practices, but
instead of handing over all responsibility for such analyses to them, the participants were encouraged to participate.

References
Baker, David P.; Gustafson, Sigrid; Beaubien, Jeff; Salas, Eduardo; Barach, Paul (2005). Medical Teamwork and
        Patient Safety: The Evidence-based Relation. Literature Review. AHRQ Publication No. 05-0053, Agency
        for Healthcare Research and Quality, Rockville, MD. http://www.ahrq.gov/qual/medteam/
Beaubien, J M; Baker, D P (2004). The use of simulation for training teamwork skills in health care: how low can
        you go? Qual Saf Health Care 2004;13(Suppl 1):i51­i56
DeVita, M   A; Schaefer,  J.; Lutz, J.; Wang,  H;  Dongilli H.  (2005).  Improving  medical  emergency       team  (MET)
        performance ­ using a novel curriculum and a computerized human patient simulator. Qual Saf Health Care
        2005;14:326­331.
Gaba, D. M. (2004). The future vision of simulation in health care. Qual Saf Health Care 2004;13 (Suppl 1)
Harrison, T. Kyle & Gaba, David M. (2005). Safe passage - using simulation to teach patient safety. The clinical
        teacher, Vol. 2, No 1.
Paavola, S., & Hakkarainen, K. (2005). The knowledge creation metaphor ­ An emergent epistemological approach
        to learning. Science & Education 14, 535­557.
Satish, U. & Streufert, S. (2002).Value of a cognitive simulation in medicine: towards optimizing decision making
        performance of healthcare personnel. Qual Saf Health Care; 11:163­167
Shapiro, M J; Morey, J C; Small, S D; Langford, V; Kaylor, C J; Jagminas, L; Suner, S. et al. (2004). Simulation
        based teamwork training for emergency department staff: does it improve clinical team performance when
        added to an existing didactic teamwork curriculum? Qual Saf Health Care;13:417­421
Thomas, E J; Taggart B, Crandell, S; Lasky RE; Williams, AL; Love, LJ; Sexton, JB, Tyson, JE, and Helmreich, RL
        (2007). Teaching   teamwork     during the Neonatal  Resuscitation  Program:   a  randomized    trial. Journal of
        Perinatology (2007) 27, 409 ­ 414
Weinger, M B; Gonzales, D C; Slagle, J; Syeed, M (2004). Video capture of clinical care to enhance patient safety.
        Qual Saf Health Care 2004;13:136­144

                                                                                                                           3-
