                                How to design educational technologies?
                                The development of an instructional-model
                       Tamar Ronen-Fuhrmann, Yael Kali, Technion - Israel Institute of Technology,
                                                   Email: yaelk@technion.ac.il

                  Abstract: The potential of design to support learning has been documented for a wide range
                  of ages. In this research we explore the added value of engaging learners in a design process,
                  with a target audience that received little attention in the learning-by-design literature, namely,
                  graduate students in education. Our exploration of student learning is conducted as a design-
                  based  research   study,   with   students who    participated   in national   and international,  multi-
                  institutional  design-courses.     Findings   indicate   that  by   integrating   approaches    from   the
                  Learning   Sciences    and   the  Instructional   Systems Design       worlds, the   instructional model
                  developed     in this  study  supported    students   to  design    pedagogically    sound    educational
                  technologies. An "anchoring stage", in which students shift from philosophical to practical
                  design was found as a crucial stage in student learning. Interpreting the findings in terms of
                  the  novice-expert    literature, we  found   that as we  refined   our  instructional   model, students
                  were better supported in making expert-like design decisions.

       Introduction
                  Research in the Learning Sciences and in the CSCL field has shown that many opportunities to learn
         arise in the course of designing an artifact, in general, and a computer-based artifact, in particular. Papert (1991)
         , in his description of Constructionism claimed that a productive way to support learning is to engage learners in
         constructing a public artifact "whether a sand castle on the beach or a theory of the universe."            The potential of
         design to support learning has been documented for a wide range of ages and levels of expertise. For instance,
         Harel (1991) explored the learning that takes place when fourth grade children develop mathematical software
         products designed for other students in their school. She showed that the young designers learned not only about
         mathematics    (fractions) and  programming       (Logo),   but  also  about    design  and   user  interfaces,  as well  as
         representational, pedagogical, and communicational issues. Kafai (2006) showed similar outcomes with fifth
         grade children who designed and developed computer games for their peers. She argues that: "The greatest
         learning benefit remains reserved for those engaged in the design process, the game designers, and not those at
         the  receiving end, the   game  players.   After  all, the  game  player  is  not partial  to the  discussions  involved  in
         developing valid instructional game ideas, designs and strategies. What finds its way into the final designs is
         only a substrate of those discussions." (p. 39). The impact of design on learning was also found with middle
         school students; for instance, Kolodner et al. (Kolodner et al., 2003) indicated that their Learning By Design
         approach   significantly  enhanced    middle-school     students' motivation,     their collaboration   and  metacognitive
         skills, and their scientific understanding in topics included in their designs (earth and life sciences).
                  Recently, the notion that those who design gain important insights about their own learning processes
         has been recognized and developed not only as an instructional strategy, but also as an approach for conducting
         research   in education.   Design-based       research methodology     (Barab     & Squire,   2004;    Collins,  Joseph,  &
         Bielaczyc, 2004) has become a well accepted manner of conducting research, and a powerful methodology to
         investigate how learning takes place when supported by curricular innovations. In this research we explore the
         added value of engaging learners in a design process, with a target audience that received very little attention in
         the  learning-by-design   literature, namely,    graduate   students   in education.    Studying   the way   these  students
         develop their skills in designing educational technologies, and how they can be supported in developing these
         skills, should be of   specific interest   to our community,    in order     to better understand   how  to  promote  these
         potential educators, curriculum-designers, learning-scientists, or policy makers.
                  The   few  studies    that have   begun    examining   how    graduate    students   learn  the art  of designing
         educational   technologies,  usually   follow    one   of  two  main   approaches      for supporting    students'  learning
         processes.  The  first approach,    usually   taken by  researchers    from  the  Learning    Sciences,  is an  open-ended
         reflective approach. In this approach, which some researchers compare to the architects' design studio (Hoadley
         & Kim, 2003), class-meetings are devoted to students' working on their design projects, providing feedback to
         their peers, and refining their design artifact based on peers' and instructor's input. In this manner, they play a
         role of  a reflective  practitioner (Schon,   1983).   The  second approach,      usually  taken  by researchers    from the
         Instructional Systems Design world, support the design process in a much more structured manner, namely the
         ADDIE    (Analyze,    Design   Develop,    Implement,   Evaluate)  model     (Dick,    Carey, &   Carey, 2001).    Recently,
         researchers have begun advocating for synthesizing between these approaches (Barab, 2004; Hoadley, 2004;

2-22
Smith, 2004). This study follows this call, and provides students with both the structure of the ADDIE model,
and the openness of the reflective practitioner studio approach.
          Our exploration of student learning is conducted as a design-based research study, with students who
participated  in  national  (Israel) and  international, multi-institutional design   courses. By  documenting      the
iterative process   in which we  designed    an instructional-model   for supporting  graduate  students'  learning  to
design  educational    technologies, we  were   able to  achieve two  research goals:  a)  to get an   insight into the
students' learning processes, and b) as find ways in which these processes can be supported. We interpret our
findings in terms of the novice-expert literature (e.g., Clement, 1998).

Context
          This research focuses on three design courses, in which graduate students in education learn how to
design educational technologies (Table-1). The three courses are based on an instructional-model developed in
this study, which advocates a socio-constructivist pedagogical approach, and uses a web-based resource - the
Design Principles Database. The Design Principles Database (Kali, 2006; Kali & Linn, in press) was developed
to capture,   coalesce   and   synthesize design     knowledge.   The  database    (http://design-principles.org) is a
mechanism    to  support researchers  and curriculum     designers to share  their design  knowledge   in the  form  of
design-principles, exemplified by descriptions of features from various learning environments.
          At initial stages of this study, we taught the "Curriculum Development" course, which was the first
iteration of  the instructional-model   (Tables-1 and    3). Students  were  required to   individually develop   their
educational   technologies  in an    open-ended  reflective  approach, mentored    by us,  the instructors.  Emerging
challenges students were faced with in this process were the impetus for developing the instructional-model,
which continued to develop in an iterative process. This model serves as the core of the three design courses,
and is integrated in different manners according to each of the courses' goals and constraints. In this section we
present the final version of the model, and further on in this paper we describe how it evolved throughout the
study.
          As described in detail below, pretty early in this research it was clear that students need structuring to
support   them   in designing  their  educational    technologies. As  described   above,   we  decided   to   integrate
instructional approaches    from  both   the Learning    Sciences  and the   Instructional Systems   Design    research
communities.     From   the ISD world,   we  borrowed    the ADDIE    model.  The   learning  sciences in general   and
particularly the Scaffolded Knowledge Integration framework (Linn, Davis, & Bell, 2004) served as the main
resource for the contents in the Design Principles Database, which is used throughout the model. Our model for
the design process includes the five ADDIE stages, in which we expand the Design stage, to include three other
non-linear iterative stages: Brainstorm, Build-flow and Design-features. The Design Principles Database is used
in four stages in this model. The three courses focused on the Analysis and Design stages of the model. The
three other ADDIE stages, i.e., Development, Implementation and Evaluation were only partially enacted: rather
than developing their designed technologies students developed a mockup; rather than implementation in the
field students presented their mockups in class; and rather than field-based evaluation students conducted peer
evaluation.

Table 1: The three courses involved in the study.

     Course Name                                                   Description
 Curriculum                  · Graduate students in a non-thesis master's degree
 Development of              · A requirement in program: to individually develop a curriculum unit.
 Computer-based              · Focus on design and development (no literature reading).
 Learning Environments       · About 4-5 students a semester
 (Technion)                  · Course format: about 7 group meetings.

 Designing Educational       · Graduate students (with thesis) at Technion.
 Technologies                · Focus mainly on design (no development and implementation).
 (Technion)                  · Students design a mockup as final artifact. The course includes three main
                               themes:
                             1. Technology analysis: students interact with a technology and analyze it, and
                               discuss relevant research papers.
                             2. Design studio-students design their own learning environment.
                             3. Theory- students review and discuss educational technology design literature.
 Designing Educational       Similar to Technion course with the following exceptions:
 Technologies                · Multi-institution international course (UCB, PSU, ASU, Technion) taught by 4
 (Mulit-institution            instructors.
 International)              · Students developed projects in the Web-based Inquiry Science Environment

                                                                                                                           2-2
                                      (WISE).
                                    · Theory theme included more literature.

       Methodology
                  This  study  was conducted   in a  design-based-research     methodology,    in which   learning  is explored
         through lenses of design. Design-based-research is iterative; each iteration involves enactment, data gathering,
         analysis and  refinements, aimed  at improving     the learning   materials (Barab   &   Squire, 2004;  Collins  et al.,
         2004).
                  We developed the instructional-model through three iterations (Figure-1, Table-3). An iteration was
         defined as a major change in the instructional-model. We analyze the conclusions from this study through two
         types of lenses: the  Learning  lens where     we  looked    at learning processes  of  students as   they gain design
         knowledge, and the Design lens in which we looked at: i) outcomes confirming design decisions from previous
         iterations, and ii) challenging outcomes    that  led  to refining  the  design  of the  instructional-model   for  next
         iteration (Figure-1).

                          Figure 1. Refining the instructional-model in a design-based-research approach.

        Data sources and analysis
                  In order to characterize student learning, rich qualitative data was gathered throughout the semester in
         each of the course enactments (Table-2).

         Table 2: Data source.

          Data source                    Description
          Lykert type surveys            Students were     asked   to evaluate   various elements  of  the  course   (such   as
                                         analyzing technologies, design studio, working with peers etc.).
          Reflective assay               Administered    at the end   of  each course.   Students were    required  to write a
                                         reflective assay about their design process with specific reference to: design
                                         decisions; design stages and the use of the database.
          Semi-structured interviews     Conducted   with   six students   who    were asked  to  reflect about  their  design
                                         process.
          Records of online              Whole class online discussions about the literature, Group online discussions
          discussions                    about the design studio and analyzing technologies projects.
          Student artifacts              Documents produced at various stages of the design studio in which students
                                         designed their   own   educational  technologies.   These   artifacts were  analyzed
                                         using a rubric for characterizing the degree to which educational technologies
                                         are based   on   a  socio-constructivst   approach   (Ronen-Fuhrmann,       Kali,   &
                                         Hoadley,    in press)  The   rubric includes  four  dimensions:   Learner     activity,
                                         Collaboration, Autonomy, and Content accessibility.
          Reflective journal             Documentation of important events in each of the class meetings.

        Sample
                  The  sample   included a total  of 48  students  who    participated in the  three courses   and  in the  three
         iterations (Table-3). About half of the students (20) participated in the multi-institution, international course.

2-2
Although there was a large heterogeneity between the students, they were all students who were accepted to
graduate schools of prestigious universities.

Outcomes
        In this part we describe the main outcomes that were drawn from the three iteration described above.
We specified two types of outcomes: (a) challenging outcomes which led to design decisions for refining the
instructional model, and (b) confirming outcomes which reinforced design decision from previous iterations. A
summary of all challenges and design decisions is provided in Table 4.

Table 3: Iterations and sample.

Iteration   Description                                                                Sample        Date
1           This iteration was enacted in the course "Curriculum development           4             Fall 2005
            of  computer   based   learning environments".    It  was   taught to 4
            graduate  students   at the  Technion.   The   course    was   originally
            supposed to take place as an individually guided project, but due to
            requests from    the students was   changed   during    the semester  to
            include meetings every other week. The meetings did not have any
            pre-defined structure.
2           The second iteration used a preliminary version of the instructional       19 (14+5)     Spring 2005
            model developed based on iteration 1 (see outcomes). Two courses
            were   enacted   using  this version  of  the  model:       "Curriculum
            development of computer based learning environments" (taught for
            the second    time)  with  5  students, and  "Designing     educational
            technologies", which was taught for the first time to 14 graduated
            students at the Technion.
3           The revised instructional model was used in the third iteration as         25 (20+5)     Fall 2006
            the core of two courses: 1. the multi-institutional course "Designing
            educational technologies".    And, 2. : "Curriculum development of
            computer based learning environments" (taught the third time) with
            5 students.
Total                                                                                  48

Iteration-1
Challenging outcomes
        Following are outcomes about challenges that came up in iteration 1, which led to design decisions that
eventually brought us to develop the preliminary version of the instructional-model.
    1.  Difficulties due  to the  open-ended   nature of  task ­  The   four students    who  participated in the  first
        iteration, which   was   supposed   to take  place as    an  individually guided   project,  expressed  much
        frustration from the open-ended nature of the task; they felt that they did not know where to start and
        asked to have meetings to think together about how to approach the task.       To respond to their needs, we
        defined tasks for each meeting and provided guidelines for the whole design process. As these scaffolds
        were   provided,  tensions  dramatically    decreased.   For example   one    student  said  in an   interview:
        "Initially, I really didn't know how to begin thinking about the project... but after each stage, things
        became   clearer. It was  like another  piece of  the  puzzle   was exposed   at each  stage".  Therefore, the
        design decision that was made for the next iteration was to build a structured design process, which
        would guide the whole design process, inspired from two fields, the Instructional Systems Design and
        the Learning Sciences, as mentioned above.
    2.  Unawareness to rationale ­ Documentation in our reflective journal about students while working on
        their projects showed that their design decisions relied, to a large extent, on their intuition. Students
        hardly mentioned the rationale behind these decisions. This was when we made the design decision to
        use the  Design   Principles   Database  as part  of  the   design  process,  in order to   increase  students'
        awareness to the rationale behind their design.
    3.  Limited intuition ­ As described above, students relied mainly on their intuition for designing their
        educational  technologies.   We   also found  that this   intuition was   based  on  limited experience.   For
        example, one student said in an interview: "In the past, when I designed learning materials I learned
        while doing... I'll be happy to get skills and tools that'll help me learn from research". Our design
        decision was to enrich students' intuition by integrating the instructional-model in a design course that
        would include, in addition to the "design studio" theme, two more themes; one that would focus on

                                                                                                                           2-2
                  educational technologies literature, and another that would engage students in analyzing state-of-the-art
                  technologies.
             4.   Dependency     on  guidance   - the interviews   with  the  four students    in this iteration  showed    that they
                  depended heavily on the guidance and coaching of the instructors. For example, one of the students
                  says: "I had a collection of unorganized ideas ... discussions with the instructors during the meetings
                  helped me connect these ideas to some pedagogical principles". To enable students to take advantage of
                  our guidance, but also enable them become            independent,    we made a design decision to employ a
                  cognitive apprenticeship model, which includes modeling, coaching,              and fading away phases (Collins
                  et al.,1989) for the instruction of the whole course.
             5.   Peer  learning  needed    strengthening   - the  reflective questionnaire     outcomes   indicated   that students
                  greatly valued, and took advantage of peer feedback and dialog, but thought there was not enough of
                  that. We   therefore made    a  design decision   strengthen    peer learning   by   including  peer feedback    in
                  several stages of the instructional-model. We also decided to define the main project of the course, i.e.
                  designing the educational technology, as a collaborative project.

        Iteration-2
        Confirming outcomes
                  Outcomes    from   this iteration,  indicated   that structuring  the   design   process  (design   decision   #1),
         assisted students to cope with the complexity of this task both in the "Curriculum development" and in the
         "Designing educational technologies" courses; No significant differences were found between the two courses
         with regards to survey results, which showed that students highly evaluated the structured design process (mean
         score of 4.4 of 5). This was also evident from interviews and the reflective essays. For instance, one student
         wrote: "No  doubt   that without   the  structuring  we   wouldn't  have  been    able to  reach  the product   that we've
         designed. Working in stages enabled us to refine our design all the time, each time looking at it with a different
         focus. It also enabled us to go back and forth between looking at the big picture ­ things we want our learners to
         eventually learn, and the little details ­ how a specific feature can be designed to support local goals".
                  The   decision  to use  the  Design  Principles   Database    to emphasize      awareness    to rationale  (design
         decision #2),  was  confirmed    by analyzing   students'  artifacts and  reflections.   The  results show    that students
         made more rationale-based decisions. For instance, one group developed a learning environment intended to
         assist middle school students understand how to solve motion problems. One of the features they designed at the
         beginning of the semester was a feature in which learners view an animation of a motion problem to assist them
         in solving the    problem.  When    the  students  who    designed  this feature   were   required to    search for  design
         principles in the Design Principles Database which can support this decision, they found the design principle
         "Enable manipulation of factors in models and simulation". They read the rationale of this feature, reviewed
         some examples that employ this principle, and decided to change their animation to a simulation, to make their
         learners more active and to better support their learning processes. In the reflective assay, one of the students
         says: "The Design Principles Database helped us see the pedagogical reasoning behind some of the decisions we
         had intuitively made. It also made us think again about what we are really looking for in the features we design
         and to refine them accordingly".
                  The   decision  to enrich  students' intuition   by  integrating the    instructional-model  in   a design  course
         (design decision #3) was verified by survey results.        Outcomes indicated that students viewed the following
         aspects as an important contribution to their learning: Analyzing state-of-the-art technologies (4.4 of 5); and
         Reading  and   discussion   educational  technology    literature (4.3 of  5).   This  was  also  supported   by   students'
         remarks in the final class meeting, as documented in our reflective journal. For instance, a student says "my
         intuition for designing educational technologies was raised in an order of magnitude". We also found evidence
         that the cognitive apprenticeship approach (design decision #4) was productive in supporting student learning,
         as indicated   in many   open-ended     comments     that students   wrote    in the  survey,  in which    they  stress  the
         importance of   our guidance.    The   decision to   add  collaborative   aspects  to  the model   (design   decision   #5),
         contributed to student learning as well;    Survey results show that students found it helpful to work in teams on
         the design project (4.7 of 5), and also appreciated the peer-feedback added to the model (4.2 of 5).

        Challenging outcomes
                  In spite of the confirming outcomes in this iteration, some new challenging outcomes emerged:
             6.   Tendency to build flow according to content hierarchy- Students were mainly concerned with what
                  learners  should   know   at each   stage  of the flow,   and   less concerned    with   how   to make    this flow
                  engaging for the learners. Reeves (1994) describes such an approach as objectivist: "If the designers
                  and users of CBE [Computer Based Education] lean toward an objectivist epistemology, they will be
                  primarily  concerned    with    assuring  that   the content  of  the    CBE    they  create   and  implement    is
                  comprehensive and accurate with respect to ultimate "truth" as they know it. They will seek to establish
                  the definitive structure of knowledge for a given domain based upon the advice of the most widely

2-2
        accepted experts in a field." (p. 223). For instance, one of the groups designed a technology about the
        moon-phases.    They    designed  a  computerized    three-dimensional   model    showing    the moon     orbiting
        around   the   earth to  assist  learners develop   the spatial  perception  required  for   understanding    the
        phenomenon.     At   the beginning    of  the  semester  they   designed  numerous     stages  which     included
        prerequisite   information  that  users   had  to  go through    before they  interact with   the   model    (e.g.,
        information about the moon being a reflector and not a source of light). The interaction with the model
        included mainly problem solving (e.g. questions such as "what would the moon look like at a certain
        configuration of the system?"). Following feedback from peers and instructors, who claimed that the
        initial stages and the problem solving might weary the users, they decided to completely reorganize the
        flow of activities in order to make it more appealing to users (Ronen-Fuhrmann et al., in press). In order
        to  free students from   being   constrained   by the structure  of contents, we   made   a  design   decision to
        include a content analysis task in the Analysis stage, which previously focused on a needs analysis. We
        assumed that if students would figure out the structure of the contents early in the project, they would
        be able to focus on building engaging flows of activities at the "Build flow" stage.
    7.  Frustration from inability to implement feedback- The last two meetings of the courses in this iteration
        were devoted to presentations of students' projects, with extensive discussions and feedback after each
        presentation. However, students did not have a chance to employ this feedback.         In interviews, students
        expressed their frustration about this. Thus, we made a design decision to include, in addition to the
        peer-review stages within the instructional-model, a second cycle in the design process.
    8.  Gap between theoretical and applied epistemologies ­ At the beginning of the semester, when engaged
        in  theoretical discourse,  students  tended   to advocate  socio-constructivists  paradigms,    whereas     when
        engaged   in   designing technologies     they tended   to neglect  these ideas   and  apply   more   traditional
        approaches. This gap, which was found in four dimensions: Learner activity, Collaboration, Autonomy,
        and Content accessibility significantly reduced during the course (Ronen-Fuhrmann et al., in press).
        Preliminary outcomes from the current research indicate that the earlier in the semester students were
        forced to "get their hands dirty", and create screen-sketches of their technology, rather than discuss it in
        a philosophic manner, the earlier they realized this gap, and were able to reduce it by designing features
        that better suit a socio-constructivist approach. We postulated that the addition of a second iteration (the
        design   decision described     above), would   require  earlier submission   of  the  first design   stages  and
        encourage students to anchor their ideas in real design-making earlier in the course. We assumed that
        this would support students in achieving artifacts that are more pedagogically sound toward the end of
        the course.

Iteration-3
        This  iteration  too, indicated   improved     learning outcomes,   which    confirmed  some     of   our design
decisions, and yet again illuminated new challenges.

Confirming outcomes
        Adding the content analysis stage (design decision #6) indeed assisted students to focus on building
engaging flows    of activities. This    was  evident  from   both  the  multi-institution   international    "Designing
educational technology" course, and the "Development course" at the Technion. When students were required to
develop their flow   of activities, it  was  already  after mapping   the   contents they  planned    to cover    in their
educational technology.   As  a  result, they were   focused  much   more   than students  in  iteration 2  on   building
engaging activities. For example, one group developed a technology named "How micro-organisms can help
us?" Earlier, the students created a very detailed mapping of the contents. When they came later on to develop
the flow of activities, they designed an activity in which students are provided with an article about a scientist
who is  developing   a  new  genetically-based    vaccine.  The learners  are supposed    to play the    role of  another
scientist who critiques her colleague. To base their critique on the science, and learn the contents, students were
provided with guiding questions and "just in time" content knowledge. The design of this activity is an example
of students' focusing on student engagement rather than constrained by the hierarchy of contents.
        Design decision #7, i.e., to add a second design cycle, also proved to support the design process; the
quality of the projects at the second design cycle, as assessed by the rubric for evaluating the degree to which
educational technologies     employ    socio-constructivist  approaches,    significantly improved.    However,      with
regards to "anchoring" students' design ideas in practical design work, as early as possible (Design decision #8)
our data was somewhat ambiguous. We still found that the earlier this "anchoring" happens, the earlier students
decrease the gap between their theoretical and applied epistemologies. Many students also indicated in their
reflective assays that having to design the details of their activities helped them better articulate their design
solutions, as illustrated in the following except: "To me the most crucial part of the work happened during the
`build flow' stage. That was when we began thinking of how our technology would actually work. We had to
imagine scenarios, and try to feel what a user of our environment would go through. This was really a milestone

                                                                                                                              2-2
         in the design, where we had to neglect some ideas that were just too vague, and design realistic solutions".
         However, we did not find evidence that by having to submit practical design documents earlier in the process
         "anchoring" occurred earlier. It seems that other factors, related to students' personal traits, self confidence and
         the interactions within the group were also involved in this "anchoring" process. Some groups did not "anchor"
         at all, and continued to talk about their designs in a theoretical manner until the end of the course.

        Challenging outcomes
              9.   Limited online-peer-assessment - The analysis of the assessments that students provided to each other
                   showed that students found it difficult to understand their peers' design ideas from the documentation
                   of each of the design stages.     This outcome was also supported by the survey; relatively low attitudes
                   (3. 9 of 5)   were attributed   to "Online   peer-review".  We   thus  made  a design  decision to combine
                   between  online-peer-assessment     and  face-to-face   dialog  between groups,  and  to  support the  online
                   peer-review with better tools, integrated into the work environment.
              10.  Confusion due to dual infrastructures- Students in iterations 2 and 3 were required to use two different
                   infrastructures: a) a course website (Moodle), which included the course plan, assignments, and all the
                   online communication,     b) the   Design  Principles  Database.   Documentation  in  our reflective  journal
                   showed many instances in which students were confused about where to find information and post
                   assignments. Their use of the information in the Design Principles Database was limited due to these
                   confusions. Although we found the use of the Design Principles Database was productive, as described
                   above in the confirming outcomes following the second iteration, some of the students devoted only
                   little time to search for design principles that could better support their design decisions. To make this
                   knowledge   accessible,  and  increase   its usability, we  made    a design decision  to embed   the   entire
                   instructional-model into the Design Principles Database.

         Table 4: Summary of challenges and design decisions.

          #      Challenging outcomes                                      Design decisions
          1      Difficulties due to the open-ended nature of task         Structuring the design process
          2      Unawareness to rationale                                  Use the Design Principles Database to emphasize
                                                                           awareness to rationale
          3      Limited intuition                                         Enrich students' intuition by integrating the
                                                                           instructional-model in a design course
          4      Dependency on guidance                                    Employ a cognitive apprenticeship model
          5      Peer learning needed strengthening                        Add collaborative aspects to the model
          6      Tendency to build flow according to content               Adding the content analysis stage
                 hierarchy
          7      Frustration from inability to implement feedback          add a second design cycle
          8      Gap between theoretical and applied                       Make concrete design artifacts earlier in the
                 epistemologies                                            design process (supported by design decision #7)
          9      Limited online-peer-assessment                            Add Face-to-face dialogs between groups
          10     Confusion due to dual infrastructures                     Embed the entire instructional-model into the
                                                                           Database

       Discussion and Conclusions
                   The   challenges   that came    up  in  each  of  the   iterations provide  an interesting  perspective  for
         characterizing   the  process in   which     graduate  students   acquire skills in   designing  pedagogically   sound
         educational technologies, and how these students can be supported in this process. Our initial attempt to support
         student   learning in the  first  iteration  was  to provide  them   with  an   open-ended reflective  setting. Acting
         according to Schon's (1983) reflective practitioner approach, and employing a learning sciences tradition, we
         felt that with  such  a creative  task in   hand  students  would benefit  mostly  if we will serve  as guides  in this
         process, and adjust our guidance to their emerging needs. The importance of the guidance and peer learning
         came up in the findings as aspects that need more emphasis (challenging outcomes #4 and #5), backing our
         decision to employ a design studio approach. However, from the first iteration, it was evident that students'
         most pressing need, in spite of their rich background regarding educational theory, stemmed from this open-
         ended   approach   (challenging   outcome    #1); they felt that the they needed   more  structure. As  reflected from
         students' remarks, the instructional model developed following these findings, which integrates the openness
         and reflective nature of the studio approach with the structure of the ADDIE model, indeed relieved students

2-2
from having to deal with all aspects of the design at the same time. Students in the second and third iterations
felt that this was crucial to their ability to design artifacts of high quality.
          This finding can be interpreted in terms of cognitive load, and novice-expert literature (e.g., Clement,
1998). Learning scientists who are expert curriculum designers do not necessarily follow a structured design
process (Barab, 2004; Hoadley, 2004; Smith, 2004). Their immense theoretical knowledge about the challenge
they  are designing   a solution for, and   their acquaintance   with   a  large  number   of   solutions that  have  been
developed for dealing with similar problems provide them with a good intuition, which guides their design.
While   designing, they  simultaneously     reflect upon   various aspects  of   the  design,   including   the needs  and
requirements   of their audience,   the hierarchical  structure of  content,   creating  a  clear and   engaging   flow of
activities, and designing features that have the potential to promote learning in each of these activities. However,
as indicated from our findings, for novice designers, for whom these knowledge and practices are new, the
cognitive load is just too large. Dividing the task into a series of finer grain tasks (design decision #1), such as
those found   in the  ADDIE    model,   and to even  smaller  tasks such   as  those  we   defined   in the Design   stage,
(Brainstorm, Build flow, and Design features), reduced the cognitive load and enabled students to focus each
time  on  a different aspect  of the design.   The  cognitive apprenticeship     model   (Collins, 1990)    for supporting
novices, advocates for exactly this type of scaffolding. According to this model, when experts reflect on the
cognitive processes they go through in solving a problem (in this case, the problem can be defined as designing
an educational technology), they can best break the problem into bits that are manageable for novices.
          Other challenges that emerged in this study can also be explained in terms of cognitive load and a
novice-expert continuum. For instance, students' tendency to develop features based on their search for "cool"
solutions, without being aware of the pedagogical rationale behind these features (challenging outcome #2),
their limited intuitions (challenging outcomes #3), and their tendency to develop activity flows that depend on
hierarchy of contents (challenging outcomes #6), can also be compared with the expert practices. As described
above,  experts  too, tend  to rely  on their  intuitions. They  also  seek  to  design  innovative     solutions, and  are
concerned with the hierarchy of contents they are designing their solutions for. However, in contrast to novice
designers, at the same time they take into account pedagogical concerns, and are more reflective about their
thinking processes. Using the Design Principles Database as part of the instructional model (design decision #2),
and integrating it into a design course (design decision #3), which included literature reading and analysis of
state of the art educational technologies, enabled students to rely on expert knowledge, found in these resources.
In this manner they were able to move toward the expert side of the novice-expert continuum.
          The gap between students' theoretical and applied epistemologies (challenge 8), which was identified
in an earlier research (Ronen-Fuhrmann et al., in press), was found in this research as an important stage in
student learning. By "getting their hands dirty" with practical design of their technology, rather than discussing
it in a philosophic   manner,  students  realized   this gap and   were   able   to reduce  it. This anchoring   stage, as
indicated from students' doing and saying, served as a crucial stage in students' learning. Although we did not
find a way to make this stage occur early enough in all groups, we view this finding as an important contribution
for understanding the learning process of novice designers.
          Finally, other outcomes, such as students' frustration from their inability to implement their feedback,
the limitation of the online peer assessment, and students' confusion from the dual infrastructure (challenging
outcomes # 7, #9 and #10), enabled us to refine our instructional model. The latest version of the instructional
model is currently embedded as the "Design Mode" of the public Design Principles Database. We encourage the
learning sciences community to take advantage of the resource and continue this fascinating line of research.

References
Barab,  S.  A. (2004).  Using  design   to advance   learning theory,   or using    learning theory  to   advance  design.
          Educational Technology, 44(3), 16-19.
Barab, S. A., & Squire, K. D. (2004). Design-based research: Putting our stake in the ground. Journal of the
          Learning Sciences, 13(1), 1-14.
Clement, J. (1998). Expert novice similarities and instruction using analogies. International Journal of Science
          Education, 20(10), 1271-1286.
Collins,  A.  (1990). Cognitive  apprenticeship     and  instructional technology.    In B.  F.  Jones  & L. Idol   (Eds.),
          Dimensions of thinking and cognitive instruction (pp. 121-138). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Collins,  A., Joseph,   D., &  Bielaczyc,   K. (2004).   Design Research:    Theoretical    and   Methodological    Issues.
          Journal of the Learning Sciences, 13(1), 15-42.
Dick, W., Carey, L., & Carey, J. O. (2001). The systematic design of instruction (5th ed.). New York: Addison-
          Wesley Educational Publishers.
Harel, I. (1991). Children designers: Interdisciplinary constructions for learning and knowing mathematics in a
          computer-rich school. Norwood, NJ: Ablex Publishing.
Hoadley, C. (2004). Learning and design: Why the learning sciences and instructional systems need each other.
          Educational Technology, 44(3), 6-12.

                                                                                                                              2-2
        Hoadley,   C., &  Kim,  D.  (2003).  Learning,  design  and  technology:   The creation    of a design   studio  for
                 educational innovation.  In  A. P. d. Reis &   P. Isaías (Eds.), Proceedings   of the  IADIS   interational
                 conference e-Society 2003 (pp. 510-519). Lisbon, Portugal: IADIS Press.
        Kafai, Y. (2006). Playing and making games for learning. Games and Culture, 1(1), 36-40.
        Kali, Y. (2006). Collaborative knowledge building using the Design Principles Database. International Journal
                 of Computer Support for Collaborative Learning, 1(2), 187-201.
        Kali, Y., & Linn,  M.   C. (in press). Technology-enhanced    support   strategies for inquiry  learning. In  J. M.
                 Spector, M. D. Merrill, J. J. G. V. Merriënboer & M. P. Driscoll (Eds.), Handbook of Research on
                 Educational Communications and Technology (3rd Edition). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
        Kolodner, J. L., Crismond, D., Fasse, B., Gray, J., Holbrook, J., & Puntembakar, S. (2003). Putting a Student-
                 Centered Learning by DesignTM Curriculum into Practice: Lessons learned. Journal of the Learning
                 Sciences, 12, 495 - 548.
        Linn, M. C., Davis, E. A., & Bell, P. (Eds.). (2004). Internet Environments for Science Education. Mahwah, NJ:
                 Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
        Papert, S. (1991). Situating   constructionism. In  I. Harel &    S. Papert (Eds.), Constructionism     (pp. 1­11).
                 Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
        Reeves, T. C. (1994). Evaluating what really matters in computer-based education. In D. K. M. Wild (Ed.),
                 Computer education: New Perspectives (pp. 219-246). Perth, Australia: MASTEC.
        Ronen-Fuhrmann, T., Kali, Y., & Hoadley, C. M. (in press). Helping education students understand learning
                 through designing. Educational Technology.
        Schon, D. (1983). The reflective practitioner: How professionals think in action. New York: Basic Books.
        Smith,  B. K.   (2004). Instructional  systems  and  learning sciences:   When     universes  collide. Educational
                 Technology, 44(3), 20-25

2-20
