     Gender, institutional structure and learning in an engineering
                                                    college

           Lari Garrison, Reed Stevens, Andrew Jocuns, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195
                lari@u.washington.edu, reedstev@u.washington.edu, jocunsa@u.washington.edu

         Abstract:     This paper examines the implications of a college of engineering's institutional
         structure for men and women engineering students. The data for this paper is drawn from a
         large "person-centered ethnography" (Hollan & Wellenkamp, 1993), taking place at "Large
         Public University (LPU)" a flagship state university in the Pacific Northwest. We argue that
         the timing of admission, and students' beliefs about the process provide a lens through which
         women and men see their engineering peers both in school and beyond. These beliefs are not
         static, however and change over time, providing hope for an engineering field in which gender
         is not foregrounded, but rather one's capability of doing engineering work is.

Introduction
         In the past three decades science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) fields have been
struggling to improve the number of women who complete STEM degrees. In particular, engineering has seen
only marginal   improvements      in  the  number   of women    studying    engineering   as undergraduates     despite
significant  resources devoted   to  programs    designed to promote   the  field to women    and girls and  research
designed to better understand the disparity in the number of women and men studying engineering.
         As mentioned above much research has sought to understand why the number of women who study
engineering is so small relative to men (Adelman, 1998; Blickenstaff, 2005; Conefry, 1997; Dryburgh, 1999;
Eisenhart & Finkel, 1998; Felder, Felder, Mauney, Hamrin Jr., & Dietz, 1995; Henwood, 1996, 1998, 1999;
Holland & Eisenhart, 1990; Margolis & Fisher, 2002; McLoughlin, 2005; Seymour & Hewitt, 1997; Stonyer,
2002; Tonso, 1997; Traweek, 1988). Until recently this work could largely be categorized in two ways--One
category of research identifies or prescribes a remedy for a presumptively inherent difference between women
and men that prevents women from entering STEM fields in numbers equal to their male counterparts (e.g.,
women do not have experience tinkering, like men do); A second category of research identifies the culture of
STEM fields, or failures of programs designed to promote engineering to women as contributing to the disparity
in numbers. Critics of this first strand of research link this research to "gender-difference research" and argue
that it suggests that there is something "wrong" with women that needs to be fixed, by remediation, through
special programs,    mentoring,  etc. (Eisenhart  & Finkel,  1998;   Tonso, 1997).   In response  to this first strand,
researchers who objected to the removing of the person from the culture in which she is being educated insisted
on bringing culture back into the picture as an explanation for the disparity in numbers and a third group of
studies has sought to understand how the culture and the individual in practice may explain why engineering is
unable  to  attract women    to careers in  engineering.(Eisenhart   & Finkel,    1998; Holland  &   Eisenhart,  1990;
Margolis & Fisher, 2002; Seymour & Hewitt, 1997; Tonso, 1997; Traweek, 1988).
         The  larger   study from   which   this data  is drawn follows    these  studies and provides    a sustained,
longitudinal look   at the experiences  of  men   and  women  as they  become     engineers. Practice theory,   and in
particular situated learning (Lave & Wenger, 1991)     provide researchers a way to see the interplay of individual
and  culture (Eisenhart  &   Finkel,  1998; Holland   &   Eisenhart, 1990;  Lave   &  Wenger,  1991;  Nespor,    1994;
Stevens & Sabin, 2006; Tonso, 1997; Traweek, 1988). Additionally, we employed an analytical framework set
forth in "Becoming an Engineer" (Stevens, Garrison, Jocuns & Amos, in review) which takes into consideration
three dimensions along which one changes as one becomes an engineer--identification, accountable disciplinary
knowledge and navigation. The development and changes along three dimensions work together to either move
one toward a career as an engineer or to move one away from a career as an engineer. These two theoretical
frames and the longitudinal nature of the study will provide a fresh look at the phenomenon and attempt to
provide possible reasons disparity in the number of women and men studying engineering by examining what it
is like to become an engineer. In this paper we focus on the dimensions of identity and navigation. A perspective
that learning is situated compels us to look at the access one has to the practices of the field or community as
learning is viewed as "participation in the social world." (Lave & Wenger, 1991, p. 43)

Methods
         The data for this study (ethnographic interview transcripts and ethnographic observations) are drawn
from a  larger, cross-institutional,  longitudinal, ethnographic   study of  engineering   education,   the Academic
Pathways Study (APS) (Sheppard et al., 2004). Through APS we hope to illuminate the myriad of pathways
students follow and forge on their ways to becoming engineers. We are particularly interested in three aspects of

                                                                                                                           1-
         students' development--how      they  come   to identify   themselves  (and how   others come   to identify  them)  as
         engineers, the disciplinary knowledge for which they are held (or not held) accountable in and outside of school,
         and how they navigate through their engineering education (Stevens, O'Connor, Garrison, Jocuns, & Amos, in
         review).

        Research Setting
                  One of five U.S. institutions participating in the Academic Pathways Study, Large Public University
         (LPU) is in the Pacific Northwest in the United States. It is set in an urban area and attracts students from
         throughout the state, and the rest of the U.S. students are attracted to the strong academic reputation in a variety
         of fields. The engineering college, the focus of this study, is considered one of the nation's top 25 engineering
         schools by U.S. News and World Reports in their annual ranking of colleges and universities. Students generally
         apply for admission to the LPU Engineering College at the end of their sophomore years, after completing a full
         two years of pre-requisite courses that are primarily taught by colleges outside of the College of Engineering.
         Admission    is highly  competitive  in  most   of  the departments    in  the College of   Engineering.  As at  most
         institutions of  higher learning  in the  United   States, one   finds only about  20%   of the students  enrolled  in
         engineering at LPU to be women.

        Participants
                  The    participants in APS  at   LPU   are forty  undergraduate    students. The   students were   invited to
         participate in the study because they identified themselves as pre-engineering or engineering majors in their
         freshmen year at LPU. The study as a whole is seeking to better understand how people become engineers, with
         particular attention paid to students who are women and/or students of color, to this end recruiters for the study
         over-sampled for women and minorities. In the fall of 2003 in their freshmen year, the students who volunteered
         to participate were assigned to one of three groups, based on the level of participation with which they felt
         comfortable.
                  All forty students took part in bi-annual surveys and performed an annual engineering-related task.
         Twenty-four of the forty students (Group C) also participated in an annual structured interview, while the other
         sixteen students (eight men and eight women--Groups A and B) took part in an annual ethnographic interview.
         Finally, eight (four men and four women--Group A) of the sixteen participating in the ethnographic interviews
         were also observed on the campus of LPU. Group E, was comprised of people in Groups A, B and C who
         decided  not  to major  in   engineering, or  who   did  not get  into  the engineering  college.  Group   E students
         participated in an ethnographic exit interview. This paper draws primarily from the ethnographic interviews with
         two of the eight in group A, which has been supplemented, as necessary with field notes from the observations.

        Data Collection & Analysis
                  Informal, ethnographic interviews were employed to get the participants' perspectives on the practices
         in which they were engaged as engineering students at LPU. These 2-hour-long interviews took place in the
         spring of each year for the first four years the students were at LPU and were used to capture deep reflections on
         the students'   experiences   (Cameron,   2000;   Conefry,   1997;  Henwood,    1996;  Holland   &   Eisenhart, 1990;
         Wortham,     2000). The longitudinal  nature  of  the study  allowed   for comparison  of   an individual's responses
         across the four years, and allowed us to see how ideas and reported beliefs changed over time. Interviews were
         audio-recorded and transcribed. To aid in identifying relevant passages and patterns in the data for the purposes
         of this paper, transcripts of the interviews were culled using Atlas.ti for talk that had been previously coded for
         either one or both of the topics of gender and admission. These excerpts were then analyzed with an eye to
         emergent patterns in the data. The cases chosen for this paper were chosen because they are representative of the
         notion being    discussed. The  purpose   of this  study is  not to make    generalizations about  all of engineering
         education, but rather to identify and elaborate on a practice at LPU that has an impact on students. What is true
         at LPU may not be true at other schools, but we believe studies like ours can play a role in helping to set future
         research agendas.

       Findings
                  We began with an assumption, as evidenced in the literature, that there might be something different in
         the experiences of men and women in engineering that could explain why women are underrepresented in the
         engineering workforce and engineering education community and asked all the participants over the course of
         the four years about their beliefs about whether or not there were differences in the experience of men and
         women.
                  There were several strongly-held beliefs about women in engineering that we became aware of over the
         course of this study. One was the notion that women go into engineering because they wanted to help society
         and use their work in the field make people's lives better. We found this explanation failed to address the fact

1-
that engineering was attractive to both the men and women in the study for many other reasons, not the least of
which was the attractive starting salary for people who get jobs in the field, which in the United States was
roughly $50,000--a figure much larger than one would command in most other fields. We found that both men
and women were attracted to engineering for this reason, namely that they would have a comfortable material
existence after they completed their degrees and were working in the field. The good salary, our data indicated
(across four   campuses),   was  seen   by  students  as   a reward    for the    hard work  they  were  expected   to  do  as
undergraduates (Stevens, Amos, Jocuns, & Garrison, 2007)
           We  found   that men    and  women      largely told  similar   stories  about   the origins  of their  interest in
engineering. These stories most often included a description of themselves as being good at mathematics and/or
science. Some students talked about the influence of a summer internship program that provided them with the
opportunity to work at government research labs or high-tech companies. There were a few students who talked
about a relative, friend, or influential teacher who had gotten them interested in the field of engineering. The
students, both men and women, regardless of the origins of their interest in the field, largely could not provide
us with detailed accounts of what their day-to-day work as future engineers would look like, even after they had
worked in the field as interns. Despite this cloudy understanding of future work, students were drawn to the
field, and tackled the work of their first two years without the promise of even being admitted to their hoped-for
majors in the College of Engineering.
           During the first two years at LPU, as mentioned earlier, students took prerequisite classes that were
outside the engineering college. Students at LPU referred to these classes as "weed-out" classes, designed to test
their mettle and prove to the admissions committees that they were worthy of one of the coveted spots in the
engineering   college.  Students   talked  at great length   in  their interviews   about   the  status of  their grade point
averages (GPA) and how their GPAs compared with their peers. Based on conversations with peers and college
advisors   students   could gauge  their  standing  relative  to  others.  If they  felt their  grades  did not   immediately
qualify  them    for  admission,   most  students   sought   to  bolster   their  case  for admission    by participating   in
engineering-related activities (e.g., the human-powered submarine) or working on engineering research teams
on campus. Most of the work during this portion of the curriculum was individual-based. Students were graded
on   their work  on   exams    done on    their own,   on    homework      problems    submitted  as   individuals, etc.  The
competition for spots in the college and the individual-based nature of the graded work of the first two years
contributed to an environment in which collaboration was effectively (if not directly) discouraged. Certainly,
students in the study formed study groups in the first two years, but these study groups were small, and were
important to students only as long as they were useful to them (e.g., that they were getting something out of
them that was beneficial in terms of mastering course content). In their interviews with us around the time they
were applying to the college of engineering the students explained to us their chances of getting into the major.
Some of the students were very confident they would be admitted to the major, and others were much less so.
Those who were very confident had GPAs that were higher than the GPA the college had reported as the mean
GPA that would qualify one for admission. Those who were less confident had GPAs that were close to the
mean GPA. In the interviews these students presented views of the admission process that were much more
complex than the confident students. They related that there were many factors considered by the college--
things like activities in which one participated, prior work or research experience, one's dedication to the field
of engineering and even one's gender could sway the committee to admit one.
           We were surprised to learn the students believed that one's gender could determine one's admission--
both men and women held this view. This view was expressed across the participants in the second year of the
program, the year after which students would be applying to their majors. (Citation withheld for blind review)
The way that gender could determine one's admission was that women, it was believed, had different admission
standards,  or   that even  spots  were    "saved"  by  the  department       for women.    These  beliefs  seemed   to   have
implications for the women who participated in this study in a few significant ways. Furthermore, the very
programs    that the  university   had  in place   to serve  as   resources   for  women,    like Women     in    Science and
Engineering (WiSE) were cited by both men and women as evidence that women must have been less qualified,
because    women  had   such   programs    to help  them.    This phenomenon       has  been   referred to  as "spotlighting"
(McLoughlin,     2005). Spotlighting    can   take several   forms, and    in this case  it was  programs   in place to   help
women feel less isolated in the male-dominated STEM fields or to provide academic assistance that seem to
have drawn attention to women in a negative way, which was clearly not the intent of the university or the
programs. These beliefs had implications not only for the women in the study, but also the men. They expressed
views that positioned the women as adversaries, who were unfairly competing for spots in the college that they
had not earned.
           For the women in the study the two years they spent within the major (junior and senior years) were
full of anxiety,  related   to the perception   that  they   might  have   had    less stringent standards  applied  in   their
admissions to the college. Women talked about strategies they employed to avoid perpetuating the notion that
women "didn't know what was going on" in class. They related going to other women (when they could) to get

                                                                                                                                   1-
         help on homework. In the junior and senior years students were expected to work in groups more frequently,
         and women actively sought other women with whom they could work rather than working with men.
                 In the next section we present two cases--of Erica and Simon--who illustrate the tensions at work in
         the lives of men and women as pre-engineering students and then as admitted engineering students.

       Different standards?
                 The cases of Simon and Erica illustrate several important differences in the experiences between men
         and women at LPU, first is the difference in the perceptions of the standards used to judge men and women's
         applications to the College of Engineering. Second, is the notion that women felt the need to prove themselves
         worthy of being admitted after they had been accepted to their departments. Furthermore, we note that this
         feeling that women were held to different standards by the field extends in a very real way for someone women
         even beyond their experiences as college engineering students.
                 Simon and Erica both staked a great deal on their ultimate admission to their chosen programs. For
         Simon, studying engineering was all he had wanted to do, since he was a child and Erica moved far away from
         her home state to study engineering at LPU. Needless to say, with so much invested, both expressed concern
         about getting into their respective engineering majors.

        Simon
                  Simon spent much time working on research projects in the Aero department, and got a job in one of
         the Aero labs on campus in his freshman year. He built an impressive resume for his application, and was able
         to go to his best friend's dad (a faculty member at LPU during his freshman year) for advice. We asked Simon
         to talk about his understanding of the admission process for Aeronautics and Astronautics (AA),
                 Simon: Um, I believe if you have like a 3.3 or a 3.4, they automatically accept you into the
                 department...[if] you have like a 3.0 and whatever that line is, they look at your stuff, you
                 know, they read your essay, see where you're placed and, depending upon that, if nothing
                 stands out as negative, they'll let you in. And then below a 3.0, they really have to look at you
                 and, um,   so I mean,   it's school. Grades  are  probably the most  important factor. I would
                 imagine.
                 Interviewer: Where are you at right now? Do you know?
                 Simon: Just above a 3.0. That's the main reason why I'm kinda worried is cause I don't have
                 the grades that I want. I don't feel comfortable where I'm at. I've got a lot of things on the
                 side that are helping me, and everybody I've talked to said I shouldn't be worried, but you
                 know there's still that thought in my head. (Simon, sophomore year)
         The "things on the side" and resume-building activities were important for Simon, given his understanding of
         the admission process the college's standards--if one has a GPA below a 3.3 or a 3.4 you are not automatically
         admitted and your application and all its parts will be scrutinized. With a GPA around a 3.0 Simon believed he'd
         have to prove himself   in other ways,  these activities and research with  which he  became   involved    early-on
         would aid him in his attempt to get into the program.
                 Simon spoke more about the admission process when he was asked how the experiences of a woman
         might be different from the experiences of a man in engineering,
                 It's easier for [a woman] to get in the department. I was talking with one of the advisors, they
                 take a lot of women and it's interesting to note that a lot of the-90, 95% of the people that drop
                 out of the classes after the first year are women because it's easier for them to get in to the
                 department, therefore they don't have to work as hard their first two years. They get into the
                 department, they realize, all of a sudden, they're just buried in work and they can't handle it
                 and they drop out. Whereas us white guys, who have higher standards for getting in, because
                 we're white males, we have to work harder and get a better GPA, and therefore the jump isn't
                 nearly as great. (Simon, sophomore year)
         Simon holds the view that it is "easier" for women to get in and presented statistics to back up his argument that
         applying lower standards is harmful to the women, because they are then unprepared for the difficult nature of
         the work. It is not clear where he has gotten those numbers, or if they are accurate, but what is clear is that
         Simon had a perception that women are "buried in work," "can't handle it," and ultimately "drop out." This
         happens, he said, because the women, who haven't had to "work as hard" in their freshmen and sophomore
         years as the men, are overwhelmed by the work they encounter after they get into their majors.
                 By Simon's junior year he was taking classes in his major and got a prestigious long-term government
         co-op in his field. His views about admission remained unchanged to some extent--he still believed the person
         in charge of admission for the program favored women's applications.
                 She's [the woman in charge of AA admission] gung-ho on trying to get women. Um, we get
                 emails from her all the time, she's sending out to others, the AA class project, everybody in
                 the junior class   gets em,  and we   just get  emails off-the-hook from  her about women-in-

1-
        science-and-engineering    scholarships, or  women-in-science  this, or women-in-science-that.
        Not any minority stuff, but, it's--it's pretty easy to tell she favors. (Simon, junior year)
His views about women being as qualified as men once they got into the major seemed to change markedly from
his sophomore to junior year, however. In explaining the small number of women who are in his department,
despite the woman in charge of admission being "gung-ho on trying to get women" he says,
        Simon: There's--not as many women apply to engineering. And it's not because they're not
        good enough, it's because they don't wanna do it. It's--from what I've understood, I mean
        there's things that women like to do, most women don't like to do engineering.
        Interviewer: What about the girls, like in your AA classes, ((Simon: Uh huh.)) would you say
        that they're like different from=
        Simon: =Not at all.    (Simon, junior year)
It is not that women were any different, in Simon's view, than the men, it was just that women did not want to
"do engineering," He explained the lack of women in his field in a way that it is a common folk-explanation--
that there were things that women liked to do, and engineering did not fall into that category, and the ones who
stayed in engineering must have been the women who liked it. In his senior year interview When he was asked
if he thought there were differences in the experiences of men and women engineering students in his senior
year, Simon's answer was different. He stated,   "No, I don't. Not from what I've seen." (Simon senior year) His
answer in his   senior year changed  from  that of  his sophomore  year,  which implies   that Simon     had   learned
something that caused him to change his mind at some point from his second year to his fourth year of college.
While it is not clear what has convinced him to unseat this prior belief, what is clear is that Simon left school
believing that men and women engineers were equally capable and not different at all.

Erica
        Erica came to LPU because she wanted to be an engineer, and heard good things about it from a high
school classmate. Erica and Simon led very different lives outside of class. Erica worked off campus in the
service industry (until the summer after her junior year), lived in an apartment off-campus, and unlike Simon,
was not involved in engineering-related research prior to admission. When asked about the application process,
Erica described it in this way, "Well, the application's just an online form, you fill it out and write a personal
statement and send it in and hopefully [they] pick you [laughing]." She was aware, thanks to a visit with an
advisor (who was a woman) for chemical engineering, that her grades made her not "a borderline case."
        Well, I talked to the advisor and she told me, right now I have a, like a 3.35 in my engineering
        classes, so she said that's right like around the range that they're looking for. But then I was
        like, "Oh you know, should I start working on my personal statement now?" but she said that
        I'm not a borderline case. (Erica, sophomore year)
Erica was asked about whether or not she thought a woman would have an advantage in the admission process.
        I still think  that it might be an advantage    because  I think, you  know, they    want     to be,
        everybody   wants   to  be more diverse,  especially in the university  setting, you   know,     like
        diversity's a really important part of it, so I think that there's still a slight advantage to being a
        woman, but in talking to the advisor, she didn't make it seem like I was any less or any more
        than anybody else, which was good, because I don't want to feel like I got in just because I'm
        a girl, like I want to feel like I got in because I worked hard and I got the grades... I think they
        still are gonna look at it and say, okay, well, you know, if I was exactly the same as a man,
        and it was either me or him, I think you know they might take me if they want more women in
        their program. (Erica, sophomore year)
Erica's explanation was that gender was a sort of tie-breaker for use by the department when two candidates
were equally qualified for admission--a factor considered, but only after other factors were equal. Her version,
unlike Simon's, did not depict the woman getting into engineering as being less qualified than the men. There is
tension evident in Erica's talk--her use of the word "but" signals a contradiction with what she thought (that
women have a slight advantage) and what she reported the advisor told her. Erica's explanation must reconcile
two things, both the official information (from the advisor) as well as a stated belief that people think diversity
is important "in the university setting", and specifically that in the case of the engineering college, increasing the
number of women in the program translates to a more diverse student population.
        Erica also related that she felt the need to prove herself to her peers, a consequence, one might argue of
her awareness of the widely held belief that women got into the major more easily than their male counterparts.
Erica, in her sophomore year interview expressed that there would be differences in the ways in which women
and men (and their work) were accepted by their classmates. She described her way of coping with this
problem--proving them wrong and working hard.
        Erica: But as it goes on like, even if you expect it a little bit, um, you can prove em wrong and
        it won't hurt as bad [inaudible] hopefully.
        Interviewer: So that will be your strategy ((Erica: laughs)) to prove them wrong?

                                                                                                                          1-
                  Erica: Prove em wrong. I'll always work as hard as I can, you know (Erica, sophomore year)
                  In her junior year interview she related an experience with a male peer in which she felt that he was
         scrutinizing her work more than he was scrutinizing her teammates' (who were men) work. She concluded by
         telling us,
                  Well, because I'm a girl like, when I'm in a group of all guys and they're all like poo-pooing
                  my   ideas, you   know,  saying  you  don't know  what  your   talking about. Like  of course,   it's
                  natural to think 'Oh, it's because I'm a girl.' you know? Even though it might not be, like if a
                  guy had the same ideas they might be like, you know, "what are you thinking?", you know.
                  But when there are obvious differences, I think it's easier to blame those differences. (Erica,
                  junior year)
         Erica, then, found herself expecting the men she worked with to see her as not knowing "what she's doing", and
         then analyzed her interactions with them through this lens. She admitted, that if a man with whom she was
         working criticized her ideas, it could be that her ideas deserved to be criticized, or it could be that he was using a
         different standard to judge her work than he would to judge the work of men. For Erica, it was "natural," even
         "easier" to  attribute someone    "poo-pooing"   her ideas to the  fact  that she is a woman.   In  other words,   the
         attribution of the criticism to her gender enabled her to preserve her belief that the ideas that she had were of
         value.
                  In her senior year interview Erica discussed what she thought the differences between the experiences
         of men and women in engineering at LPU were. As a senior, a month or so away from graduation she had come
         to see her department as more familial than she had in her junior year. One thing seemed to trouble her about her
         department--she remarked on a lack of women role models in the college, citing a small number of women
         professors (two), and her awareness of only one woman who the college named a "distinguished alum" in the
         department.
                  In our building there's like this wall of distinguished alums. There's one female on the wall
                  out of, like, at least 25 people and she is famous for, like, running a cosmetic company. And
                  you  know,    it almost  feels like we're   breaking into this, like,  good  old boys  club. Like,
                  seriously, because you know, granted that's not the way people look at the world now. And
                  then, now we have the same opportunity but we're still getting hired by people who are from
                  back when, you know, women were secretaries and that's it. So I think that definitely kind of
                  plays a role because women haven't, women are starting to establish their role in science and
                  their role in engineering, but it hasn't been like a long-established thing. We can't look back in
                  books and be like, `oh look at this lady look what she did, you know'. So, um, maybe not as
                  easy to relate to. (Erica, senior year)
         She explained that the absence of women in her field made it harder for her to relate to the field. One possible
         reading of this is that Erica had to work to picture herself in the field, whereas men had the advantage of looking
         at the pictures of distinguished alums on the wall in the lobby of the Chemical Engineering building and seeing
         people who looked like they did. Men could more easily, one could argue, relate to the field, and see themselves
         as potential contribution-makers to the field.
                  During her senior year Erica attended several job fairs and was interviewed by many companies. She
         had a job lined up months before she graduated, and she talked very positively about the company she was
         going to work as a place where she felt comfortable. She contrasted this with her experience at interviews with
         other companies.
                  I interviewed with this [name of shipyard] and, like, I'm kind of, like, I'm not a girly girl, but
                  I'm  a lot  girlier than the people  that work at the  [name   of shipyard].  And  so just kind  of
                  walking around there, `oh do you want to leave your purse in the car', and just, like, little
                  comments about the fact that I was a girl. I remember at one of the career fairs I talked to an
                  oil company and they're like, `well, you have to get dirty'. And I was like, `would you say
                  that to everyone or just the females that come up?' (Erica, senior year)
         As she transitioned to a career as an engineer from a career as an engineering student Erica identified some
         experiences she had at interviews that seemed to affirm that even beyond school women were confronted with
         different expectations than their male counterparts because of their gender. In both the examples that Erica gave
         her gender, was in her mind foregrounded by the interviewers. Her last statement indicated an awareness that the
         interviewer would not have said, "you have to get dirty," had she been a man, thus, in her mind there were a
         separate set of expectations for women in the field. Although these two quotes do not address the effects of the
         perception that women get into the major more easily, they illuminate an important point--that women perceive
         that the field may continue to hold them to different standards than their male counterparts, even beyond their
         engineering education experiences.

       Conclusions

1-0
         In addition to concern about getting into their majors Simon and Erica also share a perception that it is
easier for a woman to get into the engineering college than a man in their sophomore years. We have argued
elsewhere (Garrison, Stevens, Sabin, & Jocuns, 2007) that this shared perception may mean the conditions for
what Claude Steele (1997) has termed stereotype threat are present for women in the College of Engineering.
Stereotype threat, according to Steele is "the social-psychological threat that arises when one is in a situation or
doing something for which a negative stereotype about one's group applies." One of the examples that Steele
presents is that of "math-identified women" (p. 614), women who think of themselves as being good at math. He
found that  the awareness   of the negative   stereotype  that women    are  not  good at  math  influenced  the  math-
identified women's   performance      on  activities in their college math   classes.  Similarly,  we  contend   that if
Simon's and Erica's views are widely-held, and if women in the college are aware of this negative view of their
group, then their individual performances in engineering-related activities might be impacted negatively in a
long-term and sustained way. This is consequential for learning, from a practice perspective, as the women may
view themselves as not being accepted by the field, and therefore the women may, in effect limit their own
participation in the important practices in which those in the process of becoming an engineer should engage. In
other words, although they may be recognized by administrators in the engineering college as engineers-in-
training, worthy members of the community, the women, out of fear of presenting themselves as "not knowing
what's going on" will merely opt out of participating (a navigational choice) or only partially engage with the
community (i.e., only with other women). Furthermore, if we are to consider that part of becoming an engineer
is developing an identification with the field, and having others identify oneself as an engineer-in-the-making,
then this partial feeling of acceptance would necessarily limit one's ability to become a full member of the field.
         It would seem admission to the college of engineering at LPU is rather mysterious and obscured to
students. They can categorize people into groups. There are "no problem" students, and "borderline cases", and
the "they really have to look at you" students, but the boundaries between the categories are not known to them-
-it is in this sense, that it is mysterious. It is so significant to them that they attempt to demystify it--cobbling
together their  impressions of the    admission process   from  bits and   pieces of information   they obtain   from a
number of sources, some reliable and others seemingly less so. And, if Erica's disregard of the advisor telling
her that gender was not a factor in admission decisions is any indication, it would seem that students place a
great deal of weight on the information they obtain from the unofficial sources. Why they seem to privilege the
information from the unofficial source is unclear, but given that educators are the dispensers of the official
information  (competing   with   this    unofficial  information),   perhaps  it  makes   sense  to dispense     official
information about the admission process more widely and more often than is being done currently at LPU We
hope to extend this research to the other four campuses to determine if we see evidence of similar beliefs at
engineering schools where students are admitted as freshmen.
         In addition to adjustments to the manner in which students are admitted to the college of engineering,
engineering  educators  might  examine    the programs    like WiSE,    which on  the  campus   of  LPU  appear   to  be
"spotlighting" the women engineering students. At LPU the program is open to both men and women, but there
is a stigma attached to involvement in the program. What had been designed to be a resource (WiSE), may
indeed have been viewed as a liability by the women on campus who could have benefited from its services.
Promoting the organization as being open to all students might be a way to alleviate the stigma that appears to
have been attached to the program. This is not to say that women in this study did not make use of the services,
but there were a number of women in the study who did not ever take advantage of the tutoring and other
programs.  One   has to  wonder    if it is related  to the   notion of women     believing that  they  need to   prove
themselves--doing    so might  have,   in their eyes,   meant  identifying themselves   as  being  illegitimate, or  less
legitimate members of the engineering community.
         In writing about this issue previously, we did not have four years of data across which to examine how
the students' beliefs evolved. Simon's shift in belief makes one hopeful for the future of the field.

References
Adelman, C. (1998). Women and men of the engineering path: A model for analysis of undergraduate careers.
         Retrieved. from http://www.erc-assoc.org/nsf/engrg_paths/.
Blickenstaff, J. C. (2005). Women and science careers: Leaky pipeline or gender filter? Gender and Education,
         17(4), 369-386.
Cameron, D. (2000). Styling the worker: Gender and the commodification of language in the globalized service
         economy. Journal of Sociolinguistics, 4(3), 323-347.
Conefry, T. (1997). Gender, culture and authority in a university life sciences laboratory. Discourse & Society,
         8(3), 313-340.
Dryburgh,  H.   (1999). Work   hard,  play  hard:   Women   and professionalization   in  engineering-adapting    to the
         culture. Gender and Society, 13(5), 664-682.
Eisenhart, M. A., & Finkel, E. (1998). Women's science: Learning and succeeding from the margins. Chicago,
         Ill: University of Chicago Press.

                                                                                                                             1-1
         Felder, R. M., Felder, G. N., Mauney, M., Hamrin Jr., C. E., & Dietz, E. J. (1995). A longitudinal study of
                  engineering  student performance  and   retention III. gender   differences in student  performance    and
                  attitudes. Journal of Engineering Education, 84(2), 151-163.
         Garrison, L., Stevens, R., Sabin, P., & Jocuns, A. (2007, June 24-27). Cultural models of the admission process
                  in engineering: Views on the role of gender. Paper presented at the American Society for Engineering
                  Education Annual Conference, Honolulu, Hawaii.
         Henwood,    F.  (1996). WISE   choices? Understanding    occupational    decision-making   in a  climate   of equal
                  opportunities for women in science and technology. Gender and Education, 8(2), 199-214.
         Henwood,    F.  (1998). Engineering  difference: Discourses   on  gender,  sexuality   and  work   in a   college of
                  technology. Gender and Education, 10(1), 35-49.
         Henwood, F. (1999). Exceptional women? Gender and technology in U.K. higher education. IEEE Technology
                  and Society Magazine, Winter 1999/2000, 21-27.
         Hollan, D., & Wellenkamp, J. (1993). Contentment and suffering: Culture and experience in Toraja. New York:
                  Columbia University Press.
         Holland, D. C., & Eisenhart, M. A. (1990). Educated in romance: Women, achievement, and college culture.
                  Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
         Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge [England] ;
                  New York: Cambridge University Press.
         Margolis, J., & Fisher, A. (2002). Unlocking the clubhouse: Women in computing. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT
                  Press.
         McLoughlin, L. (2005). Spotlighting: Emergent gender bias in undergraduate engineering education. Journal of
                  Engineering Education, 94(4), 373-380.
         Nespor,  J.  (1994). Knowledge    in  motion: Space,   time,  and  curriculum    in  undergraduate     physics and
                  management. London ; Washington, D.C.: Falmer Press.
         Seymour, E., & Hewitt, N. (1997). Talking about leaving: Why undergraduates leave the sciences. Boulder:
                  Westview Press.
         Sheppard, S., Atman, C. J., Stevens, R., Fleming, L., Streveler, R., Adams, R. S., et al. (2004). Studying the
                  engineering  student experience: Design    of a longitudinal  study. Paper    presented at   the American
                  Society for Engineering Education Annual Conference and Exposition, Salt Lake City, UT.
         Steele, C. M. (1997). A threat in the air: How stereotypes shape intellectual identity and performance. American
                  Psychologist(52), 613-629.
         Stevens, R., Amos,   D.,  Jocuns, A., &  Garrison,  L.  (2007).  Engineering  as lifestyle  and  a  meritocracy   of
                  difficulty: Two pervasive beliefs among engineering students and their possible effects. Paper presented
                  at the American Society for Engineering Education Annual Conference, Honolulu, Hawaii.
         Stevens, R., O'Connor, K., Garrison, L., Jocuns, A., & Amos, D. (in review). Becoming an engineer. Journal of
                  Engineering Education.
         Stevens, R., &  Sabin,  P. (2006). How  diverse  is your   "diversity"?: The  politics  of sorting in  a  college of
                  engineering. Paper presented at the Annual Meetings of the Society for the Anthropology of North
                  America.
         Stonyer, H.  (2002).  Making  engineering  students--making     women:   The  discursive   context  of  engineering
                  education. International Journal of Engineering Education, 18(4), 392-399.
         Tonso,  K.  L.  (1997). Constructing  engineers  through practice: Gendered   features  of   learning  and  identity
                  development. Unpublished dissertation. University of Colorado.
         Traweek,  S. (1988).  Beamtimes   and lifetimes: The   world of high-energy   physics.  Cambridge,    MA:  Harvard
                  University Press.
         Wortham, S. E. F. (2000). Interactional positioning and narrative self-construction. Narrative Inquiry, 10(1),
                  157-184.

        Acknowledgments
         This article has relied on the cooperation, insight, and generosity of the student research participants from the
         four schools who patiently explained their lives and shared their experiences with us. The corpus of data upon
         which this article is based was elicited and recorded by Lari Garrison, Andrew Jocuns, Kevin O'Connor, and
         Portia Sabin. This material is based on work supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant No.
         ESI-0227558, which funds the Center for the Advancement of Engineering Education (CAEE). CAEE is a
         collaboration of five partner universities: Colorado School of Mines, Howard University, Stanford University,
         University of Minnesota, and University of Washington. Thanks also to the people who wrote such helpful
         reviews.

1-
