       Complex Systems and Learning: Empirical Research, Issues, and
                           "Seeing" Scientific Knowledge with New Eyes
                    Michael J. Jacobson, The University of Sydney, NSW Australia, mjjacobson@mac.com
                           Hyo-Jeong So and June Lee, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
                                    Email:   hyojeong.so@nie.edu.sg,d june.lee@nie.edu.sg
                 Uri Wilensky, Paolo Blikstein, Pratim Sengupta, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL, USA
                      Email: uri@northwestern.edu, paulo@northwestern.edu, g-sen@northwestern.edu
                    Sharona T. Levy, Haifa University, Israel, Sharona T Levy, stlevy@construct.haifa.ac.il
                            Richard Noss, University of London, United Kingdom, r.noss@ioe.ac.uk

                Abstract:   The  purpose    of this  symposium    is  to move    beyond    speculations about  how
                knowledge about complex systems might be important for students to understand to focus on
                empirical research into the learnability of these ideas. For example, do complex systems ideas
                represent  learning challenges   that  are qualitatively  different  than  learning other  scientific
                knowledge? What are the differences in pre-conceptions students have about complex systems
                phenomena and more expert scientific ways of thinking in these areas? What are the profiles
                of  successful  and   less successful   ways   of learning   about   complex   systems  conceptual
                perspectives? Can complex systems provide conceptual perspectives for cognitively "seeing"
                physical and social sciences subjects in new and interconnected ways? It is hoped the papers
                in this session will provide insights into these questions and other theoretical and research
                issues in the learning sciences.

                                                 Symposium Overview
                                                        Michael J. Jacobson

                There have been recent papers in journals such as The Journal of the Learning Sciences and Cognitive
        Science  as well as   various sessions   at conferences   such   as American   Educational    Research  Association,
        International Conference of the Learning Sciences, and Cognitive Science over the past few years that have
        considered different aspects of how ideas and conceptual perspectives related to the multi-disciplinary study of
        complex   physical and social   systems  might  be  of   importance   in the field of  education.  Issues have   been
        considered  such as whether   complex    systems   ideas  might  constitute  important new    knowledge   K-16   level
        students should learn, what might be the challenges to be faced in helping students learn emerging scientific
        knowledge, or how these analytical and methodological perspectives might be used to inform our understanding
        of the  dynamics   of complex    educational   systems.   The  purpose   of  this  symposium    is to  move   beyond
        speculations about how knowledge about complex systems might be important for students to understand to
        focus on  empirical research  into the learnability of   these ideas, as  well as  to consider  issues of theoretical
        importance to the field of the learning sciences.

       Implementing Multi-Agent Modeling in the Classroom: Lessons from Empirical
                              Studies in Undergraduate Engineering Education

                                                Paulo Blikstein and Uri Wilensky

                This paper reports on a four-year empirical study of MaterialSim (Blikstein & Wilensky, 2004), an
        undergraduate material  sciences   learning environment   based   on  multi-agent  computer   modeling    built in the
        NetLogo (Wilensky, 1999b) simulation environment. This design-based research builds on previous studies that
        have  suggested  the  benefits  of   complex    systems,  multi-agent    and/or   cellular-automata   simulation   for
        understanding how a variety of complex behaviors in science derive from simple, local rules (Langton, Minar, &
        Burkhart, 1995; Wilensky, 1999a; Wilensky & Reisman, 2006; Wilensky & Resnick, 1999; Wolfram, 2002).
        The design of MaterialSim emerged from a literature review on engineering and materials science education
        (e.g., Hurst, 1995; Lamley, 1996; Russell & Stouffer, 2005; Thornton & Asta, 2005), classroom observations,
        and extensive interviews   with students.   Our observations,   supported   by the literature review,  indicated   that
        students' understanding of the subject matter was problematic, and that the conventional teaching strategies and
        resources were  not up  to  the challenge   of the content   being  taught.  Particularly, university-level Materials
        Science is exceptionally complex and interconnected, but the traditional teaching strategies are fragmented and
        "linear": Students are presented with different scientific phenomena, one at a time, with their respective sets of

3-
equations  and   mathematical  models.     In this "many-to-one"     framework,    many    context-specific    equations  and
models   are  necessary   to explain    one   single  phenomenon.      The    result, as our  studies    have  suggested,  is
fragmented, overly specific, and inflexible knowledge, which students cannot utilize to explore new areas within
the subject matter.
         MaterialSim's design, conversely, follows a "one-to-many" framework (Blikstein & Wilensky, 2006),
in which students are led to identify, by exploring previously-built NetLogo models, some common principles
across entire content   sections  of  a course.    These  few    principles   can be  used to  understand     many  different
phenomena. After having mastered those basic principles, students are asked to author a new computer model of
their choice. A core feature of this design, then, is that students can apply a small number of models to capture
fundamental   causal   structures underlying     behaviors    in a range   of apparently   disparate phenomena      within  a
domain.  For example, the free-energy minimization model allows students to understand crystal nucleation and
growth, solidification, annealing, recrystallization, phase transformations, diffusion, and many other phenomena
in Materials Science, which are traditionally taught as separate topics, each with their own models.
         Four user studies were conducted, in 2004, 2005, 2006, and 2007, with a total of 39 Material Science
undergraduate    students enrolled   in an    introductory    Materials  Science   course.  The    first three studies   were
conducted in the lab, but the last study took place in a regular classroom, as a for-credit assignment. In this last
implementation   (n=18),  each    student  was    assigned  the   task of  programming     an agent-based      model of   any
relevant topic in the course, run the model, collect data, and compare their results with published data. Students
were given one month to complete the assignment and took approximately 20 (± 6) work-hours on average to
complete it. Students were observed during three activities: learning the NetLogo language, learning how to
build computer   models   with NetLogo,       and  running/analyzing    multi-dimensional     experiments     with their  own
models.  We   videotaped  all student   sessions     and  captured  their  computer    interactions. The   first author   also
attended the Microstructural Dynamics undergraduate course, collected and analyzed class materials and related
literature. At the end of the quarter, students filled up questionnaires about their motivation, their modeling
experience, and time investment in different phases of the project.
         The  data  demonstrate    the  usefulness   of   the complex   systems    perspective    infused into   MaterialSim
design. All 18 students were able to successfully complete their models and data validations, most of which
were able to identify agent rules with applicability in more than one phenomenon, and students' self-reported
ability to create computer models increased significantly. We posit that, whereas the conventional, many-to-one
approach leads to the accumulation of inert models, the one-to-many multi-agent simulation approach provided
students with   useful generative   models    to  reflect on  the  unifying   principles of   the phenomena      studied, and
enabled them to build new models. However, the environment in an undergraduate engineering course presented
challenges   not present  in the  lab   studies  we  had   previously   conducted.     For example,   issues   such  as   time
investment, intrinsic/extrinsic motivation, the usefulness (for students) of learning a new computer language,
and the perceived usefulness of the activity to their school performance had to be constantly negotiated. From
this experience, we identified design principles and important challenges for researchers making the transition
from complex-systems-in-the-lab to implementations in regular classrooms.

Selected References
Blikstein, P., & Wilensky, U. (2004). Materialsim: An agent-based simulation toolkit for learning materials
         science.  Paper  presented     at the   International   Conference    on  Engineering     Education,    Gainesville,
         Florida, USA.
Blikstein, P., & Wilensky, U. (2006). From inert to generative modeling: Two case studies of multiagent-based
         simulation  in  undergraduate     engineering    education.   Paper   presented   at the  Annual    Meeting  of   the
         American Educational Research Association, San Francisco, CA.

                     On Learnability of Electricity as a Complex System

                                           Pratim Sengupta and Uri Wilensky

         Electricity has been a topic of much interest to learning scientists and science educators over the last
three  decades.  The   Pfund  and   Duit   (1998)    bibliography   documents      around  1200    studies  that   investigate
students' misconceptions in the domains of heat, light, and electricity. Recently, a number of proposals elaborate
the need for introducing students to microscopic level models of electricity (Eylon & Ganiel, 1993; Chabay &
Sherwood, 1995, 2002; White, Frederiksen, & Spoehr, 1993; Sengupta & Wilensky, 2006). The goal of such
models is to enable students to relate the macroscopic phenomena (such as electric current and voltage) in terms
of interactions between microscopic objects (e.g., electrons, ions). However, there is little agreement on the
instructional strategies  involved   in implementing      these  ideas  in classroom     contexts. Chi   and  Leeuw  (1994)
suggested  that  naïve and   expert  cognition    in the  domain   of  electricity are   incompatible    with each  other, as
experts and novices pertain to different and incommensurable ontologies of knowledge. They proposed that

                                                                                                                                  3-
         instruction  in  this  domain     should  "shun"   any   materialist   allusions,    and  instead   focus   on process-based
         descriptions of electricity. Bagno and Eylon (1997) argued for a "principle-based" instructional strategy that
         provides students with a microscopic understanding of electromagnetism through canonical principles from the
         domain of classical mechanics. White and Frederiksen (1993) demonstrated the use of agent-based simulations
         in which students were shown interactions between collections of charges as well as introduced to equational
         forms of representations to bridge the macro- and microscopic levels of description. Clement (1993, 1998) and
         Clement   and   Steinberg     (2002)  advocated   the use    of analogical   thinking     in a   non-computational    learning
         environment to foster student understanding of phenomena related to electricity. Also, it is noteworthy that these
         instructional studies typically focused on advanced high school and/or undergraduate students.
                   In our research, we investigate issues related to learnability of phenomena in the domain of electricity
         when they are represented as complex, dynamical systems. We situate our discussion in the context of NIELS
         (NetLogo Investigations in Electromagnetism; Sengupta & Wilensky, 2006), a multi-agent based, computational
         learning environment consisting of a suite of models authored in NetLogo (Wilensky, 1999) and demonstrate
         that such representations can lower the learning threshold of at least the introductory level phenomena in the
         domain of electricity so that students as young as 5th graders can understand them. NIELS models represent
         phenomena in the domain of electricity in an emergent (Wilensky & Resnick, 1999) fashion ­ e.g., aggregate
         level phenomena such as electric current and resistance emerge due to simple interactions (push, pull, simple
         collisions) between thousands of individual level agents (atoms, electrons) inside a conductor. Students interact
         with  these  models   through    scaffolded  and  open-ended    activities that    often  involve  a  combination   of   simple
         perceptual   actions  (e.g.,  counting,   observing   or inferring     trajectories,  etc.), thereby   leveraging   their  core
         knowledge    systems  (such   as  objects,  number   and motion),    which   are    present  even  in  infants (see Spelke   &
         Kinzer (2007) for a review). Results from implementation of NIELS models in fifth, seventh, and twelth grades
         and  in undergraduate    classes   indicate  that through    such   activities, learners  across   a wide   spectrum   of  ages
         activate their existing repertoire of object-based knowledge elements due to perceived contextual cues in the
         NIELS models. These object-based knowledge elements are acquired through our earliest interactions with the
         physical world (diSessa, 1993; Papert, 1980, Piaget, 1969), and therefore, are easily accessible to students as
         young as 5th graders, perhaps, even younger.
                   Furthermore, our results reveal that naïve students, prior to their interaction with NIELS, tended to
         assign  the  attributes  (e.g.,  mass,  flow)  of objects at    the individual   level   (i.e., electrons  and atoms)    to the
         aggregate-level, emergent phenomena such as current and resistance. Wilensky and Resnick (1999) have termed
         this tendency   to assign  agent-level    attributes to  the macro-level   emergent      phenomena     as   "slippage between
         levels." These perceived attributes at the aggregate level then activate object-based knowledge elements in the
         learner's mind and this produces the commonly noted "misconceptions". It is noteworthy that these are the same
         knowledge elements that are activated primarily due to micro-level cues in the NIELS models in course of the
         students'  interaction   with    NIELS,   and  as our   results  show,   give   rise  to  an    expert-like understanding    of
         electricity. Therefore,  one     can say  that these knowledge      elements    are  not the  wrong   cognitive  resources   to
         activate, but  rather  due    to the perceived  contextual   configurations     at  a different  level of   description  of the
         phenomena,    an otherwise       useful knowledge    element  can   be inappropriately     activated   in the  learner's  mind,
         thereby leading to a "misconception".
                   In conclusion, our results indicate that representing electricity as a dynamical complex system allows
         us to reconceive the process of learning of the revenant phenomena as a levels-based re-organization of the
         learner's existing object-based knowledge elements (Sengupta & Wilensky, 2006, 2007, 2008 (in progress)), as
         opposed to a radical conceptual change (Chi, Slotta & Leauw, 1994; Slotta & Chi, 2006). Furthermore, our
         results also  indicate   that NIELS     models, through  its use    of activities   that leverage  core   knowledge   systems,
         lower the learning threshold and enable much younger kids (5th graders) to learn the same content typically
         taught in high school and undergraduate levels.

        References
         diSessa, A. (1993). Towards an epistemology of physics. Cognition & Instruction, 10, 105-225.
         Eylon,  B-S.  &    Ganiel,    U. (1990).  Macro-micro    relationships:   the   missing    link  between    electrostatics  and
                   electrodynamics in student reasoning. International Journal of Science Education, 12, 79-94
         Fredericksen, J., White,B., & Gutwill, J.(1999). Dynamic mental models in learning science: The importance of
                   constructing   derivational    linkages among   models.    Journal    of  Research    in Science  Teaching,    36(7),
                   806-836.
         Levy, S.T., & Wilensky, U. (2008).        Inventing a "Mid-level" to make ends meet: Reasoning between the levels
                   of complexity. Cognition and Instruction, 26(1), 1-47.
         Papert, S. (1980). Mindstorms: Children, computers and powerful ideas. Basic Books, NY.
         Reiner, M.,   Slotta  J. D.,  Chi  T.,  H., &   Resnick  L., B.   (2000).  Naïve     physics    reasoning:  A  commitment    to
                   substance-based conceptions. Cognition and Instruction, 18(1), 1-34.

3-
Sengupta,   P., &   Wilensky,  U.   (2005). N.I.E.L.S:  An    emergent  multi-agent  based   modeling     environment  for
                    learning physics. Paper presented at the 4th International Joint Conference on Autonomous
         Agents and Multiagent Systems (AAMAS 2005), Utrecht, Netherlands.
Sengupta,   P.,  &   Wilensky,     U.   (2006).   NIELS:   An    agent-based    modeling     environment    for   learning
         electromagnetism.     Paper   presented  at  the  annual  meeting   of the  American       Educational Research
         Association (AERA 2006), San Francisco, CA.
Wilensky,   U.   (1999).   NetLogo.    http://ccl.northwestern.edu/netlogo.    Center    for Connected     Learning    and
         Computer-Based Modeling. Northwestern University, Evanston, IL.
Wilensky, U., & Resnick, M. (1999b). Thinking in levels: A dynamic systems perspective to making sense of
         the world. Journal of Science Education and Technology, 8(1).

 Problem-based Hypermedia and Agent Based Modeling: Shifting Ontologies
                                          about Complex Systems

                                  Michael J. Jacobson, Hyo-Jeong So, and June Lee

         This presentation discusses a study of a problem-based hypermedia environment, the Complex Systems
Knowledge Mediator (CSKM) (Jacobson, 2008), which was designed to provide cases about different types of
complex systems in order to help students learn conceptually challenging but increasingly important ideas about
complexity (Jacobson & Wilensky, 2006). The CSKM incorporated five NetLogo (Wilensky, 1999) agent-based
computer models--Ants, Traffic Jams, Slime Molds, Segregation, and Wolf-Sheep Predation--into hypermedia
cases for which conceptual, ontological, and problem solving scaffolds were developed. Scaffolds that consisted
of mini-lessons for four main complex systems concepts as well as case-specific explanations of these concepts
were authored for the CSKM materials: agents and rules, feedback, self-organization, and emergent properties
and levels. In addition, similar scaffolds were authored for four ontological beliefs that were based on previous
expert-novice   study research    (Jacobson,  2001)   related to  (a) system   control (centralized   versus  centralized-
decentralized), (b) actions (random versus random-predictable), (c) causality (single versus single-multiple),
and (d) processes (events versus event-emergent). (1)
         A study was conducted in which 60 undergraduate university students were randomly assigned to three
treatment groups that varied the types of scaffolding. The Full Scaffolding group used the NetLogo models in
conjunction with text-based scaffolding about complexity ontological ideas such as decentralized control and
random actions and higher order complexity concepts such as self-organization and emergence whereas the
Conceptual Scaffolding group was the same but without the ontological scaffolding. The third group only used
the hypermedia cases with the NetLogo models but received no other ontological or conceptual scaffolding. The
common CSKM design features that all three groups experienced were the five complex systems cases with
embedded NetLogo agent-based models and a set of problem-solving activities that required contrasting and
comparing   the  different  cases in  order to  answer  the   problems, such   as: How   is  it possible  for a system to
function in an orderly manner when the agents in the system behave randomly?
         The CSKM was used in three sessions of approximately two hours each. Learning was assessed using a
range of declarative and problem solving measures on the pretest and the posttest. Two raters used a rubric for
factual  accuracy   and  writing  quality to   code   the open-ended    declarative  knowledge      and  problem   solving
responses. In addition, the complex systems problem solving responses were coded using a complex systems
ontology  framework   (CSOF)     rubric  (Jacobson,   2001);  for example,   "Clockwork"     ontologies   such  as central
control  of system   or   linear  action effects  or  "Complexity"    ontologies    such as  order    from  decentralized
interaction in a system or nonlinear action effects (e.g., the "butterfly effect").
         In terms of the main findings of this study, all participants in the three groups significantly increased
their declarative knowledge scores from pretest to posttest (F(1, 57) =168.90, p<.001, Kp2 =0.75). An ANOVA
on the  posttest found   there was   a  significant difference   between   the three groups     (F(2, 57)  =5.23,  p<.001,
Kp2=0.16),  with    Full Scaffolding    being significantly   higher  than the  NetLogo     treatment   (p<.001),  but no
significant differences   between    the Full  Scaffolding    and Conceptual    Scaffolding     groups. Problem    solving
ontology  scores    based  on five  ontology    ideas (non-reductive   understandings    of  phenomena,     decentralized
control, random     agent  actions, dynamic    or emergent    processes)   were calculated.     All three groups   showed
significantly higher Clockwork ontology scores (M=0.18, SD=0.14) than Complexity ontology scores (M=0.11,
SD=0.13)    on  the pretest (F(1,   57)  =6.00, p<.05,    Kp2 =0.09),  and by   the posttest  there   were no   significant
changes in the continued use of Clockwork ontology ideas. However, the participants had higher mean number
of Complexity ontology ideas in the posttest (M=0.23, SD=0.15) than in the pretest (M=0.11, SD=0.13), and
this was a significant and moderate effect size difference (F(1, 57) = 56.71, p<.05, Kp2 =0.40).
         Further it was found that on average, all participants significantly increased from pretest to posttest in
terms of four of the five complexity ontology ideas (non-reductive understandings of phenomena, decentralized
control, random agent actions, dynamic or emergent processes); but no significant shift for the nonlinearity

                                                                                                                               3-
         ontology    (which   suggests this is a more   difficult  idea to deeply  understand).  A  composite    variable  of  the
         averages of these four ontology posttest scores was created and significant correlations between the composite
         ontology score and the open-ended posttest responses to the two transfer problems were found (p<.01). Given
         the  positive  relationship   between   complex  ontologies    and problem     solving, participants were    re-grouped
         according   to their  complexity   ontologies scores   on the  posttest. The scores  ranged  from  0 to  0.7,  and three
         groups were created: low (scores less than 0.24, n=24), medium (scores between 0.24 to 0.34, n=23), and high
         scorers (scores more than and equal to 0.35, n=13).      One-way ANOVAs were run to see whether there were any
         significant group    differences  on  the  declarative knowledge,   problem    solving, and  total test scores.   Results
         showed    a significant   group  difference on the  problem    solving   performance in  the  posttest  (F(2,  57)=9.39,
         p<.001). Post hoc tests revealed that participants with low complexity ontologies scores had significantly lower
         scores on the solutions to the complex systems problems compared to the medium (p<.05) and high complexity
         ontology groups (p<.001).
                   It appears that the primarily textual scaffolding about ontological and complexity concepts the Full
         Scaffolding group received and the complexity concepts only scaffolding for the Conceptual Scaffolding group
         contributed to gains in the declarative knowledge understanding about complex systems for these participants.
         However,    the   finding that  higher  complexity   ontologies   scores  were  significantly  associated   with  higher
         performance on two of the far transfer complex systems problem solving tasks is potentially important. We
         believe there are two main reasons for this finding. First, all three groups used the complex systems cases with
         the embedded NetLogo models, which have certain representational and interactive affordances for depicting
         dynamic aspects of different types of complex systems. It may be that the NetLogo modeling activities allowed
         the participants to perceptually attend to and interactively explore properties of how complex systems behave
         that in turn allowed them to begin to construct new complexity ontologies that they did not seem to have at the
         pretest. Second, the CSKM hypermedia system has design features that support problem-solving activities in
         which facets of the different cases may be contrasted and compared, which has been found to lead to significant
         knowledge    transfer  in earlier research  (Jacobson  &  Archodidou,    2000;  Jacobson,  Maouri,   Mishra,   &  Kolar,
         1996; Jacobson & Spiro, 1995). Thus it may have been the experiences with the NetLogo models in the cases
         may have helped the students construct new Complexity ontologies such as decentralized control and random
         agent actions in conjunction with the efficacy of contrasting and comparing cases for promoting transfer, as
         suggested by Gentner and associates (Gentner, Loewenstein, & Thompson, 2003) in their theory of analogical
         encoding. However, it was also found that the participants continued to have ontological commitments to the
         Clockwork      ontologies in the  posttest problem  solutions  as  well. Future research  into these    issues is clearly
         needed. The implications of this study for learning about complex systems knowledge and for theoretical issues
         in   the field of the  learning   sciences  such as conceptual    change   are further  considered   in the  conference
         presentation.

       Endnotes
          (1)  The characterization of complexity ontologies as being dialectical in nature (e.g., actions in a complex system may have
               both random and predictable dynamics) is one that contrasts with a dichotomous view of complexity ontologies (e.g.,
               actions are predictable as a naïve view versus actions are random as a complexity view). The dichotomous view of
               complexity is more common in published research to date on learning about complex systems, including work by the
               first author, however the rationale for a dialectical view of the ontologies of complexity is being articulated in two
               manuscripts in preparation (Jacobson & Kapur, 2008; Kapur & Jacobson, 2008).

        References
         Gentner, D., Loewenstein, J., & Thompson, L. (2003). Learning and transfer: A general role for analogical
                   encoding. Journal of Educational Psychology, 95(2), 393-408.
         Jacobson, M. J. (2001). Problem solving, cognition, and complex systems: Differences between experts and
                   novices. Complexity, 6(3), 41-49.
         Jacobson,   M.   J.  (2008).  Hypermedia    systems  for  problem-based    learning: Theory,   research,  and   learning
                   emerging scientific conceptual perspectives. Educational Technology, Research, and Development, 56,
                   5-28.
         Jacobson,   M.   J., &  Archodidou,    A.  (2000).  The   knowledge    mediator  framework:    Toward    the   design of
                   hypermedia tools for learning. In M. J. Jacobson & R. B. Kozma (Eds.), Innovations in science and
                   mathematics education: Advanced designs for technologies of learning (pp. 117-161). Mahwah, NJ:
                   Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
         Jacobson,   M.   J., &  Kapur,    M.  (2008). Ontological   network  theory    and learning   about  complex    systems.
                   Manuscript in preparation.
         Jacobson, M. J., Maouri, C., Mishra, P., & Kolar, C. (1996). Learning with hypertext learning environments:
                   Theory, design, and research. Journal of Educational Multimedia and Hypermedia, 5(3/4), 239-281.

3-0
Jacobson, M. J., & Spiro, R. J. (1995). Hypertext learning environments, cognitive flexibility, and the transfer of
         complex knowledge: An empirical investigation. Journal of Educational Computing Research, 12(5),
         301-333.
Jacobson, M. J., & Wilensky, U. (2006). Complex systems in education: Scientific and educational importance
         and implications for the learning sciences. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 15(1), 11-34.
Kapur, M., & Jacobson, M. J. (2008). On the nature of complexity. Manuscript in preparation.
Wilensky, U. (1999). Netlogo. Evanston, IL: Center for Connected Learning and Computer-Based Modeling.
         http://ccl.northwestern.edu/netlogo.

Actions Across Levels (AAL): A Multiple Levels Perspective On What It Means
                               To Make Sense Of Complex Systems

                                        Sharona T Levy and Uri Wilensky

Framework
         Furthering  our  understanding  of   what  it means   to make   sense of  complex    systems  is  becoming  a
pressing  imperative,  as  educational  systems    begin   incorporating  such  constructs    into   standard curricula
(Jacobson, 2006; Wilensky, 1999; Levy & Wilensky, under review). Work to date on the topic has focused on
understanding    of the   system's    structural aspects   (Hmelo-Silver    &  Pfeffer,  2004)     or  the  underlying
epistemologies and ontologies (Wilensky & Resnick, 1999; Jacobson, 2001; Chi, 2005). This work builds upon
previous  work,  delineating  how   people  reason   about  complex   systems. We    propose   a framework,    Actions
Across   Levels  (AAL),  for understanding    and investigating   how people   reason   about complex   systems.  This
framework   describes possible   participating   cognitive processes  and   consists of two   dimensions:   description
levels and actions undertaken while interpreting systems (Figure 1).
         The notion   of  levels is a central  component   in  agent-based  approaches,  specifying    both   individual
agents and the overall system's emergent and aggregate behavior (Bar-Yam, 1997). Thus, one dimension in the
AAL framework is the description level: agent (individuals), aggregate (system) or a mélange of the two (AA,
agent-aggregate complementarity, when both description levels are incorporated in reasoning about the system;
Stroup & Wilensky, 2003).
         The second   dimension     introduces three actions,  involved  in reasoning   about  systems.  Rule-making:
connecting  conditions  and  actions, which    govern  agents' behaviors   as they   respond  to their environment   or
internal states; relating global    changes and   affected  properties; or  combinations    of   the two;  Paralleling:
simulating multiple agents acting and interacting concurrently; Chaining: observing or deriving a sequence of
states, temporal changes in the system and/or its elements. No claim is made regarding whether all cognitive
processes actually take place, nor in what order.

                               Figure 1. Actions Across Levels (AAL) framework.

Research and Findings
         In previous work, we investigated ten sixth-grade students' reasoning about ordinary social complex
systems, such as scattering in preparation for calisthenics in gym class, discovering a pervasive strategy: "mid-
level construction"  (Levy   &   Wilensky,  2008).  We   had  found  that students   invent intermediate   groups in a

                                                                                                                            3-
         variety of  forms  along  one   of two    trajectories: starting from  the agents  and   grouping;   or starting from  the
         aggregate and partitioning. This strategy reduces the amount of information in the system, while preserving its
         multi-component, dynamic and interacting nature, serving explication of the system under scrutiny. The students
         presented  diverse  mid-level   forms:    clustering agents  into  groups  ("clustering"), detaching    groups in parallel
         from a  central  cluster ("groups"),      moving  the   agents  in a staggered  form,    each group  at  a  different time
         ("outsides first"), rows of agents, subdivision into groups that behave according to different rules.
                  In the current study, we further explicate this strategy by coding the above interviews using the AAL
         framework. The students' utterances during the interview were coded according to the seven categories (Figure
         1) and analyzed for relative frequencies.
                  We have located group-wide strengths regarding the different cognitive processes: while agent rule-
         making is most commonly exercised (M=27%, SD=7), mentally simulating the system's evolution - chaining at
         all levels is least frequently (M=6%, SD=6 for agents, M=8%, SD=5 for aggregate); paralleling and aggregate
         rule-making  are   of  intermediate strengths  (M=17%,       SD=11,   M=16%,    SD=12    respectively),  however   with  a
         greater variance   among    the students.   Moreover,    we   have   found associations    between   individual  students'
         strengths and the specific forms of "mid-levels" they created, as described above. Strong (32%) paralleling is
         associated  with a  pattern involving     several groups    acting concurrently  ("groups"),  but  not  with a   pattern in
         which   groups'  actions   are  staggered   over  time   ("outsides   first") (8%).   Strong  aggregate    rule-making   is
         associated  with   the "outsides   first" pattern (29%)     but not  with the  others   (14%  for both). AA    chaining  is
         associated mainly with "clustering" (18%), less so with "groups" (12%) or "outsides first" (4%).

        Discussion
                  We discuss these findings with respect to support for the AAL framework, reported difficulties and
         possible supports in learning and teaching complex systems. In the introduction, we proposed a two-dimensional
         framework   for    describing  the  cognitive  processes     that  may  take   place  while   reasoning  about   complex
         phenomena: "Actions across Levels" (AAL). We have presented evidence to support the utility of the AAL
         framework by locating instances of each component in the students' utterances, as well as diverse strengths and
         their association with different reasoning strategies. We have found that for all the students, agent rule-making
         was prominent. Chaining (or sequencing events) was the least dominant. This confirmed our assumption that the
         task describing social settings was well suited to students' everyday agent-based reasoning. As a group, the
         students' main resource was agent rule-making. Mentally simulating the unfolding of events was a challenge.
                  Mid-level construction was used to test the framework. Given the small sample, we do this carefully,
         and claim only to trends. We found that variation among the AAL components is related to the particular forms
         of mid-levels; stronger actions were used to construct mid-levels. "Clustering" in an individual-to-mid-level
         trajectory was related to stronger Paralleling or AA chaining, central features of agent-based reasoning. The
         other patterns were formed in a population-to-mid-level trajectory. The "groups" pattern, a parallel detachment
         of groups from the central cluster was related to stronger Paralleling, while lacking the Chaining features that
         access  the system's    evolution;  staggering    the   groups  ("outsides-first") was   related  to stronger  Aggregate
         chaining  and  Aggregate    rule-making,    which    support  such  temporal   patterns, but  lack the  system's  parallel
         interactions. Educational implications of this research point a way to analyzing both strengths and difficulties
         encountered by students while reasoning about complex systems, as related curricula become more prevalent.

       References
         Bar-Yam, Y. (1997). Dynamics of complex systems. Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley, The Advanced Book
                  Program.
         Chi, M.T.H. (2005). Commonsense conceptions of emergent processes: Why some misconceptions are robust.
                  Journal of the Learning Sciences, 14(2), 161-199.
         Hmelo-Silver, C.E., & Pfeffer, M. G. (2004). Comparing expert and novice understanding of a complex system
                  from the perspective of structures, behaviors, and functions. Cognitive Science, 28, 127-138.
         Jacobson,   M.  J. (2006).  Hypermedia      systems     for problem-based     learning: Theory,   research, and   learning
                  emerging scientific conceptual perspectives. Manuscript submitted for publication.
         Levy, S.T. & Wilensky, U. (under review). Navigating the complexities of the particulate world: Learning with
                  the Connected Chemistry curriculum.
         Levy, S.T., & Wilensky, U. (2008). Inventing a "Mid-level" to make ends meet: Reasoning between the levels
                  of complexity. Cognition and Instruction, 26(1), 1-47.
         Wilensky,   U. &   Stroup,  W.  (2003).   Embedded      complementarity   of  object-based   and  aggregate  reasoning   in
                  students developing understanding of dynamic systems. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the
                  American Educational Research Association, Chicago, IL, April 1-5.
         Wilensky, U. (1999).GasLab: An extensible modeling toolkit for exploring micro- and macro- views of gases. In
                  N. Roberts, W. Feurzeig, & B. Hunter (Eds.), Computer modeling and simulation in science education
                  (pp. 151-178). Berlin: Springer Verlag.

3-
Wilensky, U., & Resnick, M. (1999). Thinking in levels: A dynamic systems perspective to making sense of the
       world. Journal of Science Education and Technology, 8(1), 3-19.

                                                                                                                3-3
