    Artifacts and Aberrations: On the Volatility of Design Research
                                    and the Serendipity of Insight
                                   Dor Abrahamson, Graduate School of Education,
               University of California--Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94720-1670, dor@berkeley.edu
                                          Tobin White, School of Education,
                   University of California--Davis, Davis, CA 95616, twhite@ucdavis.edu (1)

         Abstract: Reflecting on analyses of data from our respective design-based research studies of
         mathematical cognition and learning, we propose the utility of the instrumental genesis model
         (Vérillon   &    Rabadel,  1995)   for  examining   students'  engagement    with  designed   learning
         artifacts. The model has helped each of us to account for gaps between intended and enacted
         sequences     in relation   to these   artifacts. In  particular,  instrumental  genesis provides    a
         mechanism for differentiating between the designer's arc of intentionality and the student's
         learning trajectory, two vectors that may be tacitly aligned for historically evolved learning
         materials but at variance for recently created materials. Characteristic of our case studies--a
         networked-classroom       design for   functions  and   a mixed-media    design for  probability--are
         breakdowns in which students' behavior deviated either from the designer's intention or from
         classic models of constructivist design. In both cases, the breakdowns were valuable in that
         they occasioned refinement of our theories and designs.

Introduction
         A  common     and  perhaps     defining  characteristic of design-based   research  is that the designs    under
investigation are raw, embryonic, or in flux--they are visions not yet fully realized, guided by principles still
seeking  clearer articulation,   and  enacted   through tools   in need of  refinement.  This   incomplete  state of  the
designs, especially in their early iterations, necessarily reflects the developing nature of the theories of learning-
in-relation-to-design they seek to inform. We take the inevitable rawness and fluidity of our under-development
designs as useful affordances of this empirical genre; in the cases presented below, we describe irregular aspects
of our designs that have contributed to the refinement of theory as much as--and perhaps more than--normative
features would.  However,    irregularities    of a design  can  pose  distinctive methodological    challenges   for the
design   researcher,   particularly in  the  analysis  of  data  from  instances   in which   implementation    revealed
departures  from   an  intended    or  canonical   design.  As   to-be-expected  features  of emergent   designs,   such
departures warrant neither the outright rejection of a hypothesis nor the immediate abandonment of a designed
artifact. Rather, we posit, they may occasion the emergence of new instructional or theoretical constructs, and
mark pivotal opportunities for reexamining the enfolding dynamics between theory and design in relation to the
artifacts we study.
         This paper seeks to integrate lessons from two quite different design studies into a common set of
analytic tools for examining data episodes diagnosed as aberrant in relation to designed learning artifacts. In
particular, our respective research studies have required us to interpret instances of temporary divergence of
students' experiences from the designer's intention, whether this intention was a priori explicit or post facto
emergent. We treat these breakdowns--in communication, in understanding, in implementation of a design--as
opportunities to consider complexities inherent to learning with artifacts.(2) As researchers with both theoretical
and engineering   focus   on artifacts  that  support  learning,   we typically scrutinize students'  engagement    with
artifacts with an eye on whether, how, why, and at what point students are able to recognize the affordances of
these available artifacts for the successful accomplishment of the mandated problem-solving activities. In the
cases we discuss below, students were initially unable to instrumentalize an artifact in line with the designer's
intentionality, either because the nature of the problem was temporarily obscured from the student or because
the artifact functioned counter to the designer's intention. Based on our analyses of these cases, we have come
to believe that these designer­student breakdowns with respect to the objective and nature of instrumentalization
may be quite common to design-based research studies, and that this ubiquity constitutes an empirical resource
for advancing particular designs as well as design theory and learning theory. That is, the breakdowns do not
necessarily reflect on the integrity of the underlying design rationale, and students' experiences may ultimately
be beneficial,  yet  the  breakdowns    give   us pause to  reflect on  students'  dispositions and  resourcefulness   in
relation to the  tacit contract  underlying    productive  engagement   in  designed   learning activities. Building  on
Vérillon  and   Rabardel's   (1995)     theory  of  instrumental   genesis, we  propose    an approach   to  examining
breakdown--an approach that hinges on analytically separating the structural/functional properties of artifacts
(their "objective"   properties) from   their  use  by students  in mediated  activity. In particular, we   refrain from
evaluating whether students understood the "correct" use of the design. Instead, we articulate trajectories of

                                                                                                                             1-
       students'   observed  application   of    designed  artifacts   to learning     tasks vis-à-vis   the  researchers'  arc   of
       intentionality in relation to the students' prospective engagement with the designed learning artifacts.

      Theoretical Perspective(s)
                 Vérillon   and Rabardel    (1995)     propose a framework      for  examining    student    learning in  terms   of
       instrumental genesis, i.e., the process through which artifacts become tools to be utilized in the accomplishment
       of a task. From this perspective, an instrument represents the union of an objective artifact, such as a physical
       device or software component, with a particular user's conceptual scheme for implementing that artifact in a
       specific  activity situation. Instruments     thus  emerge   through   a  dialectical    interplay between     the technical
       demands of mastering a device and the conceptual work of making that device meaningful in the context of a
       task (Artigue, 2002).

                       Figure 1. The Instrumented Activity System model (Vérillon              & Rabardel, 1995).

                 Figure 1, from Vérillon   & Rabardel (1995), illustrates the triadic relationships between subject, object,
       and mediating artifact that comprise an instrumented activity system. This emphasis on the process through
       which  the   meaning  of  an  artifact is constituted   through  goal-oriented   activity  has  important    methodological
       consequences.   The   dialectic  between   conceptual    and   technical aspects    of   tool use  in instrumental  genesis
       unfolds   through    the  intertwined     processes   of  instrumentalization,      oriented   toward     the  artifact,  and
       instrumentation, oriented toward the user (Trouche, 2004). Through instrumentalization, an artifact becomes a
       means of achieving an objective, solving a problem, completing a task--it becomes meaningful to an activity
       situation, and thus has been transformed into an instrument. This transformation of the artifact pairs with the
       simultaneous    transformation   of  the  user,  as  through    instrumentation     the  user develops    the  schemes    and
       techniques   through  which     the  artifact   can be   implemented     in  purposive     action. As   Trouche    remarks,
       "instrumentation is precisely the process by which the artifact prints its mark on the subject....One might say,
       for example, that the scalpel instruments a surgeon" (p. 290, emphasis in original). Instrumentation involves
       forming a utilization scheme that provides a predictable and repeatable means of integrating artifact and action
       (Vérillon   & Rabardel, 1995). In Figure 1, above, the Subject­Object link evolves from initial mediation through
       the Instrument (the curved two-headed arrow) to an internalized and automaticized cognition (the horizontal
       arrows). Instrumental genesis thus both makes artifacts meaningful in the context of activity and provides a
       means by which users make meaning of the object of that activity. Mediating artifacts both constitute and are
       constituted  through  activity;  an    artifact is  imbued   with  meaning--shaped        as  an  instrument--through      its
       implementation in a specific task, toward a particular end. Correspondingly, the study of an instrument is the
       study not of an object per se, but of a process, the genesis of its significance to a particular user and for a
       particular   purpose. From    this   perspective,   examining      processes    of  instrumental   genesis    in   classroom
       mathematical activity amounts to microgenetic analysis of mathematical meaning of instruments for individual
       learners in relation to a particular problem-solving tasks. The perspective also implies the potential volatility and
       variability  of instrumentalization,    which    accounts    for   any misalignment       between   designer   and   student
       trajectories. Below, we explicate our common analytic approach, and then we present and analyze two cases of
       misaligned trajectories.

      Analysis
                 Relying  primarily  on  design-based      research  methods    (e.g., diSessa   &   Cobb,   2004),  we   elicit and
       analyze students' artifact-based engagement in problem-solving and inquiry activities, focusing on data excerpts
       selected  as particularly conducive    for investigating   and   articulating   the interplay  of  material,  cognitive,  and
       social factors  that determine   the   learning  outcomes    of  student activity.    In this section, we  summarize      two
       episodes   from our   respective studies   that  we  interpret  as manifesting     some   species  of  breakdown--for     the
       students and, reciprocally, for us. These breakdowns are examined through careful analysis of the microgenesis
       of student activity. The first case analyzes students' unexpected sense making in relation to a designed artifact in
       order  to demonstrate    the co-construction    of  learning  instruments    by  designers    and  users. The  second     case

1-
analyzes    students'    epistemic    disposition     that    the    first  author     has    termed    suspended        pertinence
(instrumentalization     without   a `towardness'),     and     this   analysis    is used    to    frame a    phenomenological
deconstruction    of  mathematical   artifacts.  The   juxtaposition    of  these  studies    demonstrates     the versatility  and
malleability of the instrumental-genesis model as an analytic tool for design-based researchers.

Case 1: Debugging an Artifact, Instrumenting a Bug
           An unexpected sequence of events in the first research study provides an opportunity to consider the
implications of artifact `breakdown' for design research. These events, presented in detail in White (in press),
hinged  on    the revelation    of a software     bug  in   a novel    learning    environment.     This  bug's    detection    was
precipitated   by a   student group's     surprisingly successful      efforts  to fashion    the   unintended    behavior  of  the
software into a meaningful mathematical instrument in the context of an assigned problem-solving task. Within
a  few days    of the   discovery,   the  software    was   revised    and  instruction    continued   virtually   uninterrupted.
However, subsequent and more detailed retrospective analysis of this event revealed ways that the students had
unwittingly   begun    treating the  bug  as   an affordance    of   a problem-solving        tool. Moreover,     this unexpected
implementation hinged on the students' insights about the bug-generated behavior of the software in relation to
key mathematical concepts, and occasioned an important insight on the part of the design researcher regarding
the redesign of the learning environment.
           This episode occurred during the first classroom implementation of a learning environment situated in
a  classroom   network   of  wireless  handheld      computers    and   intended   to  support    learning  about   mathematical
functions  through     collaborative  problem-solving       activities. A     curricular   unit  accompanying      this   handheld
network asked students to imagine themselves as cryptographers, and to collaborate with the other members of
their small   group   on daily  problem-solving      activities involving     the  making     and   breaking   of codes  based  on
polynomial functions. A handheld client application, called Code Breaker, allowed students to edit parameters
of a polynomial function, and to examine corresponding changes in a linked array of graphical, tabular, and
numerical displays. The events reported in this paper involved a representation in this array called the inverse
function table.   The instructional intent behind the inverse function table was to illustrate the bidirectional flow
of functional relationships, so that if encoding a message creates a mapping between plain and cipher text, then
decoding that message amounts to inverting that function by mapping the outputs back to their original inputs.
The range of values in an encrypted message is displayed in the Y-column of the inverse function table, as
shown in Figure 2a. Each of these cipher text values is then mapped through the inverse of a candidate function,
with the result displayed in the corresponding cell of the X-column. When this process yields an integer from 1
to 26, the    corresponding    plaintext  letter  appears   in  the  "Letter"     column.     In fact, a  late   revision had   the
unexpected side effect of including letters in this column next to all non-integer values with a greatest integral
part between 1 and 26. In linear cases where the coefficient of the candidate function was greater than that of the
encoding function, the table displayed multiple cipher text values mapped to the same letter. Figure 2b reveals
what the `buggy' table actually displayed.

       Letter       X      Y          Letter       X      Y              Letter        X       Y          Letter       X      Y

                  2.4     12                     5.6     67                 B         2.1     12             E       5.1     67

                  2.7     17                     5.9     72                 B         2.1     17             E       5.1     72

         C          3     22                     6.5     82                 C          3      22             F       6.1     82

                  3.6     32                     6.8     87                 C         3.1     32             F       6.1     87

                  4.2     42                     7.7    102                 D         4.1     42            G        7.1    102

                  4.5     47            H          8    107                 D         4.1     47            H          8    107

                  4.8     52                     8.3    112                 D         4.1     52            H        8.1    112

              Figure 2a. Inverse function table                            Figure 2b. Inverse function table with bug

           The Code Breaker environment was implemented in a middle school mathematics classroom during a
five-week summer school session. Four focus groups of four students each were videotaped daily, and these
video  records,   along  with   server   logs, researchers'     observation     notes,    and students'   written  records,  were
analyzed with regard to the problem-solving strategies enacted and the mathematical ideas expressed by the
students in each decryption activity. The episode of interest in this paper involved a day on which one group of
students drew the attention of both the teacher and the researchers because they appeared to have stumbled onto
a novel and effective way to use the inverse function table in decrypting messages. The students and the teacher
took the behavior associated with the table to be a normal feature of the software, and it was only in reviewing
the episode after class that the researchers discovered both the roots of the group's strategy and the bug on
which it relied. Without recognizing the presence of the bug in the software, the students nonetheless engaged it
in a process of instrumental genesis, crafting it into a tool and applying it with some success to problem-solving
tasks in the environment.

                                                                                                                                       1-
                 From an instrumental perspective, this strategy took a set of mathematical artifacts--characters in a
       dynamic tabular display--that were aberrant and accidental in the eyes of the designers, and implemented them
       as meaningful problem-solving tools. Those tools' meaning emerged only through the course of their application
       to  a specific  task,   namely   the  group's  effort  to determine   an unknown      function.  Though    "buggy,"     these
       repeating letters were certainly not without mathematical significance. By associating two distinct characters in
       the cipher text with the same plaintext letter, the rounding error gives the impression that the candidate function
       maps   a single  input   to multiple  outputs.  Because   functions  map   domain   elements     uniquely, the  presence   of
       "repeats" in the inverse function table would imply that the candidate was not a function at all. The group made
       use of the rounding precisely by applying this property of functions to determine whether the mapping of cipher
       text values to plaintext letters displayed in the inverse function table implied that the candidate was in fact a
       function,   and so  possibly   the encoding    function   they sought.   By creatively    drawing   on  this knowledge     of
       function    attributes, the group  managed     to transform   the repeated  letters from   the   nonsensical  artifacts they
       represented   relative   to  the intended  software    design  into meaningful    and  useful    resources   relative to  the
       objective presented by the decryption task.
                 The inverse function table was designed to emphasize the analogy between decrypting a message and
       inverting or undoing a function. In the context of its actual use by students in decryption tasks, however, the
       table appeared to fall short of the learning objective behind its design; students focused on whether, which, and
       how many letters appeared in the table rather than on the relationship between an algebraic candidate function
       and any particular numerical mapping from output to input. In fact, the instrumentation of the rounding bug into
       a tool for identifying unique function mappings by the group described here was the most successful use, with
       regard to both the problem-solving and instructional objectives, of the inverse function table made by any of the
       groups in the class. And in that case the desired student learning, in the form of a utilization scheme based on
       aspects of function, emerged only when the table, because of the bug, failed to correctly depict the inverse
       relationship it was devised to illustrate. This failure demonstrates the pivotal relationship between utility and
       instructional  efficacy,  or   between task-oriented    and learner-oriented  activity,   at the heart  of the  dialectic  of
       instrumental   genesis   and   design research.   Tools for learning  achieve   their educational   objectives  when    their
       instrumentalization--their     orientation  by    the  user-learner  toward   a task--invites    an  instrumentation     that
       incorporates those objectives. The inverse function table may have provided a rich representation of decryption
       as undoing from the standpoint of designers acquainted with those aspects of function, but it did not provide
       task-relevant   utility that made    that acquaintance    necessary or  those aspects    salient to learners.  At best,  and
       thanks to a bug, it supported an instrumentation that featured an important but partial account of functional
       relationships--specifically, that instrumentation emphasized the unique mapping from input to output, but not
       the reciprocity with inverse mappings intended by the designers. So the group's instrumentalization of the bug
       helped   to reveal  to  the  researchers  ways    by which  the  design  of the inverse   function   table constrained    the
       possibilities  for  its  instrumentation.   It also   provided  crucial  insights   into  the  redesign   of  the software,
       specifically the mid-implementation replacement of the inverse table with a more conventional function table
       display through which students could compare the outputs of a candidate function with the character values in
       the cipher text. This new design abandoned a focus on inverse functions in order to capitalize on the students'
       demonstrated    tendency    to draw   inferences  from  multiple  simultaneously    displayed    table  values, reflecting a
       revised orientation toward the learner that took into account the learner's orientation of the previous artifact
       toward the decryption task.
                 Conceptualizing the design and investigation of innovative learning tools in terms of this dialectic has
       the potential for contributing both to the theory of instrumental genesis and the epistemology of design-based
       research. In design research efforts involving innovative tools, the same artifacts simultaneously mediate the
       researcher­designer's engagement with a learner and the learner's engagement with the object of an educational
       task. Figure 3 adapts Vérillon and Rabardel's instrumental genesis model to depict the dual meaning of these
       designed instructional artifacts, constituted in relation to both the task-oriented activity of learners­users and the
       instructional   and empirical     objectives   of  design   researchers. Fully   apprehending       the meaning   of    these
       instruments requires attending to these dual roles as they emerge in relation to one another. In particular, the
       effectiveness of designed artifacts for supporting student learning may ultimately depend on the extent to which
       a  designer­educator's      instructional  objectives  and  a  user­learner's   task-orientation--the    instructional   and
       instrumental   meanings     of an  artifact--can  be   brought into  alignment.  In   the case   of the rounding    bug,  for
       example, attending to the ways the focus group applied the repeating letters to the decryption task provided a
       window into the group's emerging understanding of function, particularly as that application emphasized key
       aspects  of  functional   relationships   other   than the  learning  goals about   inverse    mapping    specified   by  the
       designers. And replacing the inverse function table with the function table reflected a change in the designers'
       orientation of the artifact toward the learner in order to account for the latter's orientation of that artifact toward
       the   task, such   that  the learner's    instrumented  activity  and  the  designers'    overarching    goals  for   student
       understanding of function were brought into closer alignment.

1-0
                                Figure 3. Dialectics of instrumentation and design.

Case 2: Suspended Pertinence en Route to Full Instrumentalization
         The first author and collaborators (e.g., Abrahamson et al., 2008) have been conducting design-based
research studies of students' probabilistic cognition. The design rationale of these studies, based on a domain
analysis  of  the  subject   matter    content  of  probability   and  constructed  according   to  a  principled
constructivist/constructionist  design  framework    (Abrahamson      &  Wilensky,   2007),  is  to   position  in
contradistinction activities   pertaining to   theoretical probability  (combinatorial analysis)   and empirical
probability (taking samples); critical learning moments are expected when students coordinate these activities
through reconciling emergent tensions between intuitive inferences evoked by the objects and representations
they construct through the activities.

     Figure 4. Scooping four marbles from a box containing equal numbers of green and blue marbles.

                   a.                                      b.                               c.

                                                                                                                      1-1
             Figure 5. The combinations tower is the distributed sample space of the 16 unique marble scoops:
          (a) a student's construction; (b) a schematic image for expository clarity; and (c) a distribution of actual
         experimental outcomes from a        computer-based simulation of the marble-scooping probability experiment.

                In one-to-one interviews, students were initially presented with a box containing an equal number of green
       and blue marbles and a utensil for drawing out random samples of four marbles and asked to predict the empirical
       outcomes of operating this device (see Figure 4, above). Typically, 4th ­ 6th grade students, who had not studied
       probability and were not fluent with graphs such as distributions, responded that a sample with exactly 2 green
       marbles would be the most common, an all-green or all-blue sample would be the rarest, and exactly 3 green or 3 blue
       marbles would be in between these in frequency. Asked to warrant their        judgments, students referred to the color
       distribution in the box (cf. Tversky & Kahneman). Notably, students never referred to combinatorial analysis as a
       means of supporting their assertions. Next, the activities shifted perfunctorily from the probable to the possible:
       students were  guided   to create all the possible  empirical outcomes   of   the experiment.  Along   the way,  students
       invariably asked whether or not they should construct the permutations, and we guided them to do so, resulting in a
       sample space of 16 unique configurations. Next, the dyad assembled this sample space into a combinations tower (see
       Figure 5a, and a reproduction in Figure 5b). When students beheld the completed tower, they typically appropriated it
       as a logical warrant for their initial intuitive inference, stating that the 2-green event has more outcomes than other
       events and therefore would occur more frequently than each of the other events. Next, students operated a computer-
       based simulation  of the   marbles  experiment   to investigate the  validity of  their triangulated expectation  for   the
       empirical distribution. Note  the   figural resemblance   of the combinations     tower  (Figures  5a,b),  a  "theoretical"
       structure, to an "empirical" structure, a histogram produced by the simulation (Figure 5c).
                In Abrahamson et al. (2008) we focus on students' insight that the sample space triangulates and thus
       warrants their initial intuitive inference, and we build an integrated cognitive­sociocultural theoretical model in
       attempt to explain students' insight. Through the lens of the instrumental genesis model (see Figure 6, below),
       students were to instrumentalize the procedure­artifact `combinatorial analysis' toward the marbles experiment.
       Specifically, the design   was for  students  to see  the combinations   tower,    a collection  of  discrete  objects, as
       indexing  the  expected    relative frequencies--1:4:6:4:1--of      samples   with   0,  1, 2,  3,  or 4   green  blocks,
       respectively. Students,    however,   were  initially unaware   that the analysis    they   were performing    would    be
       informative of the outcome distribution and were in particular oblivious to the relevance of permutations to
       frequency. Thus,  students   initially mastered  the  procedure  of  the combinatorial-analysis      artifact before they
       instrumentalized it to the mathematical problem. Students' eventual insight, by which the artifact's pertinence
       was suddenly revealed, furnished the missing link completing the instrumentalization process. Students' insight
       can be characterized as imbuing the combinations tower--a set of 16 objects--with the notion of frequency
       evoked in the context of the marbles-box experiment. The combinations tower thus became a material anchor
       for the conceptual blend of `sample space' and `frequency' (see, in Figure 6, the magnified triad on the top
       right; see Hutchins, 2005, on material anchors for conceptual blends).

1-
           Figure 6. "Futile" procedure becomes instrument (simplified from Abrahamson et al, 2008).

          This  integrated   theoretical model   (Figure   6)   was  instrumental   in our    own  realization  that in  this
particular design for the binomial, students experienced suspended pertinence of a mathematical procedure--
they  engaged     in a   mathematical  practice  without   initially knowing   its   province   of   application,  using an
algorithm  that   did  not appear   to promote   the objective   of  solving  the   stated problem.   In  turn, `suspended
pertinence,'   our   `ontological   innovation' (diSessa  &   Cobb,  2004),  was    revealed   to us  as  an aspect  of  the
`didactical contract' (Brousseau, 1997) between teacher and student, and the construct shed light on the case
study  of the   single   student who   did not  achieve   the critical insight--we     conjectured   that this  student  had
underdeveloped       epistemic   disposition    necessary  for   engaging    conscientiously      in  representation-based
mathematical inquiry (Abrahamson et al., 2008). Thus, as researchers, the instrumental genesis model supported
us in differentiating a procedure per se from the procedure-as-instrumental-toward-an-object, a differentiation
that helps us distinguish between the designer's intentionality and the students' experiences. As designers, the
model revealed to us tacit pragmatics underlying traditional didactical situations. That is, normatively, we aim to
design   learning    situations  in which  students   do   not  experience   suspended     pertinence,    because   students
themselves initiate and explore the procedures. Yet, inadvertent breakdown of the intended activity sequence
emerging from the implementation of our design fortuitously equipped us to appreciate participatory practices
students are to appropriate if they are to succeed in traditional discursive regimes of mathematical literacy.

Discussion
          The two design studies reported in this paper share an important feature. Each, at one level or another,
manifested aberration from a norm--aberrations that in retrospect proved serendipitous to the emergent research
program of understanding tensions between pedagogical objectives and their realization as individual learning
processes. In the first study, when students working on an assigned activity unsuspectingly instrumentalized
what was in fact a bug in the learning tools, the aberration was at the level of the implementation of the design.
In the second study, when students engaged in an activity sequence that enabled them to fully instrumentalize
new procedures only once they had created an artifact, the aberration was at the level of the design product. The
respective breakdowns that these aberrations created in each case provide opportunities to comment on layers of
complexity   in   the  analysis  and  expository  explication   of  design-based    research  practice.   In particular, we
highlight three insights into the relations among researchers, artifacts, and learners emerging from our respective
investigations and guiding our ongoing efforts in design research:
- Designed artifacts as resources for examining links between individual and social dimensions of learning.
Tool-mediated learning is a complex phenomenon involving multiple `agents' and unfolding over time through
rapid feedback loops. As designers whose craft focuses on the creation of objects, activities, and facilitation
guidelines, we elect to address this complexity by orienting our view toward the data through the lens of the
artifacts we    create   and research.  These   artifacts are   individual-cum-social    pivots,  because    their potential
interactivities   embody     the  designer's pedagogical    philosophy     and  conceptual      construction,   while   their
deployment in the learning environment frames and supports students' conceptualization of the target content
matter.
- Aligning designer and learner objectives. The design researcher is, in a sense, constructing an understanding of
the students'   construction    of  understanding of  the  content   matter. This   reflexivity suggests   shared  learning
processes  between     the student-toward-content    and  the   researcher-toward-student     (see Lesh   &  Kelly,  2000).
Moreover, these parallel learning processes do not occur in isolation, because as the researcher understands the
learning process, s/he can intervene in students' learning processes, e.g., by rapidly modifying the design. Thus,
the better the researcher understands the student's learning process, the more effective the student's learning
process could be. Our approach elevates students' intentionality on par with that of designers' and examines
implications of this equivalence: (a) The designer creates artifact-mediated activities intended to entrain student
facility  with  a  target  conceptual  system--students'    new    understandings    are   to emerge   through    successful
problem-solving      that necessarily  engages  the  artifacts; (b)  The   student, often  oblivious  to  the  well-defined
curricular objectives, attempts to successfully utilize the available artifacts in solving the given problems. In this
juxtaposition of the designer's and the students' intentionalities, students' conceptualization of the problem at
hand, the nature of the artifacts, and relations between the artifacts and the problem all factor in the potential
convergence of students' experiences upon the designer's intention.
- Aberrations as serendipitous occasions of insight into designed learning. The designer shapes the student's
learning process, and in that capacity the designer may introduce into the learning process elements that are
objectively  non-normative.      This  introduction  of non-normative      elements  may    be  intentional,  as   when  the
designer follows a methodical domain analysis resulting in a design rationale that differs from the norm. But the
introduction of an aberration might be unintentional, as when an error in a computer-based procedure causes the
learning  artifacts   to  behave   unexpectedly.  In both  these    cases, however,    the  students  may    be  completely
oblivious to the non-normative elements of the design, essentially because they do not have the retrospective

                                                                                                                                1-
       content   knowledge   that would   sensitize  them  to this  aberration.  These  breakdowns     in the  design--whether
       intentionally differing from normative facilitation or inadvertently introducing faulty tools--give us pause: We
       have opportunity to acknowledge tacit structure underlying the robustness of historical learning artifacts, and we
       have  also  context  for  appreciating  parallels  in researcher  learning   and student  learning    and,   thus, we   can
       leverage the learning we experience through creating the learning tools to pin down and respond to critical
       aspects of the learners' experiences and needs.

      Conclusions
                 We have both found the separation of an artifact and its potential object-oriented activities useful in
       accounting for non-normative learning trajectories observed in our research data and particularly in attending to
       analytical challenges posed by breakdowns in the alignment of learner and researcher intentionality. We see
       such aberrations as intrinsic to the design-research process and as key resources for the contribution of this
       process to theories of learning. As designers, we are in a privileged position to apprehend and analyze these
       aberrations, because we are sensitized to the underlying normative structure from which they depart. We hope
       that by   demonstrating    the  utility of   the  instrumental  genesis  model   for  examining    ostensibly    disparate
       phenomena     in our  respective   studies,  we  have indicated  a potentially   broad domain    of   application    of this
       theoretical framework to design-based research. At the same time, we also believe the value of attending to
       breakdowns extends beyond the purview of design research. Opportunities for observing these dimensions of
       learner interaction with learning artifacts are as much a consequence of the design researcher's humility with
       regard to the completeness of the design as of necessarily emergent characteristics of the design itself. By token
       of anticipating imperfections in designed artifacts and environments, design-based research exonerates students
       from complete responsibility for the success or failure of the learning process. We believe that a certain level of
       this skepticism toward design can and should be carried over to the examination of `finished' learning tools.

      Endnotes
       (1)  This collaborative paper is the result of equivalent contributions from both authors
       (2)  The canonical analogy to the insights-through-breakdown that we experience in our analyses are optical
            illusions, which reveal tacit mechanisms of perceptual construction determining an individual's contextual
            meaning for objects. As long as the machine is working smoothly, it or its parts may remain invisible, yet
            aberration from the plan foregrounds the infrastructure of the phenomenon, thus enabling its appropriation
            (cf. Koschmann    et  al., 1998,   for a discussion of  `breakdown,'    a fundamental   construct    in the Learning
            Sciences).

      References
       Abrahamson,      D., Bryant,    M. J.,  Howison,    M.   L., &   Relaford-Doyle,   J.  J. (2008,    March).    Toward     a
                 phenomenology     of   mathematical    artifacts:  A  circumspective   deconstruction    of   a design   for  the
                 binomial. Paper presented at the annual conference of the American Educational Research Association,
                 New York, March 24-28.
       Abrahamson, D., & Wilensky, U. (2007). Learning axes and bridging tools in a technology-based design for
                 statistics. International Journal of Computers for Mathematical Learning, 12(1), 23-55.
       Artigue,   M. (2002).    Learning    mathematics   in  a    CAS  environment:    The   genesis  of    a   reflection about
                 instrumentation  and   the dialectics  between    technical and conceptual   work.  International    Journal   of
                 Computers for Mathematical Learning, 7(3), 245-274.
       Brousseau, G. (1997). Theory of didactical situations in mathematics. Boston: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
       diSessa, A. A., & Cobb, P. (2004). Ontological innovation and the role of theory in design experiments. The
                 Journal of the Learning Sciences, 13(1), 77-103.
       Hutchins, E. (2005). Material anchors for conceptual blends. Journal of Pragmatics, 37(10), 1555-1577.
       Koschmann,    T., Kuuti,   K.,  &  Hickman,    L. (1998).   The concept   of breakdown    in Heidegger,      Leont'ev,  and
                 Dewey and its implications for education. Mind, Culture, and Activity, 5(1), 25-41.
       Lesh, R. A., & Kelly, A. E. (2000). Multitiered teaching experiments. In A. E. Kelly & R. A. Lesh (Eds.),
                 Handbook of research design in mathematics and science education (pp. 197-230). Mahwah, NJ: LEA.
       Trouche,   L. (2004).    Managing     the   complexity of    human/machine     interactions  in computerized       learning
                 environments. International Journal of Computers for Mathematical Learning, 9(3), 281-307.
       Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1974). Judgment under uncertainty. Science, 185(4157), 1124-1131.
       Vérillon, P., & Rabardel, P. (1995). Cognition and artifacts: A contribution to the study of thought in relation to
                 instrumented activity. European Journal of Psychology of Education, 10(1), 77-101.
       White, T. (in press). Debugging an artifact, instrumenting a bug: Dialectics of instrumentation and design in
                 technology-rich   learning    environments.    International   Journal  of   Computers      for    Mathematical
                 Learning.

1-
