    Cognitive Complexity in Mathematics Teaching and Learning:
                Emerging Findings in a Large-Scale Experiment
                   Jeremy Roschelle, SRI International, Menlo Park CA USA, jeremy.roschelle@sri.com
                                Nicole Shechtman, SRI International, Menlo Park CA USA
                              Stephen Hegedus, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth USA
                                      Jessica Pierson, University of Texas at Austin USA
                      Michelle McLeese, Virginia Polytechic Institute, Blacksburg VA USA
                        Deborah Tatar, Virginia Polytechic Institute, Blacksburg VA USA

         Abstract: Many Learning Sciences projects use technology to enhance the cognitive richness
         of teaching and learning, although few projects investigate the robustness of their approaches
         across a  wide   variety  of  teachers    and classrooms.    Our  Scaling   Up   SimCalc     project   has
         completed experiments in which over a hundred mathematics teachers in 7th or 8th grade used
         either SimCalc   or  their   existing materials.   We  found   that  students of   teachers   who    used
         SimCalc learned more. In this paper, we look specifically at the issue of cognitive complexity
         through a case study of two teachers, contextualizing the case study within aggregate data.
         Aspects   of the theme    of cognitive    complexity   can  be seen  in (a)  student   performance     on
         different types  of  test items (b)   teachers' report  of  their own   daily teaching  goals      and (c)
         discourse patterns in different classrooms. Although this analysis is preliminary, it reveals the
         potential of  understanding   Learning    Science-based     interventions  more   fully by    combining
         large-scale and case study data.

Introduction
         Many    Learning  Sciences    projects  use   interactive technology    to enhance   teaching      and learning. A
common goal of this work is to increase students' opportunity to learn important, difficult concepts in science
and mathematics.     Further, a common      approach    is  to draw   upon   the new   representational     affordances   of
technology,   including visualization,  simulation,    and  modeling.   Although    such  work   has   been  underway     for
many years, most projects work with just a few schools. Some important exceptions include Linn et al (2006),
who found that "interactive visualizations combined with online inquiry and embedded assessments can deepen
student understanding of complex ideas in science" across 16 schools in 5 states and Songer (2007), who carried
out a deliberate program of research aimed at sustaining the "Kids as Global Scientists" program across a large,
poor, urban area. These projects address science learning (see also Dede, Honan, & Peters, 2005; Schneider &
McDonald,     2007).  To  our  knowledge,      our Scaling   Up    SimCalc   project   is the   first random    assignment
experiment to examine a Learning Sciences-based approach in mathematics learning in more than 20 schools.
         Ann Brown, a founder of the Learning Sciences, brought to our attention one important reason to study
our approaches at scale: in the field, approaches can undergo "lethal mutations" which distort the designers'
intent and  undermine    the  mechanisms     which   lead   to enhanced    teaching  and   learning    (Brown,   1991).   In
mathematics   education,  the  TIMSS     international   comparison    video  studies  revealed  an    important    class of
potentially lethal mutations  (Hiebert   et al., 2003).  In particular, the  TIMSS    research   found  that    teachers can
modulate the cognitive complexity of the tasks offered to students in mathematics classes. In the United States,
which has only average performance on TIMSS, teachers tend to do the more complex and conceptual parts of
mathematical problems themselves, and tend to give students the simpler, more factual and procedural aspects.
Teachers  in  high performing   Asian    countries,  on  the   other hand,  give students   more  responsibility     for  the
complex aspects of mathematical tasks. This is not merely a cultural difference; research in Chicago found that
students learn  more  when    they receive  more   demanding     intellectual assignments    from     their teachers (Bryk,
Nagaoka,    & Newmann,    2001).    Similarly  in  Pittsburg,  Stein  and  colleagues     found that   students  developed
increased conceptual understanding of the mathematics in schools where teachers faithfully implemented more
challenging problems (Stein, Grover, & Henningsen, 1996). Over-simplifying tasks thus could be an important
(although not necessarily lethal) mutation for many Learning Sciences-based approaches; it could reduce the
students' opportunities for rich cognitive engagement. Within our Scaling Up SimCalc project, therefore, we
collected multiple measures relating to the cognitive complexity of both teaching and learning. Consequently,
we examine variability in implementation and analyze the degree to which they increase or decrease learning.
         In this paper, we report some emerging findings on the issue of cognitive complexity in mathematics
teaching and learning, looking across different scales of our research and using multiple measures. In particular,
we look both at aggregate data for 95 teachers and at a case study of two teachers. In the aggregate data, we find
that students in SimCalc classrooms learned more and that, in particular, the gains occurred on the "complex"
portion of our assessment, not on the "simple" portion. Further, the aggregate data shows that students learned

                                                         1                                                                      2-2
         more when their teachers reported cognitively complex teaching goals. In the case study data, we look at a
         teacher whose students had highest learning gains, compared to a teacher with average gains. These teachers
         were selected from a pool of four teachers in case studies and we focus on these two teachers only because there
         data was analyzed first. In ongoing work, not available at the time of this writing, we will also look at teachers
         whose classrooms had lower performance. Given that we do not yet have a full spectrum of case study data
         available, our findings are necessarily tentative. Further, a limitation of our instruments is that they were not
         designed to capture a singular construct of "cognitive complexity" ­ as the famous Indian parable goes each
         "touches  different parts   of the elephant"    (see http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Blind_Men_and_an_Elephant).
         Nonetheless, we see an important contribution taking shape in the relationships we can begin to see between
         teachers' goals, teachers' discourse moves, and student performance on more complex and simpler test items.
         We  can  also  show  that  some  less-than-ideal teaching  moves   do   not  eliminate the  benefit  of the   SimCalc
         intervention we tested; teaching discourse moves have a bounded impact on student learning gains.

       Overview of the Scaling Up SimCalc Project
                  The   long-term  mission of  the SimCalc  research  group,    based at  the  James J. Kaput    Center  at the
         University  of Massachusetts,  Dartmouth   and   extending to   colleagues  in  many  locations,  is to "democratize
         access to the mathematics of change and variation" (Kaput, 1994). Key concepts in this strand of mathematics,
         which stretches from late elementary school through university courses, concern the mathematical analysis of
         rate and accumulation. These and additional related concepts in the strand are centrally important in much of
         science, technology,  engineering  and    mathematics  in secondary    school   and   beyond.  Early  SimCalc    work
         employed   design  research techniques  to develop   SimCalc   MathWorlds    software.  This   software  presents  the
         concepts of rate and accumulation in the context of animated motions, which may be controlled by linear and
         piecewise linear functions. Students can edit these functions in graphs with a mouse (or edit traditional algebraic
         symbols) and can execute the functions to see resulting animated motions. The software was always intended to
         be  used  in   conjunction  with  curriculum    materials  that develop     the  concept   of  rate  across   multiple
         representations, including verbal, graphical, symbolic and tabular representations. As the project matured, an
         increasing focus was on the teacher professional development needed to support teachers in appropriate use of
         the integrated curriculum and software.
                  The Scaling Up SimCalc project, led by SRI International, focused on the research question: "Can a
         wide variety of teachers use an integration of curriculum, software, and professional development to increase
         student learning of complex and conceptually difficult mathematics?" The Scaling Up SimCalc project designed
         and conducted a series of large-scale experiments. This paper uses data from the first year of the 7th grade
         experiment. (The 7th grade experiment continued for an additional year and a separate 8th grade experiment was
         also conducted.) The 7th grade experiment compared students whose teachers used a 2-3 week replacement
         curriculum   unit called  "Managing   the  Soccer  Team"     with students   whose    teachers used   their   ordinary
         curriculum unit for the same topics. Teachers who used Managing the Soccer Team were trained in the use of
         the unit in  the  summer   before  implementation.   The  unit  itself is deeply  integrated   with  representational
         affordances SimCalc MathWorlds software; the text asks students to open particular software documents and
         most of the activities in the paper curriculum require students to edit and animate representations.
                  The experiment was conducted in Texas. We selected Texas because it is a large and varied state and
         has a stable and well-aligned system of standards in mathematics instruction. Further, our partner in Texas, the
         Charles A. Dana Center had the ability to reach teachers across the state and had a long-term commitment to
         increasing the number of students who enroll in AP Calculus, a course that occurs later in students' progression
         on  the mathematics  of  change   and variation  strand. We  worked    with  the Dana   Center   to  recruit  volunteer
         teachers in 8 regions of Texas representing varied demographic conditions..
                  Teachers   were  randomly  assigned to  either  use SimCalc    in  the first year or  to use   their ordinary
         curriculum materials in the first year and then use SimCalc materials in the second year. All teachers first went
         to a 2-day TEXTEAMS workshop, which introduces the concepts of rate and proportionality across multiple
         representations, giving all teachers good quality preparation for the topics we intended to measure. The SimCalc
         teachers stayed an additional three days to learn how to use the SimCalc materials. We collected several sources
         of data related to the theme of cognitive complexity. The student pre- and post-tests were designed to have both
         a "simple" and "complex" scale, corresponding to mathematics requiring simpler numeric computations and
         tasks requiring more elaborate analysis of functions across representations. Teachers were asked to complete a
         daily teaching log, which in part asked them to rate the cognitive complexity of their teaching goals. Further, we
         conducted case studies with a subset of teachers; for some of these cases, we can look at the same lesson as
         taught by different teachers.

       Aggregate Data

2-22                                                           2
         We first consider the issue of cognitive complexity using aggregate data from the 95 teachers who
completed the study reported more substantially in (Roschelle et al., 2007). The subsequent section presents
case study data for two teachers.

Main Effect Findings: Gains on "Complex" Test Items
         With a   panel of                mathematicians     and  mathematics  education   experts, we  developed   an  assessment
blueprint encompassing both simple and more complex aspects of rate and proportionality. The simpler items
were based on items used on the Texas state test for seventh grade; these typically ask students to calculate
using  a proportional relationship                 stated either  as a word  problem   or  more  mathematically.   For example,  a
problem we will later refer to as the "car of the future" problem asked:

         A car of the future will be able to travel 8 miles in 2 minutes.
         How far will it be able to travel in 5 minutes?

         Our expert panel also viewed proportionality as the basis of the first nontrivial function, f(x) = kx, that
students learn in their multiyear journey through the mathematics of change and variation ­ the mathematical
strand that continues through                 high  school   calculus. In preparation  for  future mathematics    and science, they
argued that students should learn to analyze this function across representations, including graphs, tables, and
symbolic   expressions. An                  item addressing  this  more   complex  approach   asks  students   to complete  several
missing x and y values in a table describing a proportional function, then to write an algebraic expression for the
function, and finally to sketch a graph of it.
         Our expert panel also asked us to be sure to address common mathematical misconceptions. Hence, one
item  (see Figure 1)  targeted                a  common    misconception    about  position graphs:   that the intersection of two
graphed lines on a position vs. time graph indicates when two objects are moving at the same speed. The correct
concept is that slope indicates speed, so that two objects have the same speed when their graphed lines have
parallel slopes. We   included                this  complex   item   because  interpreting  slope  as a rate   and connecting  this
representation to a narrative description of change over time is an important skill in all sciences: analysis of
motion in physics, and interpreting rates of reaction in chemistry and rates of growth in biology are some of the
many topics for which this concept is used.

         A car and a truck are driving along a 10-mile road. The graph below shows their distance
         from the starting point over a 10 minute period.

                                         10
                                          9
                                          8
                                          7
                                          6
                                                                                                         Truck
                                          5
                                                                                                         Car
                                          4
                                          3
                                          2
                                          1
                                          0
                                            0    1    2    3    4    5    6    7    8    9   10

                                                              Time (Minutes)

         When are the car and truck traveling at the same speed?
              A.     Between 1 and 4 minutes
              B.     At 2 minutes
              C.     Between 4 and 6 minutes
              D.     Between 6 and 8 minutes

                                         Figure 1. An item which tests for the concept of slope as rate.

         The overall 30-item test included 11 simple and 19 complex items. We carried out rigorous validation
processes on the test, including cognitive interviews with students, item response theory analyses on field test
data collected from a large sample of students, and expert panel reviews.

                                                                     3                                                                 2-2
                        Distance (Miles)
                 Our main effect was statistically significant and showed that students in the Treatment group learned
         more (see Figure 2 and Roschelle et al. 2007 for the primary discussion of these results). The overall effect size
         was 0.84, considered large in education studies (t(93) = 9.1, P < 0.0001, using a two-level hierarchical linear
         model with students nested within teacher). The difference between the groups occurred mostly on the complex
         portion of the test. The effect size of treatment on this portion was 1.22 (t(93) = 10.0, P < 0.0001). The effect
         size of the treatment on the simple portion was 0.17 (t(93) = 1.8, P < 0.072, n.s.); many students had mastered
         these concepts  before   the unit  began, suggesting a   ceiling effect. Because   this data was    analyzed in a
         hierarchical linear model, the statistical procedures yield an estimate of the variance at the teacher or classroom
         level vs. the variance at the student level. Only 21% of the "complex" portion and 18% of the total test score is
         accounted for by variance at the teacher or classroom level, suggesting that teachers had a limited ability to
         influence student learning with SimCalc, whether for better or worse, at least in the first year of implementation.
                 Because the SimCalc-related gains were predominantly realized on the "complex" portion of the test, it
         makes sense to further explore the issue of cognitive complexity within this data set.

                    Figure 2. Student gain scores aggregated by teacher. Mean (± SE of total) difference scores
                                                 on the 30-item student assessment.

        Analysis of Simple and Complex Test Items
                 One way in which we further examined the nature of this finding was to look within the test at the
         particular items on which students in SimCalc classrooms exhibited strong gains. On the "car of the future"
         problem described above, approximately 75% of the students got the question right at pretest, suggesting that
         the item is pretty easy for many students, even before instruction on proportionality. After instruction (using
         either SimCalc or their existing curriculum) student performance was over 80%, but this gain is not statistically
         significant. This item is not trivial. However, it can be solved in a commonsensical way if students observe that
         in 4 minutes the car will go twice as far, covering 16 miles. Then the car goes for 1 more minute and would only
         go half as far, 4 miles. 16 + 4 is 20 miles, the correct answer. Many students are competent with reasoning about
         "half as much" and "twice as much" years before 7th grade, making this a fairly simple item. Alternatively, the
         item can be solved procedurally, by setting up a proportional relationship and using the cross-multiplication
         procedure; this procedure    is commonly  taught in  7th grade instruction.  This item  was  fairly typical of the
         "simple" items in our assessment in that students are given 3 numbers and asked to compute a missing number.
                 In contrast, on the item represented in Figure 1, student performance at pretest was around 23%, which
         is slightly worse than random guessing would produce. We argue that students find this item more difficult
         because it requires knowledge that goes beyond the arithmetic skills that predominate the early years of school.
         The target concept comparison of "speed" requires identifying a quantity which is not directly given by the
         representation. Instead it must be inferred from the slope of the line, which requires conceptual understanding of
         the meaning of the slope. Further, there is a significant perceptual distracter ­ the point of intersection. Indeed,
         most  students did not  guess   randomly  on the pre-test: most  chose   answer (b), which   represents the  target
         misconception. On the posttest, 55% of students who had been in classrooms using SimCalc got the item right, a
         statistically significant gain. In comparison, only 38.5% of students in non-SimCalc classrooms got the item
         right at posttest and more students (55%) chose the misconception-based distracter, answer (b).
                 The    contrast between   these two  items reflects the  distinction in our    assessment rubric between
         "simple" items in which students are given 3 or 4 numbers and must compute an unknown value and more
         "complex" items in which students must use conceptual understanding of how functions describe rates across

2-2                                                           4
multiple representations, often including graphs. In the case of the item in Figure 1, the function is represented
in a graph and must be related to the verbal concept of "speed."

Teacher Self-Report of Teaching Goals
        We   asked    teachers  in the study  to  complete   a teaching    log after each   day of  instruction. The   log
included a scale that asked teachers to rate their degree of focus for the day's class on goals of low cognitive
complexity   (memorization   and   use  of  routine  procedures)   and   high  cognitive  complexity     (communicating
conceptual   understanding;     making     mathematical    connections     and  solving   nonroutine     problems;   and
conjecturing, generalizing, or proving). This scale was based upon a previously validated scale (Porter, 2002).
        For  high-order   goals,   in both  studies, Treatment    teachers (versus   Control)  reported  a stronger  daily
focus (t(93) = 2.3, P < 0.05) and there was an overall positive statistical association between teachers' report of
more complex goals and student gain on the complex math subscales (P < 0.0001). For lower-order goals, non-
SimCalc    teachers reported a  stronger   daily  focus (t(93) =  3.1, P <  0.01),   and there  was an   overall negative
statistical association with classroom mean student gain on the complex math subscale (P<0.05). Figure 2 shows
a scatter plot of the association between a teacher's self-report of cognitive complexity of their teaching goals
(horizontal axis) and the mean student learning gain in a teacher's classroom. When teachers report cognitively
complex    teaching goals their  students   learn more  regardless  of  condition   (although   students in the  SimCalc
condition, represented by the symbol "x" in Figure 3 learned more overall).

           Figure 3. Teachers who reported more complex teaching goals had stronger classroom learning gains.

Case Study Data
        In the context of her dissertation research, Jessica Pierson (a co-author of this paper) further analyzed
discourse in SimCalc classrooms (Pierson, in progress). Discourse analysis is an important Learning Sciences
methodology   and   has the  potential  to  yield a  thicker description of how    cognitive   complexity   is enacted in
SimCalc    classrooms.  Pierson    selected teachers  and    performed  her  case   studies before  the    aggregate data
reported above was available. Two case study teachers, code-named "Mary" and "Nancy" are discussed below.
These teachers were selected, in particular, because we had a video tape of each teaching the same lesson (both
used SimCalc). Both teachers taught in small cities in Texas and had over 20 years of experience. They both had
classrooms in which most students were white and about 1/3 were Hispanic. Mary's class had pre-test scores
that were approximately at the mean of all classrooms in the study; Nancy had students who scored about 1.5
test items above the mean (out of 30 total items). Pierson (2007) described her overall impressions of the two
classrooms as follows:
        Mary   framed     discussions   using core    mathematical     concepts  to  organize   the lesson's   trajectory.
Discussions  had    a sense  of cohesion,   and   procedures   and  formulas   were   introduced    as a natural  part of
answering central questions related to the big ideas of speed and rate. She probed their thinking and allowed
their observations and conjectures to be the impetus for further class discussion. She also encouraged students to
test their thinking,  reasoning,   and  problem   solving    with one  another.  Nancy    was   more   task-oriented  and
preferred to present mathematics as a series of small, manageable tasks and calculations.
        As it turned out, Mary's students displayed the greatest learning gains of any classroom in the study;
her classroom's gain from pre-test to post-test was more than two standard deviations above the norm. Nancy's
students had above average gains, although within a standard deviation of the mean.

                                                         5                                                                   2-2
        Discourse Analysis: Teacher Follow-Up of Student Responses
                  Because classroom discourse is broad and complex, Pierson focused on one aspect of discourse and its
         relationship to students' opportunities to learn: teacher follow-up of student responses. In particular, Pierson
         focused on the "prospectiveness" of teacher moves in the final slot of a traditional initiation-response-evaluation
         pattern. Instead of an evaluation (e.g. "good" or "that's right") that ends the sequence, a teacher can use the slot
         to encourage students to elaborate or extend their thinking. A move that uses the student response to drive the
         discussion forward   is  more  "prospective"  ­   it  anticipates that students  are  capable  of  more  extended
         argumentation and deeper thinking.
                  Pierson  (2007) found   that Mary    had more   prospective   moves   than  Nancy.  Whereas   Mary   used
         students' responses in giving or demanding more information, Nancy tended to merely "rebroadcast" the student
         response. Not surprisingly, turn-taking sequences on a topic were longer in Mary's class (average of 13.5 moves
         per sequence) than Nancy's class (average of 7.5 moves per sequence).
                  It is particularly interesting to observe the following dialog (from Nancy's class), which reflects the
         lesson in the unit that most directly relates to the misconception captured in the item in Figure 1. In this lesson,
         students are comparing   the trips of a bus and   car as represented   in graphs that look similar to  Figure 1; in
         addition, during the lesson students can animate the functions and observe the corresponding motions.

         Turn     Speaker      Text
                               Sequence 34
         150      Teacher      Can you see when you replay the simulation when the bus started to slow down?
         151      Student      Yes.
         152      Teacher      Right before it got to the end, correct? Ok at what?
         153      Student      140.
                               Sequence 35
         154      Teacher      Ok. So now let me ask you some questions. What, how long did it take them for this
                               trip? Raise your hand. How long did it take em for this trip? Chris.
         155      Chris        Three hours.
         156      Teacher      How do you know it went three hours?
         157      Chris        Cuz it ends, the line ends at three.
         158      Teacher      Very good, cuz the line for the bus or the van?
         159      Mult S's     Both.
         160      Teacher      Both end at what?
         161      Mult S's     Three hours.
         162      Teacher      Three hours. So you know it took them three hours.
                               Sequence 36
         163      Teacher      Was the speed of the two vehicles the same?
         164      Mult S's     No.
         165      Teacher      No. You know that by how?
         166      Student      They're not the same.
         167      Teacher      Because of the (pause) graph right? And because of also running the simulation. They
                               didn't stay right beside each other, did they?
                               Sequence 37
         168      Teacher      Ok, umm, how far did they go in 3 hours? Raise your hand. How far did they go in
                               three hours? Charles?
         169      Charles      ** (unintelligible)
         170      Teacher      How'd you know that?
         171      Charles      **
         172      Teacher      180 miles where? (pause - no student response).     On the graph, right?
                               Sequence 38
         173                   Ok. And let's see if you can calculate the speed. Go through, run your simulation and
                               see if you can calculate the speed for the van and then calculate the speed for the bus
                               and then also calculate the speed for the bus when it started to slow down since you
                               guys have told me it started to slow down.
                                          Table 1. Discourse Excerpt from Nancy's Class

                  Sequences 34-38 were orchestrated to accomplish the teacher's goal of calculating the speeds for the
         van and bus. Notice that this larger goal was not mentioned to the students until the last sequence (see Turn
         173). Instead, it remained hidden in a series of loosely-related questions (from the students' perspective) that
         identified the necessary components for calculating speed. Additionally, as seen in this excerpt, little control or
         responsibility is given  to  the students  as the  teacher  generated     and controlled the topic  of discussion.

2-2                                                            6
Conversation was tightly scripted with little room for student ideas to shape the discussion. It is as if Nancy had
a predetermined path that she was leading her students down: she may have heard their responses but did not
incorporate them substantially into the flow of the lesson. In fact, there was very little of substance for her to
incorporate since  students'  roles were   limited to paying   attention,  performing   basic   calculations, recalling
formulas, and answering yes/no or short-answer questions.
         In contrast, in  the discussion   of the  same  graph    in Mary's  classroom,   one   student  thought  two
piecewise linear  functions  depicted different routes  for two   vehicles instead   of different speeds.  Instead of
correcting her, Mary let the class struggle with this interpretation (the sequence was 54 moves long) asking the
student first to explain her reasoning and then providing her classmates the opportunity to share their thinking.

Supporting Data from Additional Measures and Analyses
         Because Mary and Nancy were two of the 95 teachers in the larger study and because several kinds of
analyses are taking place, we have additional data about these two teachers. As mentioned both teachers had
many years   of experience   and taught  in schools   that are similar  in many   respects.   Nancy's students   were
"smarter" although Mary had a smaller class.
         Although Pierson was not aware of this when choosing the cases or analyzing the discourse data, the
teachers differed in their goals and level of mathematical knowledge. Mary reported more complex teaching
goals than Nancy. Indeed, in the graph in Figure 3, she is represented by the top-right "x." Nancy chose higher-
than-average values on the Likert scales for cognitively complex teaching goals, but she also chose higher-than-
average values on the scales for simple teaching goals, suggesting that she tried to balance between simple and
complex teaching goals. On the test of "Mathematical Knowledge for Teaching" given to all teachers at the
beginning of the study, Mary got a higher than average score and Nancy got a lower than average score. This
suggests that Mary knew the mathematics covered in the SimCalc replacement unit better than Nancy did. We
would conjecture that knowing more mathematics and adopting more complex teaching goals are related to and
supportive of the discourse style that Mary adopted.
         It is interesting to analyze the performance of students in Mary and Nancy's classroom on the "slope as
rate" problem portrayed in Figure 1, as the discourse analyzed by Pierson related directly to this problem. In the
overall data set, 55% of students who used SimCalc and 38.5% of students who used their ordinary curriculum
got this item right on the post-test. In Mary's class, 67% of the students got this problem right ­ a better-than-
average performance. In Nancy's class, only 35% of the students got the problem right and almost twice as
many chose the misconception-based distracter.
         Nancy's   students  did gain  more   than   Mary's  students   (and more    than students   in   the  average
classroom) on the "simple" portion of our test; thus her focus on cognitively simple tasks apparently did have a
pay-off. Yet, we wonder if it was worth it. Recall that Nancy's started out with a higher-than-average classroom
pretest. This suggests her students were likely ready for more complex mathematics and could have learned
more if  presented  with  an  appropriate   opportunity to  learn.   This  raises the   classic teaching  problem  of
"diminishing returns" for a continued focus on skills that many students already know well.
         Any  conclusions   drawn   from this data  can only   be preliminary, as  there  is  much  more  data  under
analysis. Another crosscutting analysis undertaken by sociology graduate student Michelle McLeese at Virginia
Tech (another   co-author of  this  paper) also picked  out Mary     as an unusual   teacher  based on   her  teaching
behavior, starting from a different perspective. Mary was one of four teachers out of 24 teachers observed to
explicitly mention Willie Nelson's song "On the Road Again" in teaching the unit called "On the Road." Willie
Nelson is an iconic Texas figure and this song can be expected to be well known by the students. Of the four
teachers, she was the only one to engage in substantial elaboration of this relationship; she wrote a song for the
class. One way of conceiving Mary's success is that it reflects a kind of mathematical opportunitism, which can
lead to cognitively complex goals and to prospective interactions as well as elaboration of meaningful contexts.
         Nancy's and Mary's classrooms represent only two of large set of teachers being studied in case studies
from several perspectives. We have additional interview data for all teachers. Further, we will later consider
teachers with classrooms with below-average pretest scores or below-average gains. In addition, we have data
from both Nancy and Mary in a second year of implementation and Mary's second year class does not gain have
the top learning gains. However, in the second year, Mary's class started with a considerably higher pre-test
score (making it hard to replicate the gains) and reached a higher post-test score as well. This illustrates some of
the nuance that must be considered before reaching conclusions.

Discussion
         We have examined the issue of "cognitive complexity" across two different scales of data and many
several different measures   within a data  set that  presents a  "main   effect" of increasing   student learning of
complex mathematics. Although SimCalc has features in common with many other Learning-Sciences-based
approaches for increasing opportunities to learn rich content, few projects have an opportunity to triangulate on
the issue of cognitive complex from different scales of analysis and different data sources. Admittedly, we do

                                                      7                                                                    2-2
         not have   a   single definition  of  cognitive complexity   across  all measures    in our study.   We  have,   however,
         explained the definition in use in each measurement instrument in the study.
                  Although our findings are preliminary, a convergent story is emerging. Teachers may moderate the
         impact of an intervention like SimCalc by choosing cognitively complex teaching goals. These goals may then
         be  enacted  in   many  ways   in  the classroom.   One  difference in   enactment   may  be   in the prospectiveness  of
         teacher discourse moves in the "E" slot of the Initiate-Respond-Evaluate/Extend sequence. Other differences in
         enactment may relate to teacher's knowledge of mathematics and comfort in working through "misconceptions"
         with students. The effects of these differences may be most profound on test items that address deep-seated
         conceptual difficulties.
                  Overall, however, it is worth bearing in mind that only 21% of the variance in student learning gains on
         the complex portion of our test is accounted for at the teacher level. The rest of the variance is at the student
         level. In this paper, this is reflected in the fact that Nancy's students performed well despite some features of her
         teaching that may be less than ideal. Indeed, strength of the SimCalc intervention we studied is that students on
         a whole learn more with it, despite having a wide variety of teachers and classroom situations.            Our conclusion
         therefore   is not    simple.  First,  the SimCalc    intervention  (on   average)   enabled   students    learn complex
         mathematics better than their existing curriculum did. Second, teachers who reported more complex goals had a
         measurable but limited impact in modulating the degree to which students learned more complex mathematics,
         perhaps because of the way discourse was enacted in their classrooms.

       References
         Brown,   A.    (1991). Design   experiments.    Theoretical  and  methodological    challenges    in evaluating  complex
                  interventions in classroom settings. Journal of the Learning Sciences.
         Bryk, A. S., Nagaoka, J. K., & Newmann, F. M. (2001). Authentic Intellectual Work and Standardized Tests:
                  Conflict of Coexistence? : Consortium on Chicago School Research.
         Dede, C., Honan, J. P., & Peters, L. C. (Eds.). (2005). Scaling up success: Lessons learned from technology-
                  based educational improvement. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
         Hiebert, J., Gallimore, R., Garnier, H., Givvin, K. B., Hollingsworth, H., Jacobs, J., et al. (2003). Teaching
                  Mathematics      in   Seven  Countries:   Results From   the   TIMSS 1999      Video  Study.   Washington   DC:
                  National Center for Educational Statistics.
         Kaput,  J.  (1994).   Democratizing    access   to calculus: New   routes  using  old   roots. In  A.  Schoenfeld   (Ed.),
                  Mathematical thinking and problem solving (pp. 77-155). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
         Linn, M., Lee, H.-S., Tinker, R., Husic, F., & Chiu, J. L. (2006). Teaching and assessing knowledge integration
                  in science. Science, 313(August 25), 1049-1050.
         Pierson, J. (2007). The impact of moment-to-moment discourse moves on opportunities to learn mathematics.
                  Paper presented at the 29th Annual Conference of the North American Chapter of the International
                  Group for the Psychology of Mathematics Education, Lake Tahoe, Nevada.
         Pierson,  J. (in  progress).   The Relationship    Between   Teacher    Follow-up Moves   and     Mathematics    Learning.
                  Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Texas at Austin.
         Porter,  A.  C.   (2002). Measuring     the   content of   instruction: Uses in   research  and    practice. Educational
                  Researcher, 31(7), 3-14.
         Roschelle, J., Tatar, D., Shechtman, N., Hegedus, S., Hopkins, B., Knudsen, J., et al. (2007). Can a technology-
                  enhanced      curriculum  improve   student  learning of  important mathematics?      Results  from  7th  Grade,
                  Year 1 (No. 1). Menlo Park, CA: SRI International.
         Schneider, B., & McDonald, S.-K. (Eds.). (2007). Scale-up in Education: Issues in Practice (Vol. 2). New York:
                  Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, Inc.
         Songer,  N.    B. (2007). Rethinking    sustainability of  curricular   innovations: Notes   from    urban Detroit. In B.
                  Schneider & S.-K. McDonald (Eds.), Scale-up in education: Issues in practice (Vol. 2, pp. 165-182).
                  New York: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, Inc.
         Stein, M. K., Grover, B. W., & Henningsen, M. A. (1996). Building student capacity for mathematical thinking
                  and reasoning: An analysis of mathematical tasks used in reform classrooms. American Educational
                  Research Journal, 33(2), 455-488.

       Acknowledgments
         This material is based on work supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant No. 0437861. Any
         opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the authors and
         do  not necessarily    reflect the views   of the  National  Science    Foundation.  The  Scaling    Up SimCalc    Project
         required the contributions of a large and dedicated team and the participation of many teachers, school leaders
         and teacher educators. Although we cannot individually thank each person in this space, we are nonetheless
         grateful for his or her contributions.

2-2                                                                 8
