         Implementing what we know about learning in a middle-school
              curriculum for widespread dissemination:                                  The Project-Based
                                         Inquiry Science (PBIS) story
                              Janet L. Kolodner, Georgia Institute of Technology, jlk@cc.gatech.edu
                                   Mary L. Starr, University of Michigan, mlstarr@umich.edu
                                     Daniel Edelson, National Geographic, dedelson@ngs.org
                             Barbara Hug, University of Illinois at Urbana Champagne, bhug@uiuc.edu
                                     David Kanter, Temple University, dkanter@temple.edu
                                   Joseph Krajcik, University of Michigan, krajcik@umich.edu
                             Juliana A. Lancaster, Georgia Gwinnett College, jlancaster@ggc.usg.edu
                                   Thomas A. Laster, It's About Time, talaster@herffjones.com
                              Jennifer Leimberer, Northwestern University, leimberer@comcast.net
                                 Brian J. Reiser, Northwestern University, reiser@northwestern.edu
                             Michael T. Ryan, Georgia Institute of Technology, mryan@cc.gatech.edu
                             Rebecca Schneider, University of Toledo, RSchnei@UTNet.UToledo.Edu
                               LeeAnn M. Sutherland, University of Michigan, lsutherl@umich.edu
                                     Barbara Zahm, It's About Time, bzahm@herffjones.com

                  Abstract:   Project-Based Inquiry   Science  (PBIS)  is a   comprehensive  technology-enhanced
                  science curriculum for grades 6 through 8 (ages 12 ­ 14), designed based on foundations in
                  the learning sciences.  Most of its units were developed during the 1990's at Georgia Institute
                  of Technology,   Northwestern  University,  and  University   of Michigan.     Over the past five
                  years, researchers at  these  universities (and others)  have  been   working   to pull the  units
                  together into a curriculum that can be disseminated nationally (in the U.S.).      During the last
                  two years, we have been working closely with the publishing company, It's About Time, to
                  bring the curriculum to publication. We present the research foundations of PBIS along with
                  the pragmatics of incorporating individual units into an integrated curriculum appropriate that
                  addresses  the diverse requirements  of  50 states while  also addressing   the diverse needs  of
                  learners.

       Introduction
                  PBIS is a comprehensive 3-year science curriculum for middle school (grades 6 through 8; ages 12 ­
         14), designed based on foundations in the learning sciences.  It is comprised of 15 project units, 5 for each of the
         three science disciplines covered in the middle grades (earth, life, and physical sciences). It infuses software use
         for data mining and visualization, modeling, and simulation. Most of its units were developed during the 1990's
         at Georgia Institute of Technology, Northwestern University, and University of Michigan in the context of a set
         of learning sciences research projects (the Learning by Design project (e.g., Kolodner et al., 2003a) and the
         LeTUS endeavor (e.g., Edelson et al., 1999; Kanter et al., 2006; Krajcik et al., 1998)).    Since 2003, researchers
         at these universities (and others) have been working to pull together the units into a comprehensive science
         curriculum usable throughout the United States.   Since 2005, we have been working closely with the publishing
         company, It's About Time, to bring the curriculum to publication. Parts of the curriculum have been adopted by
         school systems; other parts are currently being piloted (tried out). We will have the full curriculum ready in the
         2008-2009 academic year.
                  When we began our collaboration, we expected that it would be time-consuming but straightforward to
         pull the units together into a curriculum. Conceptual foundations behind units developed in each of our research
         groups were  highly   compatible.  We    had  all done   extensive   materials development   in  collaboration with
         teachers who    piloted our units  in  their classrooms,    developed   professional  development    materials  and
         programming, and collected significant data about student learning (e.g., Kolodner et al., 2003; Kanter et al.,
         2006). Each of the research groups was committed to having students learn through inquiry sustained over many
         weeks of working on a compelling challenge or big question and having students engage in science the way
         scientists do ­ using the same kinds or reasoning and similar tools.      Two of our three groups designed our
         approaches based on the cognitive model implied by case-based reasoning (e.g., Kolodner, 1993; Schank, 1999).
         We all meant our units to be implemented through a cognitive apprenticeship (Collins et al., 1989). When we
         looked across the content of our units, we seemed to be covering most of the science content for middle school.
         We were excited that across our units, learners would experience a whole range of investigative methodologies
         used by  scientists (experimentation,  modeling,  simulation, data   mining)   and that we  had  the opportunity to
         foreground  systems  thinking,  varied roles of models   and modeling   in science,  and  explanation  construction

3-
across the sciences.
         But  we   were naïve  about    the work    that would    be  involved   in integrating our units  into  a cohesive
curriculum.   As   individual  units, each   covered     content   without  concern   about   integrating  that  unit  into a
curriculum that had to cover an entire three years of standards.           Each of our research groups had interpreted
project-based, inquiry, case-based reasoning, and other things differently, and each had called similar practices
by different names.   Units developed in the southern U.S. alluded to things that kids in the northern U.S. might
not have   experienced,   and  vice   versa.    We    found   that taking   locally-developed    curriculum    units  into  a
nationally-appropriate  coherently-organized     curriculum    was    more  challenging    that we  had imagined,    both   in
intellectual and logistical ways.
         In the process of our development activity, we have learned a lot about bridging the gap between a
researched-based   curriculum    design  and    the realities  of  middle   school   settings,  the marketplace,     and the
publishing industry. We have addressed challenges that have arisen in ways that have allowed us to keep our
basic design of 6-to-8 week units with sustained inquiry around a set of inter-related science concepts, covering
mandated   standards   while  maintaining    the story   line  of  each unit.  The   curriculum   implements    a  cognitive
apprenticeship  and   provides   foundations    for engaging   children    in  three years  of  knowledge     building (e.g.,
Scardamalia, 2002) as they participate in project-based inquiry science.             Our curriculum provides a coherent
view of  inquiry   across  all of   the units.   We   present  our    goals   in designing    PBIS, its   learning   sciences
foundations,  our  design    process and    the challenges    we   faced,  and   the framework     we've   devised   for our
integrated effort.

Our Goals in Designing the Project-Based Inquiry Science (PBIS) Curriculum
(and criteria and constraints we have had to meet)
         Overall, our goal in designing PBIS has been to contribute to creating a generation of citizens who
understand what it means to think like a scientist.      We want them to understand basic science content and have
experience using it to reason, to recognize the relevance of science to their live, and to know some science
deeply and to become curious about other science. We want them to see science as a systematic way of thinking,
a way of thinking that is always seeking the best understanding possible of phenomena, that questions why
things are happening and how trustworthy evidence is, and that uses trustworthy evidence to draw conclusions
and generate explanations.   We want learners to understand where evidence comes from and how systematic one
must be  to  collect  good   evidence.  We   want   them   to  recognize    that science   knowledge    is learned   through
investigation, is backed by evidence, and comes from trying to make sense of and synthesize across multiple
investigations. We want learners to appreciate the investigation and reasoning that goes into generating agreed-
upon science  knowledge      and to  recognize   that we  come     to know    new   things through  a cycle   of generating
questions,  investigating, collecting   evidence,   analyzing,    and  drawing   conclusions    based on   what   is already
known and the new data.      We aim to help learners move from novice ways of carrying out such reasoning to
more expert ways.
         There is controversy across states and school districts about whether to focus on depth or breadth, to
what extent to focus on content and on thinking like scientists, and how well students should be able to think
like scientists. In the US, management of education and educational requirements is done by states, and within
states, by school districts. Each school district decides how to cover the content mandated by their state, what
books to use, and how to train teachers. Standards in some states focus, as PBIS does, on depth over breadth
when "covering" content and on students coming to think like scientists.            Other states focus more on breadth of
content and less on students thinking like scientists. Within states, different school districts have preferences
about ways of covering their standards. We cannot expect every state or school district in the U.S. to have goals
consistent with those of our curriculum.     We do, however, want any school district that shares our philosophy to
be  able to  argue  for adopting    our  curriculum.      For  this,  we  have   had  to   be   cognizant  of the  coverage
requirements of different states and have had to make sure our materials provide breadth of coverage, for those
that need it, within the allotted time.
         This   great amount   of diversity  requires    great flexibility  in published   materials.   Some states cover
science in a disciplinary way ­ earth science in one grade, life science in another grade, and physical science in
another. Some cover in an integrated way ­ some of each of those curricula in each grade. Whichever approach,
topics can be covered in different grades, at different times during the year, and in different orders. Taking a
project-based approach means that our curriculum groups topics according to the ways they are needed to solve
a big question or challenge, often quite different than the taxonomic sequencing of topics curriculum leaders
may have developed.
         We have therefore had to design PBIS so that units can be done in different sequences, so that the same
unit might be used in 6th grade (age 12), 7th grade (age 13), or 8th grade (age 14), and so that they can be used in
schools with computers in each classroom and in schools with computers only in labs, in schools with plenty of
money for purchasing electronic equipment and in schools that do not have the money for that, in schools that
have money for producing copies of charts and in schools where students have to draw charts by hand on their

                                                                                                                                 3-
         own paper, and so on.    Some   school   districts offer more   days  of professional   development  to  teachers than
         others, and we have also had to design with this in mind. We have needed to take all of this diversity into
         account in addition to designing for the huge range of experiences and capabilities of teachers, learners, and
         cohorts of learners.
                   Given this wide diversity, it might seem that instead of a publishing textbooks, it would make more
         sense to publish units on the web with advice about how to adapt them to the needs of one's students, school, or
         state. The pragmatics of school and the realities of teaching as a profession argue against this.      School systems
         need the reliability of indestructible textbooks that they can order and receive in bulk.     Schools need to be able
         to easily order and receive resources for carrying out science activities. Even the most energetic teachers do not
         have time to create curriculum materials from pieces, and most middle-school teachers are not expert at the full
         range  of middle-school  science  topics. All of   this suggests  the   need to  partner with a  publisher in  creating
         curriculum materials and means of supply, that materials need to be constructed as books, and that curriculum
         materials and training for teachers need to be supplied hand in hand.

       Foundations in the Learning Sciences
                   PBIS is grounded in the principles of many different literatures.     From the cognitive literature (see, e.g.,
         Bransford et al., 1999), we focus on the need to help learners build mental models or schemas, the iterative
         nature of mental model construction, the need to tie the concrete and the abstract to each other well for transfer
         to occur, and the need for repeated deliberative practice (Ericsson, 1993).     In particular, we draw from the model
         suggested by case-based reasoning of processing learners need to do to extract rich mental models from their
         experiences and to label or index those schemas so that they can be recalled later, and the variety of experiences
         they need applying those schemas in new situations, explaining their failures, and debugging them (Schank,
         1999; Kolodner et al., 2003b).  PBIS sequencing is designed to help learners reflect on their experiences in ways
         that afford identifying lessons they might extract and provides multiple opportunities to apply what they are
         learning, identify what they still need to understand better, and get help with debugging their understanding. We
         also take very seriously the notion that learning can only happen on the edges of what we know (Bruner, 1966,
         Vygotsky, 1978).     For these reasons, PBIS sequencing includes activities that help students identify what they
         think they know, discuss these things to identify the things they disagree about, and generate questions.
                   The socio-cognitive  and  socio-cultural  literatures tell us the  importance  of  helping learners   identify
         roles  they might  play, feel  that they  have permission      to participate   in those ways,   value   those ways of
         participating, get practice participating, and feel ownership of the goals they are achieving and their ways of
         achieving them (see, e.g., Bandura, 2001; Cobb, 1996; Engle, 2002; Greeno, 2006; Holland et al., 1998; Lave &
         Wenger,   1991;   Wenger,   1998).   PBIS    consistently  treats  students   as   "student scientists," helping  them
         understand the relationship between what they are doing and what scientists do and providing them support they
         need to act as scientists would. PBIS's "laucher units" introduce learners to the roles they might play and the
         value in playing those roles (Kolodner, 2007).     PBIS not only has many venues for participating with others, but
         its student materials include support for participating effectively in those activities.  Repeated activity structures
         are introduced early on, and each time each is carried out, the student text helps students know what they should
         focus on both when actively participating (e.g., presenting) and when more passively participating (e.g., while
         listening).
                   The science education literature (e.g., Driver, 2000; Duschl, 2002; Herrenkohl, 1998) tells us what it
         means to do science and to treat children as students scientists.     The science education literature tells us what
         learners need help with (e.g., knowing what to talk about, help with carrying out what they are doing, good
         instructions for making things work); that explorations early on can help learners identify what they need to
         learn and make predictions; that combining exploration, prediction, investigations, explanation and application
         with each other can lead learners to see science as a system (refs). The Project-Based Science literature (see,
         e.g., Blumenfeld et al., 1991; Krajcik, et al., 1998) suggests that students should learn science through engaging
         in the same kinds of inquiry practices scientists use, in the context of scientific problems relevant to their lives,
         and using   tools authentic to science. Learning   by   Design  (Kolodner    et al., 2003a; Kolodner,    2007; Ryan &
         Kolodner, 2005), which derives from Problem-Based Learning (Koschmann et al., 1993), suggests sequencing,
         social practices, and reflective activities for promoting learning from design activities. The LBD team suggests
         ways of (i) getting middle-school children to engage in appropriate reflection; (ii) helping participants become
         comfortable   with sequences   of scientific practices;  (iii) how   to help  students   connect the phenomena    they
         experience to science content; and (iv) how to create a culture of collaborative learning and rigorous thinking in
         the classroom.

       Designing PBIS
                   PBIS's design has required all of the authors of this article and others.    Early on (2004), in our weekly
         work groups, we laid out foundational principles, then worked on specifics of creating a common "look and
         feel." Each unit would follow a pattern of, first, helping students understand and engage with the big question or

3-
challenge,  then a  variety  of "learning  sets" that  each focus   on a different    set of issues needing   coverage    to
address the challenge or question, and then a section to pull it all together.          We wanted each learning set to
engage learners in asking questions, pursuing answers, sharing answers, making meaning, and then applying
that meaning back to the big question or challenge. We then identified practices for each that would be included
in PBIS.    We also identified practices for maintaining continuity within each learning set and unit. We then
identified  templates  we   might   use  for  each that would    support student     and  teacher  success   and ways     of
organizing student texts so that students would recognize the purposes and sequencing in what they were doing.
Together with the publisher, we put together an advisory team to read every unit, keep track of what they were
covering   and what    they  could  cover,   and advise developers     about   how   to   revise their units to  fit into a
curriculum. Developers revised their units and handed in drafts.       Our advisory team became a development team
and made the next pass on writing each unit or worked with unit developers to make the next pass. We also
identified standards from 10 states that we covered and had missed. In 2005, we began piloting and field testing
the curriculum. At this point, new issues arose.    Not every unit worked within the framework we had developed.
Many units were missing sequencing. Others had big questions or challenges that students did not find engaging
enough   or could  not connect   to,  or that teachers  found   too hard to    carry out  in their classrooms.   We were
missing whole units. Units developed in some parts of the country were not as easy to use in other parts of the
country.   Units that were easy to cover when researchers were available to help were harder to enact when
teachers  had  only a  few  days   of professional  development     available.  All  of  the units were  missing     content
required by state standards. The work was too much for two people to do.          Our publisher began hiring writers ­
for revising the student texts and the teacher guides.
        We have learned a lot about bridging the gap between researched-based, theoretical curriculum design
and the realities of middle school settings, the marketplace, and the publishing industry.          We have had to find
creative solutions and guiding principles for realizing the goals of both entities without sacrificing needs of
either. We list below the challenges we have had to address in our design.
   x      Sustaining interest to enable sustained inquiry. It is often hard to help students maintain momentum
          through the long period of a unit.     It is often hard doe teachers to be excited about spending so much
          time on small sets of concepts. Yet we know how important sustained inquiry and iterative refinement
          of one's understanding are.
   x      Promoting reflection and articulation among middle school students. Doing is fun for children ages 12
          to 14; reflecting on what they have done to learn from their experiences is not as interesting.         Nor are
          teachers always confident about facilitating discussions that would lead learners to reflect in ways that
          are needed for learning.
   x      Promoting    development    of understanding   over    time: Repeated      deliberative  practice  to  learn  the
          practices of scientists. Iterative refinement of understanding and progressive development of reasoning
          capabilities are  central  in PBIS  but  the  ability to  facilitate such  development    is not  always   in the
          repertoires of teachers, who are used to students mastering content or capabilities before moving on.
   x      Managing scope and sequence in each unit. The units in PBIS each center around some big question or
          challenge designed to be personally-engaging for the students.         Each unit requires going deeply into
          some content and affords familiarity with other content.      But our units do not always cover everything
          about a topic in a unit. We have the challenge of maintaining an approach centered on an engaging
          question and providing coverage of topics at the same time.          It is quite difficult to cover all topics and
          maintain the flow and momentum of a challenge.
   x      Sequencing   units into   a curriculum.  This issue   was  presented   in  the  introduction.   Different states
          require topics to be covered in different years and at different times.

The Design of PBIS
          The result of our design work is a 3-year science curriculum made up of 15 units (see Table 1). But
PBIS is not merely a set of 15 project-based inquiry units. Central to PBIS's design is that students are put into
the role of "student scientist." Everything they do, and every decision we've made as designers, centers on this
notion.   Students learn science, as scientists do, in the context of answering a big question (e.g., How can I
prevent my friends from getting sick?) or solving a big challenge (e.g., Design a device that can lift a shipment
of supplies to the top of a cliff.).  They break that into smaller questions and then carry out investigations and
read about what scientists know to develop explanations that will answer the smaller questions.            Then they use
what they have learned to try to answer the big question or solve the big challenge.             Along the way, students
share what they are learning with each other and have the kinds of discussions that allow them to make meaning
together.

Table 1: PBIS Units (sequenced by discipline)

Earth Science Units                       Life Science Units                         Physical Science Units

                                                                                                                               3-
         Digging In                              Animals in Action                       Diving Into Science
         launcher unit for Earth Science;        launcher unit for Life Science;         launcher unit for Physical Science;
         focuses on experimentation and          focuses on observation and              focuses on  experimentation as an
         simulation and modeling as              interpretation as an investigation      investigation method; content
         investigation methods; content          method; content includes structure      includes gravity, air resistance,
         includes erosion and weathering,        and function, and the way those         how forces combine; students
         and it introduces rocks and             and the environment affect animal       design whirligigs and parachutes
         minerals and earth processes            behavior; students design               that fall to the ground as slowly as
         (volcanos); students design and         enclosures for zoo animals that will    possible.
         model a system for managing the         allow them to communicate or feed
         erosion and water flow on a hill        as they would in the wild.
         above a basketball court.
         Planetary Forecaster                    Good Friends and Germs                  Moving Big Things
         Students are challenged to decide       Students focus on practices for         Students are challenged to design a
         where on a newly-discovered             preventing their friends from           device that can lift a load of
         planet a new colony be located.         getting sick. Content includes          supplies to the top of a cliff.
         The planet is in a solar system a lot   cells, bacteria, viruses, spread of     Content includes forces, work,
         like Earth's, and the colony should     disease, body organs, body              mechanical advantage.
         be where temperatures are between       systems.
         5 and 30 degrees C. Content
         includes heat transfer, temperature,
         climate, weather, global warming.
         Earth Structures and Processes          Living Together                         Air Quality
         Students explain why new islands        Students give advice to a city          Students examine the air quality in
         are developing and mountainsa re        council about the conditions under      their neighborhood and make
         changing their shapes.  Content         which they should allow a new           recommendations about improving
         includes earth's layers, earth's        industry to move to the town.           it. Content includes basic
         processes, earthquakes, volcanos,       Content includes ecology, food          chemistry, mixtures, solutions,
         topographic maps.                       chains, watersheds, adaptation,         acids, bases, pollution.
                                                 pollution.
         Underground City                        Genetics                                Vehicles in Motion
         Students decide where on the            Students give advice to the Rice        Students are challenged to design a
         newly-discovered planet a large         for a Better World Institute about      vehicle and its propulsion system
         underground facility can be placed.     developing a rice plant that can        that can travel over a hill and
         Content includes rocks and              grow in draught conditions and is       beyond.   Content includes forces
         minerals, rock cycle, reading           resistant to caterpillars. Content      and motion, Newton's laws of
         several types of maps, folding,         includes genetics, reproduction,        motion.
         geologic time, fossils.                 DNA, natural selection, artificial
                                                 selection, evolution, genetic
                                                 engineering
         Astronomy                               I, Bio                                  Energy from Trash
         Students identify collisions that       Students advise the school about        Students are challenged to design a
         might be about to happen in the         providing healthy lunches.              foot-controlled (Rube Goldberg)
         universe. Content includes the          Content focuses on body processes,      device that can turn the lights off in
         planetary system, forces on space       homeostasis.                            a room when someone leaves.
         objects, movement of space                                                      Content includes types of energy,
         objects.                                                                        energy transformations,
                                                                                         conservation of energy, energy
                                                                                         from natural resources,
                                                                                         conservation of natural resources.

                  PBIS units are designed to support learners in participating successfully as student scientists.   Students
         begin each year with a "launcher unit" (Holbrook & Kolodner, 2000; Kolodner, 2007) that serves a variety of
         purposes: (i) introducing practices of scientists and classroom practices, (ii) promoting creation of community
         among students, (iii) promoting a culture of collaboration and collaborative learning and setting expectations
         for rigorous scientific discourse, and (iv) providing a context for teacher and students to get to know each other
         and develop rapport. Launcher units help the class learn to work together, help learners become familiar with the
         ways scientists think and have discussions, and introduce learners to the activities and tools they use throughout
         PBIS. The practices introduced and reviewed in launcher units (cultural practices, discourse practices, science
         practices, project practices, and learning practices) are repeated and built on over the course of the school year.

3-
         There are many different supports in each unit that help learners successfully address big questions and
challenges.   (a) At the beginning of each unit are activities that help learners understand the big question or
challenge.   Activities are designed to help learners think about what they already know that might help them
address the challenge and some of the new things they will need to learn.         (b) A Project Board helps learners
keep track of their learning. They use a new Project Board for each big question or challenge and keep track of
what they think they know, what they need to investigate, what they are learning, the evidence that supports
what they are learning, and how that helps them answer the big question or challenge. (c) Each unit is composed
of 4 to 6 learning sets, one for each of the smaller questions that needs to be answered to address a big question
or challenge.  They begin each learning set with some activity that helps them identify what they know that can
help them answer the smaller question and what they still need to learn more about, and they record that on the
Project Board.  Investigations and readings in each learning set are aimed toward answering the question for that
learning set, and after each set of activities that makes important points, students return to the Project Board and
record what they are learning and their evidence.    (d) At the end of each learning set, students apply what they
have learned to the big challenge or question, and they record on the Project Board what they have been able to
glean so far about the solution to the question or challenge.    This sequencing is designed to sustain continuity
and interest in the big question or challenge throughout the course of a unit. The activities done at the end of
each learning set allow learners to see the progress they are making and recognize next steps they need to take in
moving closer to a solution.    The Project Board, a constant fixture in the classroom, is a place for recording
progress and a constant reminder of how far students have come in addressing the challenge and what they need
to be doing to complete it.
         Within  each  learning set   is sequencing   and support   for answering    the  learning set's question. (a)
Activities  include  several  different  kinds  of   investigations   and explorations    ­ designing    and running
experiments, designing and running simulations, designing and building models, examining large sets of data,
examining examples, and reading case studies.      (b) Like scientists, they read about science they are learning ­ a
little before carrying out investigations, but most of the reading they do is to help them understand what they've
already experienced in an investigation. Each time they read, the text includes Stop and Think questions to help
them guage how well they understand what they've read.      (c) When they are addressing a design challenge, they
engage in design and construction work as part of a learning set, applying what they are learning to some part of
the challenge. (d) They make explanations on a regular basis.     The materials help them make claims (what they
think they know), identify evidence from investigations that support their claims, identify science knowledge
they've read that supports their claim, and then construct a statement that describes why their claim is so ­ i.e.,
why something is the way it is or behaves the way it does. They might make recommendations, as well, and they
are told that a recommendation is a special kind of claim that, like any other claim, needs to be supported with
evidence, science knowledge, and explanations. (e) Each activity is accompanied by "science journal" pages that
are designed to provide scaffolding for the small-group activities and places to record data, observations, claims,
and explanations.
         One of the most important things the curriculum materials do is help learners reflect.        PBIS materials
include many different tools for promoting reflection. (a) Stop and Think questions help them make sense of
what they have been doing or what they have just read.      (b) Reflect questions help them connect what they've
just done with other things they've done or read earlier.  (c) Analyze your Data advice helps them make sense of
data they've collected, providing hints about what to notice in the data and how to detect trends.        (d) Messing
About sections provide guidance about how to explore materials or discover new ideas.          (e) What's the Point?
subsections summarize content in a section.
         Perhaps   the most   important   tool for reflection in   PBIS   is  the  guidance  students  are  given  for
collaborating with each other in small groups and sharing their small-group work and what they are learning
with the whole class.    In  general, students  work  with  each  other   in small  groups  to make  meaning  before
discussions with the whole class. PBIS has in its sequencing abundant opportunities for sharing small groups'
findings, ideas, and discoveries with the class, and student text includes guidance about what to present and
share when and how to do it.    (a) In Investigation Expos, small groups report to the class about investigations
they've done.  For each Investigation Expo, groups make a poster detailing what they were trying to learn from
their investigation, what  they did,  their data, and their interpretation   of data.  The text that goes with each
Investigation Expo provides hints about what to present and what to pay attention to and ask questions about in
the presentations of others.  Investigation Expos are always followed by discussions about what they've learned
and how to do science well.     (b) Briefings are presentations of works in progress. They give small groups a
chance to get advice from their peers that can help them move forward.          The  student text that goes with each
one   gives advice about what   to present  and what  to  listen for, and briefings   are followed  by discussions of
what's been   learned  and  how to  move    forward.  (c) Solution  Showcases    are  for showing  finished  products.
Presentations during Solution Showcases include in them a presentation of how the solution to the question or
challenge was reached and the evidence that was created and used along the way.           (d) Discussions around the
Project Board provide opportunities for collaborative meaning making.        (e) Conferences are short discussions in

                                                                                                                          3-
         small  groups  before   more    formal whole-class    discussions.    While    in whole-class   venues,  only  some   class
         members participate, in small-group discussions, everyone has a chance to participate.
                  This  sequencing       and support    together   promote     both   reflection and   iterative  development     of
         understanding. Students present to each other at times when they have the need to learn from each other or to get
         help  with   their reasoning    and  ideas    before moving    forward.      Launcher   Units   give  learners experience
         recognizing   the  value of   presenting   to and getting    help from   their peers,  so learners   come to   value  those
         opportunities.    To inform   their peers   and to   get good  advice    from  their peers   requires presentations   at an
         appropriately-rigorous level.    This, in turn, requires the kinds of reflection that help learners identify what they
         have done and what they are learning.
                  Iterative refinement of understanding and progressive development of capabilities are built into this
         same fabric.   Development of understanding is promoted through embedded sequences of activities: students
         identify what  they  think    they  know,  make   predictions,    carry  out investigations,  make    claims,  read, create
         explanations to connect claims to their supporting evidence and science knowledge, attempt to apply claims,
         identify where claims fall apart, revise their claims, and raise new questions.         Revisiting the challenge between
         learning sets promotes taking a variety of perspectives on the big topics of each unit. Important practices of
         scientists are practiced repeatedly in each unit, always in contexts of authentic need.       Venues for public practice
         of science practices and skills and for use of science content are opportunities for students to work together to
         debug their understanding and capabilities.
                  Another issue the sequencing addresses is assessment. A common plea we hear from teachers is to help
         them with assessment ­ grades they have to give individual students ­ without inserting quizzes into student
         activities.  PBIS has a huge variety of opportunities for individual assessment in the context of small-group
         activities. Homework assignments ask individual students to prepare for the next day's activities or to reflect on
         and summarize something they have just done or learned.           Though students work in groups, they keep records
         individually.  After group presentations, it is always appropriate to ask individuals to write up their work ­ in
         e.g., lab reports. At the ends of units, after groups have achieved the challenge together, it is always appropriate
         to ask individual students to write up their solutions or critiques of the group solution.          Not all students have
         strengths in writing; when possible, we advise teachers to ask students to draw or find other ways to present
         what they are learning.  A picture dictionary is one means of doing that.
                  How do we deal with coverage of topics and sequencing of units? We have solved the problem of
         coverage by making decisions in each unit about which topics will get focus in the unit, and we add small text
         boxes to units in places where becoming familiar with some other content would not be out of place. Longer
         topical discussions are put into asides in places where they do not hurt the flow.        Good Friends and Germs, for
         example,    emphasizes   the  respiratory,  circulatory, digestive,   and  immune     systems   in the  main   text.  After
         students learn about those systems and make recommendations about preventing spread of disease, there is an
         optional set of pages about other body systems.      We solve the problem of sequencing with several tactics.         First,
         our materials cover some topics in more sophisticated ways than others.             We've also identified the units that
         build on each other.    The sequencing in Table 1 takes both into account. When coverage is by discipline, we
         advise   doing the   units   in the  sequence    they  appear     in the columns     of  Table  1.    When    coverage   is
         interdisciplinary,  we  advise  using  those  towards    the top  of each  column    earlier in middle  school  and   those
         towards the bottom in later grades.
                  Managing scope and sequence also means identifying themes that are important to science and that
         connect units to each other, e.g., use of modeling as an investigative method, systems thinking.          We have used a
         variety of methods for managing thematic connections: recurring types of text boxes and margin notes for some
         (e.g., technology connections), header/subheader sequences for some (e.g., all kinds of investigations are called
         investigations at the header level, with the particular type of investigation (e.g., experiment, simulation) in a
         subheader), and recurring vocabulary for some (e.g., systems).
                  Our teacher materials and programming aims to treat teachers as learners. It is common for teacher
         materials to be in the form of "Teachers' Editions" (TE's), books where student pages are miniaturized and put
         on pages, and teacher hints for managing the classroom and learning are around the edges. We are designing
         PBIS "Teachers' Planning Guides" (TPG's) differently. The TPG for each unit is designed to help teachers plan
         classroom activities in detail, review what needs to happen in class, and glance during class for reminders about
         what comes next.     They are designed for use by teachers new to PBIS and by those who are more experienced.
         They are designed so that we (the writers) can provide for teachers what we think they need and so that teachers
         have space to write notes as they are planning.

       The Future
                  We    have  been  field   testing our  materials  over   the past   several years   throughout  the  US.    Initial
         evaluations show that students are learning significantly. At present (March 2008), all units have been piloted,
         and  most   have   been field tested,  and  10 of  the 15    student books   are  near  publication.  We  are  working   on
         completing the other student books and on revising teacher materials.          We are looking forward to working with

3-0
evaluators to evaluate the strengths and weaknesses of our published curriculum, and we are looking forward to
others using PBIS classes as venues for carrying out investigations of learning.

References
Bandura, A. (2001). Social-cognitive theory: An agentic perspective. Annual Review of Psychology, 52, 1-26.
Bruner, J.S. (1966). Toward a theory of instruction. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Bransford, J. D., Brown, A. L., Cocking, R. R., eds. (1999). How People Learn. Washington D.C.: National
         Academy Press.
Cobb,  P.   &   Yackel, E.  (1996).   Constructivist,   emergent,   and  sociocultural  perspectives   in the  context  of
         developmental research. Educational Psychologist, 31(3/4), 175-190.
Collins, A., Brown, J. S., & Newman, S. E. (1989). Cognitive apprenticeship: Teaching the crafts of reading,
         writing, and mathematics. In L. B. Resnick (Ed.), Knowing, learning, and instruction: Essays in honor
         of Robert Glaser (pp. 453­494). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Driver, R., Newton, P., & Osborne, J. (2000). Establishing norms of scientific argumentation in classrooms.
         Journal of Science Education, 84, 287-312.
Duschl   R. A.,  Osborne,   J. (2002).  Supporting   and    promoting argumentation    discourse   in  science education.
         Studies in Science Education, 38, 39-72.
Edelson, D.C., Gordin, D.N., & Pea, R.D. (1999). Addressing the challenges of inquiry-based learning through
         technology and curriculum design. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 8 (3&4), 391­450.
Engle, R.A.     &  Conant,  F.R.    (2002). Guiding   principles  for fostering  productive     disciplinary engagement:
         Explaining an emergent argument in a community of learners classroom. Cognition and Instruction,
         20(4), 399-483.
Ericsson, K., Krampe, R. & Tesch-Romer, C.         (1993). The role of deliberate practice in the acquisition of expert
         performance.    Psychology Review, 100, 363-406.
Greeno, J.G. (2006). Authority, accountable positioning and connected, general knowing: Progressive themes in
         understanding transfer. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 15(4), 539-547.
Herrenkohl, L. R., & Guerra, M. R. (1998). Participant structures, scientific discourse, and student engagement
         in fourth grade. Cognition and Instruction, 16, 433-475.
Holland,   D.,  Lachicotte  Jr., W.,  Skinner,   D., &   Cain, C.   (1998).  Identity and Agency    in Cultural  Worlds.
         Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Kanter, D.E. & Schreck, M.A. (2006). Learning Content Using Complex Data in Project-based Science: An
         Example from High School Biology in Urban Classrooms. New Directions in Teaching and Learning,
         108.
Kolodner, J. L. (1993). Case-based reasoning. San Mateo, CA: Kaufmann.
Kolodner , J.L., Camp, P.J., Crismond, D., Fasse, B.B., Gray, J., Holbrook, J., Puntambekar, S. & Ryan, M.
         (2003a).      Problem-Based    Learning     Meets   Case-Based   Reasoning    in the   Middle-School    Science
         Classroom:     Putting Learning by Design into Practice. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 12 (4), 495-
         547.
Kolodner, J. L., Gray, J., & Fasse, B. B. (2003b). Promoting transfer through case-based reasoning: Rituals and
         practices in Learning by DesignTM classrooms. Cognitive Science Quarterly, 3,119­170.
Koschmann,      T. D., Myers,    A. C., Feltovich,   P. J., &  Barrows,  H.  S. (1994).  Using   technology   to assist in
         realizing   effective   learning   and  instruction:  A principled   approach    to the   use of    computers  in
         collaborative learning. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 3(3), 227­264.
Krajcik,   J., Blumenfeld,  P.,  Marx,    R., Bass,  K.,  &   Fredricks, J.  (1998).  Inquiry   in project-based  science
         classrooms: Initial attempts by middle school students.      Journal of the Learning Sciences, 7, 313-350.
Lave,  J.,  &   Wenger,  E.  (1991).    Situated learning:    Legitimate  peripheral   participation.  New    York,  NY:
         Cambridge University Press.
Scardamalia,    M.  (2002). Collective   cognitive   responsibility for  the advancement     of knowledge.   In  B. Smith
         (Ed.) Liberal education in a knowledge society (pp. 67-98). Chicago: Open Court.
Schank, R.C. (1999). Dynamic memory revisited. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Vygotsky, L.S. (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher psychological processes. Cambridge, MA:
         Harvard University Press.
Wenger,    E.   (1998). Communities     of    practice: Learning,   meaning,    and   identity, Cambridge:     Cambridge
         University Press.

Acknowledgments
This project has been supported in part by the National Science Foundation under grant nos. 0137807, 0527341,
and 0639978.      Opinions expressed are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Science
Foundation.

                                                                                                                             3-
