             Reframing Research on Intuitive Science Knowledge
      Rosemary S. Russ, Bruce Sherin, Northwestern University, 2120 Campus Drive, Evanston, IL 60208
                           Email: r-russ@northwestern.edu, bsherin@northwestern.edu

         Abstract:   Education    research has  devoted   significant effort  to  understanding    the intuitive
         knowledge    students    bring to  bear  in  reasoning     about formal   science.    In  addition  to
         documenting     the specific   content  of  students'  conceptions   in  particular   domains,    some
         researchers attempt to make more general claims, both within and across domains, about the
         nature of   intuitive knowledge.    These   attempts   involve   an  implicit  assumption     that the
         character and function of all intuitive knowledge is the same ­ that there is a single kind of
         thing called "intuitive science knowledge" that can be singularly characterized. The purpose
         of this work is to call that assumption into question, and we present examples to highlight our
         concerns. We propose a theoretical framework that provides a way to more carefully frame
         our research   on intuitive science knowledge     and  demonstrate   how    it can be  used   to  bring
         additional clarity to current discussions in the literature.

Research on Intuitive Science Knowledge
         Both science    education   researchers and    instructors have  long    held  an  interest in identifying  and
understanding   students'  prior    conceptions. Work     in a  variety   of  domains      has characterized   students'
understanding   of science   topics ranging  from   the  shape  of  the earth (e.g., Vosniadou     &   Brewer,   1992) to
elementary mechanics (e.g., McCloskey, 1983) to biological categorization (e.g., Carey, 1985). This research is
often motivated by the belief that students possess intuitive knowledge of science content ­ knowledge gained
outside of formal instruction ­ that impacts how they learn formal science content. It is hoped that finding out
more about the intuitive knowledge itself will help make classroom instruction more effective and meaningful.
         The  desire  to understand     more about   students'  intuitive  knowledge     of science    has  largely been
translated into research agendas that seek to document the specific contents of intuitive knowledge as it relates
to particular scientific domains. For example, in their work on the shape of the earth, Vosniadou and Brewer
(1992) describe the particular alternative models possessed by students. However, in some cases, researchers
have attempted to address questions that have broader import. They have attempted, for example, to describe the
character of intuitive knowledge in particular areas. Even more broadly, some researchers have attempted to
draw  conclusions,  which    span  domains,  about   the nature of  intuitive science   knowledge.     For  example, the
literature is rife with arguments over the form of intuitive knowledge ­ whether it is more theory or model-like
or whether it is fragmented (e.g., diSessa, Gillespie, & Esterly, 2004). In attempting to draw conclusions that
span domains, there is an assumption that the character and function of all intuitive knowledge is the same ­ that
there is a single  kind of   thing called "intuitive science  knowledge"     that can   be compared    straightforwardly
across all domains, and can be singularly characterized.
         The purpose of this paper is to call this assumption into question. We argue that the various attempts to
document student conceptions have often been focused on different kinds of knowledge, with very different
origins, function, and character. As a result, many attempts to draw conclusions about intuitive knowledge that
span domains are, at best, incoherent. As a remedy to this situation, we propose a framework that we hope can
bring new  clarity to attempts   to draw   more  general  conclusions   about  intuitive   science knowledge.    In what
follows, we first lay out some reasons for concern. Then we describe our new framework. Finally, we show how
the framework can be applied to help bring clarity to some of the major debates in the research literature.
         Our approach in this brief paper will be purely theoretical. We will not present any new data, although
we will draw on brief examples from the literature to illustrate some points. We believe that the issues are clear
and dramatic enough that extensive reference to data is not needed. Instead we see this paper as a chance to step
back and reflect on some of the fundamental assumptions of research on intuitive science knowledge.

Reasons for Concern
         We believe that there are good and fairly clear reasons to doubt the assumption of domain uniformity
of intuitive knowledge. In this section, we will take the reader on a brief tour of three sets of examples. Each of
these sets of examples makes it clear that, at the least, there are reasons doubt the assumption of uniformity.

The Issue of Domain Size
         First is the issue of domain "sizes." The domain of mechanics within physics seems much larger than
the domain of phases of the moon. The first encompasses a wide range of physical situations and knowledge
whereas the second is an extremely narrow slice of phenomenology. Which of these is the appropriate size to

                                                                                                                            2-2
         consider a domain? Can we consider both domains and still imagine their relevant intuitive knowledge base to
         be the same kind of thing?
                  It is likely that students' intuitive knowledge relevant to these two differently-sized domains differs in
         its scope and range of applicability. Consider part of a student explanation for what happens when a ball is
         tossed into the air - a task from the domain of mechanics.

                  J: When you throw it, you're giving it a force upward, but that force can only last so long...
                  So you give it this initial force, and its going up just fine, slower and slower because gravity is
                  pulling on it and pulling on it. (diSessa, 1996, p. 720)

         Here, J uses intuitions about forces, competition between forces, the effect of forces, and the strength of forces.
         This same  knowledge    (or  some closely  related knowledge)     could   also function to answer questions     about
         projectile motion, objects moving in space, and objects moving along the ground. In contrast, consider the line
         of research that attempts to characterize student knowledge of phases of the moon (e.g., Stahly, Krockover, &
         Shephardson, 1999). The following student describes how we see the moon.

                  A: Like, over here's the sun [refers to lamp] and then how the moon turns around [moves the
                  Styrofoam moon around the Styrofoam earth] and it goes... and what we see from the... see
                  the sun's not over here [indicates unlit side of the Styrofoam ball], it's right here [points to the
                  lit side of the Styrofoam ball] so that makes a shadow. (Stahly et al., 1999, p. 167)

                  A uses knowledge about the relative locations of the sun, moon, and earth as well as intuitions about
         light and shadows. Though some of it is fairly general, A's knowledge does not need to ­ and sometimes cannot
         ­ answer a wide range of questions; the domain is much smaller in that it consists of this single task.
                  As we hope to make clear, this issue of domain "size" is reflective of a more general problem with
         domains, and what we mean when we speak of "intuitive knowledge of Domain X." It may be non-trivial to
         draw  boundaries around    a domain.  For  example,    mechanics   encompasses    many   sub-domains    (e.g.  linear,
         freefall, and projectile motion) and overlaps with other domains (e.g. chemistry) in complicated ways. It is not
         clear which aspects of mechanics to consider part of that domain and which to exclude.
                  Even if it were possible to cleanly define domains, assigning student intuitive knowledge to a particular
         domain poses further problems. For example, while Stahly et al. (1999) interpret A's reasoning as providing
         insight into her intuitive knowledge of phases of the moon, we might also just as easily claim that this excerpt
         gives data about her knowledge of the domain of light and optics. The knowledge she uses here might be more
         general knowledge that would fit equally well into a variety of domains; it does not cleanly or exclusively map
         onto a single science domain. diSessa et al. (2004) describe many of these concerns with domains ­ including
         fuzziness, overlap, and scope ­  in reference to knowledge contextuality.

        Variability in Form and Genesis of Knowledge
                  Obviously  the content  of students' intuitive knowledge    varies    from domain  to domain.   But   it also
         seems, at least intuitively, that the knowledge can be of very different types, both within and across domains.
         Consider two examples from intuitive physics. It is likely that some students possess a relatively elaborated
         mental model of what happens when an object is tossed in the air, including forces and velocities and how they
         change. At the same time, students might possess knowledge in the form of facts, perhaps as not much more
         than a slogan such  as  "gravity is always  constant."  Furthermore,   it is possible that the intuitive knowledge
         associated with some domains might lean more heavily on knowledge of one form or another. For example,
         students may  have  a coherent  impetus theory of  mechanics      (McCloskey,   1983) whereas  their  knowledge    of
         nutrition may be built from individual facts (Kantor, Sherin, & Lee, 2006). Such great differences in the form of
         knowledge means that we must be careful in drawing general conclusions about intuitive knowledge both within
         and across domains.
                  These differences in the form of knowledge in part arise because intuitive science knowledge can have
         a wide variety of kind of origins. In some cases, for example, an individual might develop the knowledge by
         directly abstracting it from their own experience. For example an individual might develop an understanding of
         how a tossed ball works by tossing balls and watching what happens. In other cases, intuitive science knowledge
         might be acquired when children hear pop-science at home or on the radio. For example, knowledge of nutrition
         likely comes from hearing doctors or TV personalities talk about what's good for you.

        The Repurposing of Knowledge
                  In some cases, it seems as though students apply intuitive knowledge from one domain in order to
         reason about  another  domain.   This again makes   it unclear    what we  can  mean    by "intuitive knowledge    of
         Domain X." Consider again J's explanation for a tossed ball ­ a problem from the mechanics domain.

2-20
         J: When you throw it, you're giving it a force upward, but that force can only last so long...
         So you give it this initial force, and its going up just fine, slower and slower because gravity is
         pulling on it and pulling on it. (diSessa, 1996, p. 720)

J's intuitions about force and motion in tossing a ball might well have been abstracted from similar experiences
pushing and pulling on objects. The knowledge was developed for navigating the physical world and is thus
directly applicable to questions about macro-object phenomena in the formal domain of Newtonian mechanics.
In contrast, the following excerpt comes from a student discussing why a lamp lights when it is plugged in ­ a
question from the domain of electricity.

         D: ...the electricity goes into the cord for the appliance, for the lamp and flows up to ­ flows ­
         I think of it as flowing because of the negative to positive images I have, and also because... a
         cord is a narrow contained entity like a river. (Gentner & Gentner, 1983, p. 99)

         D uses  intuitions       about     "flow"      and              "containment" that, similarly           to J's  intuitions          about    force and
motion,  likely originated       from       everyday    experience.             He   explicitly states           that he is using            knowledge      of a
common physical phenomenon ­ flowing rivers. However, unlike J, D's experience is not directly applicable to
the question posed to him. Instead he must put his knowledge that was developed for reasoning in one context
(the behavior of rivers) to use in answering questions from another context (reasoning about electric circuits).

A Framework for Studying Intuitive Science Knowledge
         Together, the above issues suggest a need for care and clarity in our descriptions of intuitive science
knowledge. We need a way to organize our thinking about intuitive knowledge relevant to different domains so
that, when   we begin        to make     general   conclusions                within and across   domains,             we  can             avoid the  problems
illustrated above. In what follows, we attempt to provide such a "meta-framework" that can guide our analyses
of intuitive science knowledge. We begin by describing a simple framework and then successively elaborate it
to account for more of our concerns.

Simple Frameworks
         We start with the simple notion, shown schematically in Figure 1a, that there are science domains and
distinct bodies of intuitive knowledge that align, one-to-one, with each domain. Domain X is entirely separable
from Domain Y and the intuitive knowledge of Domain X is separable from the intuitive knowledge of domain
Y.
                              QuickTime   and a
                             None decompressor
                       are needed to see thIinstpuictitvuerek.nowledge
                                            of Domain X                                                    are needed to see this picture.
                                                                                                                             Intuitive knowledge
                                                                                                       Domain X                 of Domain X
                    Domain Y             Intuitive knowledgeof Domain Y

                                        (a)                                                                            (b)
         Figure 1. (a) A simple framework and (b) a slightly elaborated framework for describing intuitive
                                                                             knowledge.

         In Figure 1b, we begin to acknowledge some of the complexity outlined in our "reasons for concern."
We first highlighted the difficulties associated with defining domains due to domain overlap and sub-domains.
To begin to account for this concern, Figure 1b shows the formal science domain as made up of sub-domains.
For example, the domain of biology includes sub-domains such as the theory of evolution and classification
systems  for living things.      We      next    highlighted               some of the  variation in            the form   and             genesis of students'
existing knowledge. We represent that variability in Figure 1b by acknowledging that existing knowledge is
made up multiple sub-systems, consisting of many elements of varying kind.

An Elaborated Framework
         While the above conceptions account for some of our concerns, it leaves others unanswered.                                                   There is
still the problem of varying domain size, and adding sub-domains does not necessarily help in better defining
domain boundaries. In addition, we still have the difficulty of how to represent knowledge that is repurposed
and applied to domains outside its domain of origin. Figure 2 shows a final elaboration that helps resolve some
of these remaining issues.

                                                                                                                                                                   2-2
                                                                                               Intuitive knowledge
                                                                     Domain X

                                                                              R1       Task      R2

                             Figure 2. A fully elaborated framework for describing intuitive knowledge.

                   We    point to two    changes    that help                 overcome       our    concerns.       First, instead  of  separating  intuitive
         knowledge into different spaces each associated with a domain, we place all of students' intuitive knowledge
         together; we do not attempt to distinguish between intuitive knowledge of domain X and intuitive knowledge of
         domain  Y.   In  this single    intuitive knowledge                  space  we       find   elements       such   as  knowledge    of living  things
         (relevant to the domains of biology and chemistry), knowledge of macro-objects (relevant to mechanics, phases
         of the moon,    and   electricity), and   knowledge                  of  rivers    (relevant  to ecology          and  indirectly relevant to other
         domains). Considering all intuitive knowledge together frees us from having to assign elements to particular
         domains, a task that may be difficult when domains themselves are not clearly defined. For example, we do not
         have to decide whether knowledge of lunar phases belongs to the domain of cosmology, phases of the moon,
         physics, or light and optics. By not designating particular knowledge to a particular domain, we are perhaps
         more open to look for overlap ­ places where knowledge relevant to one domain might be fruitfully repurposed
         to make sense of other domains.
                   Second, this conception explicitly includes the research task ­ the particular questions used to probe
         student science   knowledge.     These    tasks may                  be questions     that   researchers       pose   in clinical interviews  or on
         written evaluations or they may be classroom activities given by teachers to elicit student knowledge. We use
         the task,   instead of the   domain,    as the  organizer                 for      describing  intuitive       knowledge.      Doing  so eliminates
         concerns    about   characterizing    knowledge    relevant                 to     differently-sized        domains      since we  always    answer
         questions about the form, origin, and purpose of knowledge in relation to a single task.                                  Thus we might compare
         the knowledge     students   use in  answering     the               tossed ball     question   and        the lunar   phases  question  instead of
         comparing students' knowledge of the domain of mechanics to the domain of lunar phases.
                   The insertion of the research task as an intermediary also draws our attention to the two relationships
         shown in the figure, R1 and R2. It draws our attention to the relationship between the task and the intuitive
         knowledge (R2). We do not assume that the intuitive knowledge is directly applicable to the domain but allow
         for the possibility that it has been repurposed. It also draws our attention to how representative the research tasks
         used to elicit students' intuitive knowledge are of the science domain (R1). It may be that the tasks researchers
         select are representative of tasks that are fundamental to the domain. Alternatively, they may be only trivial or
         peripheral.  If the   latter is true, then  the    knowledge                 that     students   bring       to   bear in the   task  may  give  the
         researchers very little information about the students' intuitive knowledge that is related to tasks in the domain.

        3.3 An Illustration of the Elaborated Framework
                   To quickly illustrate the application of this framework to data, we use the episode presented earlier in
         which J describes a ball toss.

                   J: When you throw it, you're giving it a force upward, but that force can only last so long...
                   So you give it this initial force, and its going up just fine, slower and slower because gravity is
                   pulling on it and pulling on it. (diSessa, 1996, p. 720)

                   First we examine R1 ­ the relationship between the task and the domain of mechanics. Professional
         physicists likely do not sit around discussing the forces present when a ball is tossed into the air. However, a
         large  part of  the domain    of mechanics      is describing                and     explaining           various physical phenomena      using  the
         unifying theory of Newton's Laws. Thus this task is at least reasonably representative of a part of the domain. It
         is important to note however that there are other kinds of tasks (e.g., prediction) and tasks tapping other content
         (e.g. kinematics or circular motion) relevant to the domain. We certainly should not presume that once we have
         identified the character of the knowledge J uses in this task we will necessarily have mapped out her intuitive
         knowledge pertaining to the entire domain of mechanics.
                   We next examine the character of the knowledge J applies to this task. First, the content of J's intuitive
         knowledge involves notions of forces and balance. From this one excerpt, it is difficult to tell the form of that
         knowledge ­ it may, for example, be small pieces of general abstracted knowledge (diSessa, 1993) or it may
         reflect a more systematic theory of motion (McCloskey, 1983). Whatever its form, the knowledge J employed
         here likely originated from her experiences navigating the physical world and is thus directly applicable to tasks
         of this sort. Thus R2 ­ the relationship between the knowledge and the task ­ seems relatively direct. J is using

2-22
knowledge   of motion    in   the physical  world   to answer  questions  about  the  same  type  of phenomenon;    it is
unlikely that she has repurposed that knowledge.
         Notice what the framework does for us in this example. First, it forces us to focus on the manner in
which the task relates to a formal scientific domain. We must ask: Is this task representative of my domain of
concern? Of what parts is it representative? It also forces us to be more reflective about the particular bodies of
intuitive knowledge drawn upon, including what that knowledge might look like, and where it might come from.
More generally, it forces us to be more circumspect, and to follow certain strictures in drawing conclusions
about "intuitive knowledge relating to Domain X."

Example Applications of the Framework to the Research Literature
         To demonstrate the usefulness of the framework, we show how its application can bring additional
clarity to two ongoing lines of research in the conceptual change literature. In what follows we carefully attend
to  the research   tasks from  this  literature and  use  the  constructs of R1   and  R2   to reframe   the discussions.
Specifically, we address:

    1)   Coherence     vs. fragmentation    of  intuitive knowledge   ­   Conceptual  change   researchers   are
         divided over whether students' intuitive science knowledge is "theory-like" and coherent or
         less consistent and more fragmented. We analyze research on students' intuitive knowledge of
         cosmology, namely their understanding of the shape of the earth. In this conceptual arena,
         Vosniadou     and    her   colleagues  (Vosniadou     &  Brewer,  1992;    Vosniadou,    Skopeliti,  &
         Ikospentaki, 2004) advocate coherence while work by researchers in the UK and Australia
         (e.g., Nobes et al., 2003; Siegal, Butterworth, & Newcombe, 2004) suggests fragmentation.

    2)   Task selection ­ Research on the nature of intuitive biology spans many academic cultures,
         from science education to psychology to anthropology (e.g., Carey, 1985; Medin & Atran,
         1999). Within this varied work, however, there is a consistent tendency to almost exclusively
         probe students' understanding of issues of categorization.        We analyze the consequences of
         this  narrow    focus for  science educators   interested in tapping   students' intuitive knowledge
         relevant to biology.

Coherence vs Fragmentation: Intuitive Cosmology
         Research in a variety of conceptual domains has sought to describe the character of students' intuitive
science  knowledge    (e.g.,  Carey,  1985;  diSessa,  1993;   McCloskey,  1983;    Vosniadou   & Brewer,    1992). Two
major contrasting theoretical positions regarding the nature of that knowledge have emerged from this work.
One   position ­   "coherence"    - contends   that "intuitive knowledge   can   be  conceptualized  as  consisting of a
coherent and systematic set of ideas which deserve to be called a theory" (Vosniadou & Brewer, 1992, p. 527).
These "naïve theories" held by students are said to be comparable to those held by scientists, at least in their
coherence and consistency. The "theory" position attributes to students stable units of cognition for particular
areas of thought that always govern how the student thinks about a set of circumstances (Hammer, 2004). In
contrast, the other position ­ "fragmentation" - claims that "naïve ideas are many, diverse, and not theoretical in
any deep sense" (diSessa et al., 2004, p. 845). In this view student knowledge is made of a large number of
individual elements that are differentially activated in various contexts (diSessa, 1993). Each of these positions
has a number of advocates in the conceptual change literature.
         Here we focus on intuitive cosmology (or observational astronomy) - one domain where proponents of
these   opposing views   of   intuitive knowledge   have   sought  to resolve   the coherence/fragmentation    debate. A
variety of studies have attempted to characterize students' knowledge of the shape of the earth - a topic about
which students are assumed to have both rich everyday experience and extensive cultural information to draw
on. Generally,   this research    involves interviewing   students of   several ages  using a  variety of prompts   each
designed to give evidence about how they imagine the earth to be shaped. For example, students are asked both
directly "What is the shape of the earth?" as well as questions such as "If you walked for many days in a straight
line, would you fall off the edge of the earth?" During the interviews, students are also asked to create images
(either 2D or 3D) of the shape of the earth or to select among images given to them.
         On    the coherence    side,   Vosniadou   and   her  colleagues (Vosniadou    &   Brewer,  1992;   Vosniadou,
Skopeliti, & Ikospentaki, 2004) find that "there are a small number of well-defined alternative mental models of
the earth  which   are   used  by  children in  a consistent   fashion" (Vosniadou    &   Brewer, 1992,   p. 575).  They
individually interview students using a 48-item questionnaire. Early in each interview students are asked to draw
a  picture or  create  a clay  model    of the  earth; subsequent  questions    reference the  students' own   drawings.
Through their analysis of student responses and drawings/clay models, Vosniadou and her colleagues identify
five coherent models of the shape of the earth that students possess.

                                                                                                                             2-2
                    In response to these studies, other researchers use similar methods to probe student understanding of
         the shape of the earth (Nobes et al., 2003; Siegal et al., 2004). However, instead of having students construct
         their own representations, students are presented with three possible models for the shape of the earth (spherical,
         dual hemisphere ­ one for earth and one for sky, flat pancake) and asked to choose which is the correct shape.
         The rest of the questions in the interview either directly or indirectly make use of the model that students choose
         initially. Their  analysis  for this set  of  tasks reveals  "little or  no  consistency   occurring   in the children's
         responses" (Nobes et al., 2003, p. 81) which supports the claim that students' "underlying knowledge structures
         of properties of the earth are fragmented" (Nobes et al., 2003, p. 83).
                    Each of these groups of researchers directly question the methods and results of the other group. On
         one side, Vosniadou et al. (2004) critique the forced-choice method of questioning and the use of non-student
         generated models, claiming that these methods "biased children in favour of the scientifically correct responses
         and masked the existence of synthetic models" (p. 205). In addition, they suggest that the Nobes et al. (2003)
         and Siegal et al. (2004) studies only test "whether children are able to recognize scientific information" (p. 207)
         and not the students' "ability to use this information generatively" (p. 208).
                    On the other side, Nobes et al. (2003) suggest that the analysis methods used by Vosniadou and her
         colleagues   (what  diSessa et  al. 2004  call "model   mapping",    p. 861) to  classify students'   mental  models   are
         biased towards finding consistency. Both Nobes et al. (2003) and Siegal et al. (2004) question Vosniadou and
         Brewer's (1992) original study in which students drew their own representations of the earth, pointing to studies
         where results were heavily dependent on whether model selection or model generation was used. Siegal et al.
         (2004) criticize  Vosniadou     and  Brewer's  (1992)   use of open-questioning,    saying    that it may   mask  student
         competencies.
                    Our framework can help us in teasing apart the issues of consequence in relation to this debate. First we
         note that we are dealing here with a domain of small "size." Even if we can agree on the character of intuitive
         knowledge    relevant to   this domain,   we   must be  very   circumspect   about drawing    conclusions    about other
         domains, especially those that differ greatly in size.
                    Sticking within this small domain ­ the shape of the Earth, our framework tells us that there is likely
         not a single answer to the question of whether intuitive knowledge of cosmology is coherent or fragmented.
         Instead, we expect only to be able to answer the question of the form of intuitive knowledge in relation to the
         tasks used to probe that knowledge. The interview task gives us a window on student knowledge; we can look at
         particular  tasks and see  what   knowledge    they cue  that  might  be  relevant to the  overall    domain. Using   this
         window allows us to be more careful about the knowledge claims we make than describing the entire domain.
                    Let us consider  how     orienting our analysis  around    the interview   task plays   out  for the  intuitive
         cosmology debate. Vosniadou and Brewer's (1992) interview is based on the task of generating a description for
         the shape of the earth. Their work suggests that this task draws on intuitive knowledge that is relatively coherent
         (form) and are likely generated both from everyday experience and from cultural pop-science (origin). Nobes et
         al. (2003) and Siegal et al. (2004) use a different type of task - selection among competing models. Their results
         indicate that this task draws on different intuitions than those identified by Vosniadou and Brewer, namely more
         fragmented     piece-meal knowledge    (form)  that may  have  similar   origin. These authors     use different types of
         tasks (description  vs    selection) that have   different  content  (providing   models   necessarily    provides more
         content). As such, we are not surprised that they yield different pictures of intuitive knowledge.
                    We suggest that these different characterizations of knowledge arise not because one methodology got
         it "right" and the other got it "wrong," but instead because the knowledge that one accessed is in fact different
         from the knowledge the other accessed. Neither side can claim to have accessed students' "true" knowledge of
         cosmology; each side has gained some understanding of the knowledge students use in particular tasks.
                    These different tasks each give us insight into the different kinds of knowledge that students might
         bring to bear in reasoning in this domain. We could imagine both Vosniadou and Brewer's mental models and
         Nobes  et   al.'s fragmented    elements  contributing   to  students'   understanding    of  astronomy     concepts.  An
         appropriate line of research might be to study how each of these types of knowledge contributes to learning the
         formal science domain.

        4.2 Task Selection: Intuitive Biology
                    Research on intuitive    biology   presents another interesting   case for us   to consider.   As  with many
         science domains, intuitive biology has been a focus of research in science education. But intuitive biology is
         perhaps unique in the extent to which it has been a subject of interest to researchers in other fields. It has been
         studied by psychologists interested in more general issues of cognitive development (e.g., Carey, 1985), as well
         as by anthropologists and psychologists interested in the folk biological knowledge of various cultures (Medin
         & Atran, 1999).
                    Here we discuss one small slice of this varied research in order to illustrate the type of considerations
         that arise in applying our framework. Many of the tasks that are employed to study intuitive biology seem to
         hinge on issues of categorization. For example, children have been probed as to what things in the world eat,

2-2
breath,  sleep,  etc. The    results of  these   studies suggest    that young  children   answer     these questions    very
differently than older children. Young children seem to answer questions for specific animals by comparing
those animals    to   humans    whereas    older children  answer     by  making    deductive   inferences    from  category
membership (Carey, 1985; Hatano & Inagaki, 1999). This difference is taken as an indication of a broad shift in
children's  thinking.   For   example,    Hatano   and   Inagaki    describe  this    change  as reflecting   a  shift  from
personification to category-based reasoning (Hatano & Inagaki, 1999).
         Let us now consider this research on intuitive biology through the lens of the framework we presented
in Figure 2, particularly focusing on the research tasks employed in probing student intuitive knowledge and
their relationship to the formal domain (R1). As we suggested above, some research on intuitive biology has
featured an emphasis on issues of categorization. The framework guides us to ask "How sensible is that focus?"
It differs sharply,   for example,   from  the   types of  tasks that  are typically  employed     in research  on  intuitive
physics where the tasks usually involve prediction and explanation as well as attention to mechanism. Is this
difference in the type of tasks employed reflective of real differences between these two fields, or is it just an
accident of the particular manner in which the research endeavors have played out? If it is the former, then we
can be more comfortable in use of these very different tasks for probing student knowledge. If it is the latter,
then  we   might need     to be  more careful   in drawing    conclusions    about the nature   of  intuitive knowledge     in
biology based on these tasks.
         It does not seem entirely unreasonable to conclude that biology, in comparison to physics, is in some
ways more concerned with issues of categorization. Biology is concerned with cataloguing the variety of kinds
of organisms that exist and documenting the distinct sub-structures and behaviors possessed by these organisms.
There is not an obvious a parallel focus on categorization in physics. However, it is manifestly not the case that
biology is all about categorization (R1). For example, it equally involves attempts to understand mechanism.
Why, then, do researchers believe that these types of tasks are so central for understanding intuitive biology
when they are clearly not entirely, or even largely, representative of the formal domain?
         Let  us  turn  our   attention to R2,   the relationship   between   tasks   and intuitive biology,  as it  is often
understood    in research     on intuitive  biology.   For    researchers  such    as Carey   and   Hatano,    although    the
classification-focused    tasks  are  not  seen  as  providing     an  exhaustive   map   of  intuitive  biology,   they   are
understood    as providing    indicators   of the  broad   character   of  developmental    changes   in intuitive   biology
knowledge. This viewpoint makes sense particularly if one adopts a view (as many of these researchers do) that
cognition  is modular     and   domain-specific,   and   that one   module   may   be  associated   with intuitive  biology.
However,    for  education    researchers, this  privileged   role  given  to categorization-focused     tasks  needs   some
additional consideration. Whether or not we believe that individuals possess an intuitive biology module as part
of their knowledge, it seems certain that the reasoning tasks associated with formal biology are going to draw on
repurposed knowledge. For example, if we were to teach students some of the basics of biochemistry, it is likely
that we are going to draw on intuitive knowledge that is more generally associated with physical mechanism.
Thus, if we care about the learning of classroom biology and facilitating conceptual change in that domain, we
need to know more about this wider range of knowledge; we need to consider a range of reasoning tasks that are
more broadly characteristic of the domain (R1).

5 Discussion
         Education research has rightly devoted significant effort to understanding the intuitive knowledge that
students   bring to   bear   in  reasoning  about  formal     science. Developing     effective  instruction  that  supports
conceptual change relies, at least in part, on having accurate and detailed descriptions of that knowledge. Work
has  been  done  in   a variety  of  domains,  and   there is a  fair  amount  of  disagreement    both  within  and   across
domains    over  the  characterizations  of   knowledge    that have   emerged.  Implicit  in these   disagreements     is the
assumption that there is a single kind of thing called "intuitive science knowledge" that spans all domains and
can, in principle, be singularly characterized. Here, we questioned this assumption of the domain uniformity of
intuitive knowledge. We problematized the construct of "domain" and exposed issues with both the variability
and repurposing of intuitive knowledge. We then offered a "meta-framework" that addresses these concerns and
provides a way to more carefully frame our research on intuitive science knowledge. We briefly illustrated its
application to   student  data   and then  demonstrated    how   it can   be used  to  bring additional  clarity  to current
discussions in the research literature. We hope to have encouraged reflection on the assumptions underlying
research on intuitive knowledge, and offered a framework to guide our thinking such that those assumptions will
not inappropriately influence our characterizations of intuitive knowledge.

References
Carey, S. (1985). Conceptual Change in Childhood. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
diSessa, A.A. (1993). Toward an epistemology of physics. Cognition and Instruction, 10(2&3), 105-225.

                                                                                                                                 2-2
        diSessa, A.A. (1996). What do "just plain folk" know about physics? In D.R. Olson & N. Torrance (Eds.), The
                 Handbook of Education and Human Development: New Models of Learning, Teaching and Schooling
                 (pp. 709-730). Cambridge, MA: Blackwell.
        diSessa, A.A., Gillespie, N.M., & Esterly, J.B. (2004). Coherence versus fragmentation in the development of
                 the concept of force. Cognitive Science, 28, 843-900.
        Gentner, D., & Gentner, D.R. (1983).      Flowing waters or teeming crowds: Mental models of electricity. In D.
                 Gentner &    A.L. Stevens  (Eds.),   Mental  Models  (pp. 99-129). Hillsdale,  NJ: Lawrence    Erlbaum
                 Associates, Inc.
        Hammer, D. (2004). The variability of student reasoning, lectures 1-3. In E. Redish & M. Vinventini (Eds.).
                 Proceedings of the Enrico Fermi Summer School in Physics. Course CLVI (pp. 279-340). Bologna,
                 Italy: Italian Physical Society.
        Hatano, G., & Inagaki, K. (1999). A developmental perspective on informal biology. In D.L. Medin & S. Atran
                 (Eds.), Folkbiology (pp. 321-354). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
        Kanter, D., Sherin,  B.,  & Lee,  V.R.    (2006). Changing   conceptual ecologies  with task-structured science
                 curricula. Proceedings  of the   Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference  of the Learning
                 Sciences (ICLS) (pp. 293-299) Mahwah, NJ.
        McCloskey, M. (1983). Naïve theories of motion. In G. Gentner & A. Stevens (Eds.), Mental Models (pp. 299-
                 324). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
        Medin, D.L., & Atran, S. (Eds.). (1999). Folkbiology. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
        Nobes, G., Moore, D.G., Martin, A.E., Clifford, B.R., Butterworth, G., Panagiotaki, G., & Siegal, M. (2003).
                 Children's understanding of the earth in a multicultural community: Mental models or fragments of
                 knowledge. Developmental Science, 6(1), 72-85.
        Siegal, M., Butterworth,   G., & Newcombe,     P.A.  (2004). Culture and children's cosmology.  Developmental
                 Science, 7(3), 308-324.
        Stahly, L.L., Krockover, G.H., & Shephardson, D.P. (1999). Third grade students' ideas about the lunar phases.
                 Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 36(2), 159-177.
        Vosniadou, S., & Brewer, W.F. (1992). Mental models of the earth: A study of conceptual change in childhood.
                 Cognitive Psychology, 24, 535-585.
        Vosniadou, S., Skopeliti, I., & Ikospentaki, K. (2004). Modes of knowing and ways of reasoning in elementary
                 astronomy.  Cognitive Development, 19(2), 203-222.

2-2
