                                    Making your views known:
 The importance of anonymity before and after classroom debates
               Giulia Gelmini Hornsby, Shaaron Ainsworth, Marie Buda, Charles Crook, Claire O'Malley,
          Learning Sciences Research Institute, University of Nottingham, Exchange Building, Jubilee Campus,
                                           NG8 1BB, Nottingham, U.K.
                      Email: gg@psychology.nottingham.ac.uk, sea@psychology.nottingham.ac.uk,
    com@psychology.nottingham.ac.uk, charles.crook@nottingham.ac.uk, marie.buda@nottingham.ac.uk

          Abstract:  The   current  study aimed    to  examine  the  effect of anonymity    and  privacy  on
          students' voting behaviour before and after classroom debate. A positioning system with three
          different  settings was  prototyped   (Private, Anonymous    or   Public).  It was  predicted  that
          students voting publicly would be less inclined to express changes in their views, and that they
          would  tend   to conform    to  the class'  overall position more    than  students  voting  either
          anonymously or privately. Three groups of students (N=55) taking A Level General Studies
          took  part in debates    and voted   in  one of  the three  conditions.   Results supported   both
          hypotheses and suggest that anonymity and privacy play a crucial role in encouraging students
          to express individual and authentic positions. The implications of these results for technology
          mediated voting systems are discussed.

Introduction
          Using personal voting systems (PVSs) in higher education is not a new practice. Universities have
reported the successful implementation of electronic hand-sets (akin to remote controls) in lectures that are used
by students to respond to questions (Dufresne et al., 1996; Draper et al., 2004). Lessons implementing PVSs
have typically employed a format similar to the `Audience' function in the popular television programme `Who
Wants  To  Be   A   Millionaire?'. After  students have   selected answers  they  are then  quickly   displayed in the
format of a histogram (eg. Dufresne et al., 1996; Stuart, Brown & Draper 2004; Kennedy & Cutts, 2005). The
methods in which PVSs have been implemented into the classroom have been highly dependent on the teachers'
underlying pedagogical rationale (Kennedy & Cutts, 2005). Whilst some lecturers have weaved the PVS into the
traditional lecture format by using it to document students' understandings of the educational material (Draper
& Brown, 2004; Stewart et al., 2004), more radical uses of the PVS have included the usage of it as a major
catalyst to guide discussions  (Dufresne et al., 1996; Crouch & Mathur, 1997).
          Research suggests that in a number of educational contexts involving Internet based a-synchronous
communication anonymity plays a key role in creating a more socially neutral discussion base where individuals
are less exposed to social cues such as gender and status (Christopherson, 2007). Moreover, several authors have
contended that anonymity in PVSs play a notable part in their educational success. The concealment has been
said to provide students with a sense of class engagement without public exposure (Dufresne, 1996; Kennedy &
Cutts, 2005).   However,   we   are not  aware  of   any  systematic studies   addressing  the impact  of anonymity
compared   to,  for  example,  public  or private  means   of  expressing   stances with  regards  to debated   issues.
Moreover, most studies on PVS have explored their use in `one-off' situations, where teachers raise an issue and
students give their response. We wanted to explore whether PVS could be used both to stimulate a debate and
then to record whether the debate had led students to change their views about a topic. Consequently, we were
also interested in determining if students were inclined to revise their opinion when their votes were publicly
available for others to see.
          The current study aimed to examine the effect of anonymity and privacy on the voting behaviour of
students before and after classroom debates. In order to decide how to design and implement a technology based
solution we started by exploring the implications of such a system using a low fidelity prototype. Low fidelity
prototypes (e.g. pen and paper, models, Wizard of Oz methods) allow designers to evaluate key design features
ahead of implementation and have a number of advantages (e.g. cheap to implement, robust to bugs, don't lead
users  to focus on   superficial aspects  of  systems, Retting, 1994).  We   therefore   created a non-technological
positioning system dubbed the `PositionOmeter' from paper and board. This would be used to provide evidence
for the design of collaborative discussion tool which is currently under development.

The study
Conditions of Voting
          In this study, we explored three different ways that student could record their views on topics (before
and after they were debated). The first way was to record their views privately where no one else could see their
views and where they could not see anyone else's views. The second way was to record their views in public but

                                                                                                                          1-1
         anonymously so that other people could not identify which of the votes were theirs. The third way was, again, to
         record views   in public  but this time  to be  visibly associated     with the  vote. Generally,    therefore  conditions
         differed according to: (a) whether each student's vote would be seen by all other students in the class and (b)
         whether each student's vote would be recognized by all other students as belonging to a specific student. The
         implications of these different conditions are summarised below in Table 1.

         Table 1: Implications of the different voting conditions.

          Private                                 Anonymous                                   Public
          Don't have to reveal your position      Don't have to declare your position         Do have to reveal your position
          Don't have to reveal any shift in       Don't have to reveal any shift in           Do have     to reveal  any  shift  in
          position between votes                  position between votes                      position between votes
          Don't   know  how   the  class voted    Do  know    how      the  class  voted      Do know     how   the   class voted
          overall                                 overall                                     overall
          Don't    know    how  the    specific   Don't   know     how      the  specific     Do   know      how     the  specific
          individuals voted                       individuals voted                           individuals voted
          Don't    know    how     your   vote    Do know how your vote compares              Do    know      how     your    vote
          compares to others'                     to others'                                  compares to others'
          Don't know if others are changing       Do    know  if  others   are  changing      Do know if others are changing
          their votes                             their votes                                 their votes

                  Findings  from   the   social psychological    literature  show    that when   groups      debate, two   types of
         persuasion, informative and normative influence, may be at play (Deutsch and Gerard, 1955). Informational
         influence occurs as a result of a subject accepting a new piece of information and trusting it more than their
         own. If people are persuaded by other views in learning situations we might hope that it would be on this basis
         (i.e. that new information is presented that you have judged to be corrected and that is the only reason you now
         agree with this new perspective). However, it could be the case that students may respond due to normative
         influence. In this case students may be persuaded by other views because they fear rejection by others and so to
         gain social acceptance by fulfilling the positive expectations of another. Normative social influence can produce
         varying effects.  On one hand, if group conformity is expected, it can compel people to shift their opinions
         towards the consensus (Asch, 1955). On the other hand, by not changing one's initial opinions, and by even
         going against the group norm it can allow one to exert individuality and demonstrate that they are capable of
         forming opinions without slavish regard for popularity (Deutsch & Gerard, 1955).
                  When voting was private, students were unseen and unrecognised. They can compare themselves to
         others and, for example, find they hold a minority view. Nor if they change their minds over the course of the
         debate do they need to be concerned that other would notice this change of heart. The representation of their
         vote can neither influence nor directly influence others. This condition should be the least effected by normative
         influence. Moreover if students do change their votes this should be more likely to be due to convergence (a
         change in covert and as well as overt behaviour).
                  Voting publicly, on the other hand, is the opposite situation to the private voting one. Student votes are
         both seen and recognised. In this situation, everyone is aware of everyone else's vote, and whether there is a
         shift in their vote from Vote 1 to Vote 2. A vote in this situation may be much more likely to be effected by
         normative  influence. Moreover,    if  students  do  change   their votes   this  will be   just as  likely to  be due  to
         compliance (a change in overt not covert behaviour) as it would convergence.
                  Finally, voting anonymously represents an intermediate situation to the two described above. When
         voting anonymously, the students are aware that their vote will not be recognised: this corresponds to the private
         voting situation, where students do not have to reveal their position. However, contrary to the private voting
         situation, students voting anonymously know how their votes compare to others, and whether others shift their
         positions from   Vote 1   to  Vote 2.  Although  the    votes are  not  traceable  to  specific  individuals,   they were
         displayed on boards for everyone to see. For example, the vote of particularly popular or dominant students will
         have no more influence that anyone else's. We therefore expect to see less normative influence in this condition
         and less compliance than in the public vote condition.
                  We  therefore   proposed   the  following   hypotheses.    In so   doing,   we expected     that   our participant
         teenaged students would be more likely to be influenced towards consensus (Adams et al., 1985).
            x     There will be no differences between students' votes at the first vote according to condition. At this
                  stage they  will have   no indication   as  to prevailing  views   in   the class  and  so  will   not have   been
                  influenced by seeing others votes.

1-
    x    Students'  voting  behaviour    at the second  vote    will be  influenced  by   condition. Having    seen   other
         students' votes represented (as well as listened to the debate), students in the public condition will be
         more   likely to  display  compliant   votes than  students    in  the Private  or  Anonymous    condition.   For
         example, a student might vote very differently to others in Vote 1; the moment the votes are revealed,
         that student realizing how different his vote is from everyone else's might want to use Vote 2 to make
         it conform to everyone else's in the class.
    x    Further, it is suggested that students in Private and Anonymous conditions will show greater changes in
         their votes from time 1 to time 2. If they decide to change their vote having participated in a class
         debate, they will not need to fear `losing face' by being seen to change their mind. Furthermore, we
         expect students in the Anonymous condition to show greater change in their votes than those in the
         Private condition. In the anonymous condition, the students see where the class stands overall in vote 1;
         this will  influence their  Vote   2, thus causing   more   vote   shift than in the   Private condition,  where
         students do not see where the class stands overall.

Context
         This  study   was  conducted   in  classes on A  Level   (16    to 18  yr olds)  General   Studies.  Prior to the
intervention, extensive General Studies classroom observations in the same school revealed a strong emphasis
on debating skills. A review of the National Curriculum confirmed findings from the classroom observations:
within General Studies, students are encouraged to develop the ability to think critically and independently, to
appreciate others' perspectives and approaches, and to communicate using a variety of formats and styles. As
General Studies' curriculum is designed to foster critical thinking, lessons tended to be centred on issues which
do not   have a pre-determined      and univocal answer.   General     studies  therefore provided   an  ideal context   to
explore how different voting conditions would influence students' responses to debated issues.
         All classes were taught by the same teacher, with whom we had worked closely in the preparatory
phases of the study. In 2006, we had observed classes on the `Nature Vs Nurture Debate'; this involved students
reflecting on how   a  number  of   issues  can be  considered   to  be  inherited (the  `Nature'   position) or acquired
through culture (the `Nurture' position). Classes were asked to reflect on the following set of issues: physical
stature, intelligence, hair colour,  love   of freedom, sexual   desire,    acquisitiveness, good   manners,   talent as a
musician. In 2007, we revisited this teacher, now working with a new cohort and asked him to explore the use of
a voting system in addition to his standard procedure (described below as the Private condition).
         As   Table 2  illustrates, the lesson  plan  started with   a short  introduction   to the topic of   `Nature Vs
Nurture' and the eight issues to be debated (Phase 1), followed by a vote, where students were called to express
their opinion on the degree to which they thought the eight issues were inherited or acquired (Phase 2). The
teacher then led a class discussion where each of these issues was debated at a time (Phase 3). The discussion
was followed by a second vote, where the students were called to express their opinion on each issue once again
(without looking at their first vote) (Phase 4). The lesson ended in a final reflection on how the discussion may
have led to changes in the students' opinions (Phase 5).

Table 2: The lesson plan used in all 3 classes.

                                         Phase n.                      Activity
                                Phase 1                       Topic introduction
                                Phase 2                       Vote 1
                                Phase 3                       Discussion
                                Phase 4                       Vote 2
                                Phase 5                       Reflection

         Table 3 shows an example of the voting sheets that were used in 2006. The students were given one
voting sheet at Phase 2 and a separate one at Phase 4, and they were asked to mark their vote on the sheet
without conferring with other student. The teacher told the students that positions 1 to 5 reflect the opinion that
the feature is inherited, while positions 6 to 10 reflect the opinion that the feature is acquired. Votes towards the
middle of the 1 to 10 continuum reflect a moderate position, while votes towards either end of the continuum
reflect a more extreme position. No neutral position was available.

Table 3:  Personal voting sheet.

                                                        Inherited               Acquired
                                                    1   2     3  4     5    6   7  8    9    10
                           Physical Stature

                                                                                                                               1-
                                  Intelligence
                                  Hair Colour
                                  Love of Freedom
                                  Sexual Desires
                                  Acquisitiveness
                                  Good Manners
                                  Talent as a Musician

        Design
                  This study employed a [3 by 2] mixed design. The first factor, Condition (of voting), was between
         groups and had three levels; Private, Anonymous and Public. The second factor, time, was within groups and
         had two levels; Vote 1 and Vote 2. All classes were video-recorded for later analysis; consent was obtained from
         all students to be video-recorded for research purposes only.

        Participants
                  Three classes of students were recruited for the study, each taught by the same teacher. The students
         were 16 to 17 years of age and Private voting class (11 F and 6 M), Anonymous voting class (9 F and 8 M) and
         Public voting class (15 F and 6 M) were randomly allocated to one of the three conditions.

        Procedure
                  The classes proceeded according to the teacher's standard lesson plan (described above). At the voting
         phases, students in the three different classes voted as follows (Figure 1):
            x     Students in the Private voting class only voted on their own personal voting sheets.
            x     Students in the Anonymous      voting class voted    on their own     personal  sheet, and subsequently
                  transferred their vote to a public board where it was associated with a letter which only they and the
                  teacher could decode.
            x     Students in the Public class voted on their own personal sheet, and subsequently transferred their vote
                  to a public board where it was associated with their name.
                  The reason students in the classes using the PositionOmeter voted on their own personal sheet, and
         subsequently transferred their vote to a public board was to ensure that the order in which students voted in
         public did not influence how they responded. Figure 1 illustrates one example response for each of the three
         classes.

         Private                                Anonymous                                Public
                                          Figure 1. Voting records in the three classes.

1-
Results
       As data was on an ordinal scale (Likert scale from 1 to 10), non parametric tests were used throughout
analysis. Table 4 gives an introductory overview of the students' votes independently of condition. For each
individual voting item (questions 1-8), all students' answers were summed and the median computed. The same
procedure was applied for Vote 1 and vote 2.

Table 4: Vote on eight issues (1(inherited) to 10 (acquired)).

                      No.                                           Question              Vote 1         Vote 2
                      1     Physical Stature                                                3              4
                      2     Intelligence                                                    5              6
                      3     Hair Colour                                                     2              2
                      4     Love of Freedom                                                 7              7
                      5     Sexual Desires                                                  8              8
                      6     Acquisitiveness                                                 7              7
                      7     Good Manners                                                    8              9
                      8     Talent as a Musician                                            6              5

       There was a trend towards influence of condition on initial votes (K = 5.93, df = 2, p<0.052) though
not on second votes. Students in the Private condition were more inclined to respond in favour of inherited
characteristics (median 5.5) than those in the Public condition (median 6.5) (U=120, p<0.01).
       The next two sections report on analysis of students' vote shift from Vote 1 to Vote 2, and students'
divergence from the norm, respectively.

Voting conditions' influence on students' readiness to express changes in views
       The difference between the students' views in Vote 1 and Vote 2 was computed by taking the absolute
difference on each question. Figure 2 shows the median of the sum over all eight questions.

                                                                 16
                                                                 14
                                                                 12
                                                                 10
                                                                  8
                                                                  6
                                                                  4
                                                                  2
                                                                  0
                                                                        Private      Anon        Public

                   Figure 2. Difference between the students' first and second vote.

       A Kruskal-Wallis test showed a significant effect of condition (H=19.9, d.f. = 2, p<0.001).                          Students in
the Public condition shifted significantly less between their two votes than students in the other conditions (U =
142, p<0.05 Private; and U =26.5, p<0.001 Anon). Those in the Anon condition also differed from those in the
Private condition (U = 93, p< 0.02).
       Analysis of the individual questions showed that this difference was due to students' changing their
votes on questions 1 to 4 only (Table 5).

                                                                                                                                           1-
                                 Median Difference Between Votes
                                           Median divergence
                                             Position at Vote 1l 1
         Table 5: Kruskal Wallis statistics for all eight questions.

                        Q1shift     Q2shift                            Q3shift     Q4shift    Q5shift        Q6shift   Q7shift      Q8shift
            K           18.85       12.64                              13.42       10.76      5.22           1.07      1.31         3.87
            df          2           2                                  2           2          2              2         2            2
            Sig         0.004       0.002                              0.001       0.005      0.074          0.587     0.520        0.144

        Voting conditions' influence on students' divergence from the group norm
                 To assess whether groups were more or less divergent, the median of each group's vote was calculated
         (per question) and then    each individual                      student's  vote  was  compared     to that  median and the   difference
         calculated. For example, a student who scored 3 (or 7) when the group median was 5 would therefore be given a
         deviation score of 2. This was then summed over all eight questions.
         Figure 3 shows the median for students' Vote 1 by condition (sum of all 8 questions).

                                                                   6.6
                                                                   6.4
                                                                   6.2
                                                                     6
                                                                   5.8
                                                                   5.6
                                                                   5.4
                                                                   5.2
                                                                     5
                                                                           Private       Anon        Public

                                                             Figure 3. Median student votes at time 1.

                 At the first vote, students in all conditions had no access to each others' vote (though they were aware
         of whether and how their vote would be revealed to each other). We therefore expected little difference in
         divergence from  the  norm   between                      the   conditions  at the first vote and   a  Kruskal-Wallis test showed   no
         difference by condition (H=2.3., d.f. =2).
                 However,   at  the second  vote                      students were   aware   of  each others'  points of view. In  the  Private
         condition, this information was only available implicitly through debate but in all the other groups students had
         seen Vote 1 represented graphically on the boards. We therefore compared how much a student's second vote
         diverged from the median view expressed at Vote 1.
                 Figure 4 shows divergence from group norm by condition (sum of all 8 questions).

                                                             14
                                                             12
                                                             10
                                                                   8
                                                                   6
                                                                   4
                                                                   2
                                                                   0
                                                                         Private        Anon          Public

                               Figure 4. Degree of Divergence from Vote 1 at Vote 2 by Condition.

                 A Kruskal-Wallis test showed a significant effect of condition (H=10.11., df. = 2, p<0.006). In the
         Public condition, students' votes diverged from the norm considerably less than either of the other conditions (U
         = 108.5, p<0.04 Anon and U= 100.5, p<0.002 Private).

1-
Discussion
          The current study aimed to observe the effects of anonymity and privacy on student voting behaviour
both before and after a classroom debate on the topic of nature-nurture.
          As predicted, in Vote 1 there were no significant differences between how divergent students' votes
were  according    to condition.   At  this   point, students  were  not  aware   of  the group   norm  in  any of  the eight
questions, and consequently could not have been influenced by it. However, there was a condition difference in
what they voted, with students in the Private condition most likely to believe that characteristics were inherited
rather than acquired. There are two potential interpretations of this result. Firstly, that more students in this class
genuinely believed that those characteristics were inherited more than students in the other class. However, it is
possible  that their  response   was     already   influenced  by   normative   influence  as this  was the    most `neutral'
position they could take on this issue given the 10 point scale.
          In Vote 2, it was expected that students who voted publicly would be more inclined to conform to
others' votes once. When students knew what the overall class' position was, they would use their second vote
to conform   to  it, but only   when     they knew   their vote   would   be  made   public. Indeed,  this  was the  case --
students  voting   publicly  showed      less   of a divergence     from  the  class' overall position  than    those voting
anonymously. In addition, the students in the Public group diverged from the class' position less than those
voting privately. This is hardly surprising, as the students voting privately had no access to others' views on
Vote 1, hence, they could not decide to conform to others' vote when voting for the second time.
          It was also hypothesized that voting conditions would have an impact on how much students would
change their position from Vote 1 to Vote 2. More specifically, it was predicted that students would feel more at
liberty to shift  their  voting  stance   when     their identities were  not   disclosed in  the  Anonymous     and  Private
conditions, in   comparison     to the   Public    condition.  This  hypothesis   was,  again,    accepted. Students  in  the
Anonymous condition shifted their opinion the most from before to after the debate, followed by the Private and
then Public conditions.
          This provides support to the hypothesis that students are less inclined to shift voting stances when their
identity is revealed. In an intimate environment such as the classroom, students have established acquaintances
and have thereby cemented an identity. As a result, students may be more concerned about preserving character;
asserting and adamantly sticking to one's views with regards to debatable issues can serve this function. It is
clear that the anonymity and privacy made students feel more at ease to move positions `without losing face'.
          There   was   also a   significant    difference  in voting    shifting between    the  Anonymous     and   Private
conditions, with students in the Anonymous condition shifting more than students in the Private condition. This
may be due to the one salient difference between the two conditions -- the revealing of the votes and hence
group   norms  in  the  Anonymous      group.   Although    less normative    influence   may be  at  play  in this condition
(compared to the Public condition), this extra information about the norm (compared to the Private condition)
may still be expected to influence students' votes through informational influence.

Conclusions and Future Work
          In this paper, we have argued for the crucial role played by different voting conditions in classroom
debate.  By experimenting       with   a low  fidelity   prototype  in  a real  context of   use, we  have  gathered  strong
indications for the eventual design of the system as voting systems allow for the efficient implementation of
voting and for the disclosure of different levels of information on the vote results themselves.
          Firstly, personal voting systems allow for the visualisation of the class' overall position: immediately
after all students    have voted,    a   report can  be   produced   showing    where   the  students are   positioned. This
constitutes an opportunity for students to reflect on how their own positions relates to the class' one and allows
for informational influence as well as the less desirable normative influence.
          Secondly, personal voting systems allow for the manipulation of the level of information displayed
concerning the students' identity: each vote can be displayed anonymously or publicly. As our findings indicate,
students voting anonymously are (a) more willing to express a change in their position and (b) express more
independent views than the students voting publicly. Hence, we see anonymity as an opportunity for students to
express their opinions without being preoccupied with their identity being threatened by public exposure or face
loss. If students change their votes, this may be due more to informational influence and so act via conversion
rather than compliance.
          Future   work  involves    implementing     the  voting   system   in our   collaborative  discussion  system  and
analysing whether the discussion is influenced by the different voting conditions discussed above.
          We   are   interested to see   whether     representing   the students' position   publicly influences    classroom
discussion, i.e. whether the teacher and the students capitalise on the voting representation to collaboratively
construct arguments within a debate. For example, teachers could use the information about the class overall
position in order to encourage students to build arguments supporting minority views. Also, students may be
more inclined to participate in the discussion when the class' position is available to them.

                                                                                                                                 1-
                  We are also interested to see whether representing students' votes anonymously or publicly influences
         the quality of the debate. For example, teachers may be able to use the information displayed by the voting
         system in order to orient the focus of the discussion towards specific individuals' opinions rather than others'. In
         turn, students may be encouraged to express their position in different ways according to the voting condition
         they are in.
                  In addition, further studies could explore whether changes in students' votes reflected an internalised
         opinion  change    (i.e., they changed     their  minds); for example,    it would be  interesting to assess whether   the
         students' second vote in the Public condition reflected an actual conversion to the class' overall position, or a
         superficial compliance to the group norm due to public exposure. In order to do this, a follow-up intervention
         could be designed, where the same students who participated in this study vote again privately on the same
         issues. This would enable us to establish whether the students' position change from Vote 1 to Vote 2 in this
         study reflected a true opinion shift.
                  The results of this study have shown that simple changes to the design of PVS can have significant
         impact upon students' behaviour. This knowledge can inform the design of new technologies, suggest lessons
         plans for their use and even prompt guidelines for assessment (if you wish to assess the impact of a class debate
         you should do so anonymously or in private).

       References
         Adams,   G.  R., Ryan,     J. H.,  Hoffman,    J. J., Dobson,  W.   R., &    Nielsen, E. C. (1985).   Ego identity status,
                  conformity       behavior,    and personality    in  late adolescence.    Journal  of   Personality and   Social
                  Psychology, 47(5), 1091-1104.
         Asch, S. E. (1955). Opinions and social pressure. Scientific American, 193, 31-35.
         Boyle,  J. T.  &   Nicol,   D.  J.  (2003).  Using    classroom    communication    systems  to  support  interaction  and
                  discussion in large class settings. Association for Learning Technology Journal, 11(3), 43-57.
         Christopherson,    K.M.    (2007).     The  positive   and   negative   implications  of  anonymity   in  Internet social
                  interactions: "On the Internet, nobody knows you're a dog". Computers in Human Behavior, 23(6),
                  3038-3056.
         Deutsch, M. & Gerard, H. (1955). A study of normative and informational social influences upon individual
                  judgment. Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 51, 629-636.
         Draper, S. & Brown, M. I. (2004). Increasing interactivity in lectures using an electronic voting system. Journal
                  of Computer Assisted Learning, 20, 81-94.
         Draper, S., Cargill, J., & Cutts, Q. (2002). Electronically enhanced classroom interaction. Australian Journal of
                  Educational Technology, 18(1), 13-23.
         Dufresne,  R.  J., Gerace,    W.   J., Leonard,   W.  J., Mestre,  J. P., &   Wenk,   L. (1996). Classtalk:  A classroom
                  communication system for active learning. Journal of Computing in Higher Education, 7, 3-47.
         Katz, D. (1960). The functional approach to the study of attitudes. The Public Opinion Quarterly, 24(2), 163-
                  204.
         Kelman, H. C. (1958). Compliance, identification, and internalization: three processes of attitude change. The
                  Journal of Conflict Resolution, 2(1), 51-60.
         Kennedy, G. E. & Cutts, Q. I. (2005). The association between students' use of an electronic voting system and
                  their learning outcomes. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 21, 260-268.
         Rettig, M. (1994). Prototyping for tiny fingers. Communications of the ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4. 21-27.
         Mazur, E. (1999). Peer instruction: A user's manual. American Journal of Physics, 67(4), 359-400.
         Stuart, S. A., Brown,      M.  I., &   Draper,   S. (2004).  Using  an  electronic voting  system  in logic  lectures: one
                  practitioner's application. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 20, 95-102.

1-
