       Analyzing collaborative contexts: Professional musicians, corporate
                             engineers, and communities in the Himalayas
            Véronique Mertl, Timothy Kieran O'Mahony, Kersti Tyson, Leslie R. Herrenkohl, University of Washington,
                                College of Education, Box 353600, 312 Miller Hall, Seattle, WA, 98195
          Email: vmertl@u.washington.edu, tko2@u.washington.edu, kersti@u.washington.edu, leslieh@u.washington.edu
              Sameer Honwad, Christopher Hoadley, Penn State University, College of Education, 314 Keller Building,
                                                        University Park, PA, 16802
                                                Email: svh106@psu.edu, cmh35@psu.edu

                 Abstract:   This    paper  reports  on the   collaborative     experiences  and    theories  of members       of
                 professional and community settings who work with others in their everyday practices. Data are
                 drawn     from interviews   and  field   observations   with    professional    musicians   who   collaborate
                 regularly  for  performances,    corporate  engineers   working      in groups,  and   community     members
                 exchanging     perspectives on   sustainable practices     for their village.  Performing    chamber   music,
                 designing   a  new    technology-driven   plane,    or making    decisions    about   sustainability in   rural
                 communities, all require sophisticated collaboration to generate ideas from multiple perspectives,
                 problem solve, and innovate. The research we present explores the demands on the environment,
                 the relational space, and the shifts that occur for participants in their collaborative settings. The
                 findings from these studies emphasize the multidimensionality of collaboration and the importance
                 of collaboration as a tool for learning and decision-making in given contexts.

                 Increasingly, we recognize that sophisticated collaboration is needed in situations where learning, problem
        solving, or design activities are required. By examining and contrasting three distinct settings where useful forms of
        expertise are distributed among different participants, we identify important dynamics about collaborative work. We
        investigate the theories about collaboration that people develop when engaged in collaboration on a regular basis in
        their professional or everyday lives.   Data for this symposium are drawn from interviews and field observations with
        professional musicians who perform in ensembles, corporate engineers working in groups, and community members
        exchanging perspectives on sustainable water access for their village. This paper allows for a unique synthesis on
        the role of  collaboration   across contexts  and  illuminates   the    complexity   of  what  it means  to  "cre8te   a  learning
        world." By juxtaposing these studies, we gain insight into how people take up new ideas in interaction with and
        through others and are able to explore how collaboration is a major part of the context of change and innovation.
                 As  past   research   has   suggested,   there   is a   qualitative     difference    between   the  spaces    that lack
        communication and produce a void between people's exchanges, and the collaborative spaces where ideas are heard
        and  inform  each  other (e.g.  Barron,  2003;  Dillenbourg,    Baker,   Blaye,   &  O'Malley,    1996). We     are interested in
        further exploring   the elements   that intersect and allow     for productive    collaborative   moments    in everyday     "real-
        world"   settings. We   examine    the  role of collaboration    in  shifting    and building   knowledge.    We    suggest   that
        understanding how collaborators conceptualize and frame their collaborative behavior can enrich our knowledge
        base for designing productive collaborative experiences in and out of school. Yet, since the quality of collaborative
        interaction is emergent and occasioned by multiple aspects of context, our findings suggest that collaboration is a
        resource that people can draw upon rather than skills that are transferred.
                 Comparing      across collaborative  communities       reveals  that there   is a  process   of presenting     expertise,
        listening to others, and "letting go" of prior conceptions in order to integrate new ideas. These collaborators all go
        through a shift from knowledge establishing to knowledge sharing. There is a shift in action through interaction. As
        John-Steiner (2000) states, "the construction of new modes of thought relies on and thrives with collaboration" (p.
        7). In  interviewing  chamber   music   musicians,   this shift  meant   bringing    in  their varied  musical  techniques    and
        interpretations of the piece and eventually integrating ideas into a particular interpretation for performance. They
        described an ebb and flow as each participant, with their unique instruments, becomes part of the collaborative
        process. For  the  engineers   this shift was   seen  through    field  observations    when   an  intentional  opportunity    for
        collaborative formative assessment was designed using the Legacy Cycle of Learning (Schwartz, Lin, Brophy, &
        Bransford, 2000). The cycle included sharing initial thoughts, developing a plan to revise and review after receiving
        input  from  multiple   perspective  `resources', and   an   instructive  aperture   for `reporting-out'   to the   collaborative
        group.  The  mindset    that emerged    from  the  collaborative    workshop     evidenced     an identity   shift  in which  the
        participants enhanced    their meta-cognitive     understanding     through   collaborative    juxtaposing   within    and across

3-
groups. For the communities in Himalayas, members integrated indigenous and exogenous knowledge when making
decisions for sustainable ecological development. The integration was seen when youth collaborated with adults to
learn about indigenous knowledge. The amalgamation of our work across these three contexts allows a unique lens
into the intricacies of how members engage in their collaborative setting and how people are agents for change in
their communities.
        Prior research has looked at how participants may be more or less expert in the necessary facets of the
collaboration  task,   more  or  less knowledgeable       about one   another, and  in different  relationships  of power    or
solidarity (e.g., hierarchical   or heterarchical   groups).    When    research is focused   on  task demands,    the way   a
collaborative task   is constructed   is found  to  influence   outcomes  (e.g.  Johnson,  Johnson,  &  Stanne,  1998).  Prior
relationships (Jones,   2002)   and   relative status of  collaborators  (Chizhik,  2001)  also  influence   the success  of a
collaboration. While those who examine the context within which the collaboration occurs have found these findings
to be important, they have also found that by manipulating the pre-existing environment, levels of collaborative
success can be altered. Literature on improving collaboration has emphasized scripts for interaction (e.g. Rummel &
Spada, 2005), changing perceptions of collaborators (Cohen, 1994), or assignment of roles (Herrenkohl & Guerra,
1998) with the expectation that these interventions might work productively across situations. This literature on
improving collaboration focuses primarily on the cognitive skills and individual needs. It assumes that knowing
`how' will  lead   to   enacting  those  `skills'  in a   collaborative  engagement.   Our  work   extends   the  research on
collaboration by looking at the complexity of how people collaborate within professional and community settings.
Learning about collaboration by designing collaboration that is prescribed differs from understanding where it is
emergent   or a   part  of everyday   "naturalistic"  practice.   For the professionals   and  community     members   in  our
research, there are no roles or scripts, and, yet, the participants speak to collaborative moments that unfold in their
work as they seek innovative solutions and practices.
        Past   studies,    employing     video  analyses   of   collaborative   interactions, highlight  how     outcomes    of
collaborations  can    be  highly  variable,   differing  between    groups working     on the   same   task even   when   the
composition of the groups are similar with respect to prior knowledge (Barron, 2000, 2003; Stevens, 2000). The
research points to the importance of conceptualizing both the relational and the cognitive aspects of joint work,
particularly as they relate to the larger social context, including institutional constraints (Barron, 2003) and practices
for organizing joint work (Stevens, 2000). We theorize that in collaboration, collaborators use meta-collaborative
knowledge   for   managing   their  interactions  and  monitoring    the development   of  their shared problem   space.  Our
findings confirm that our participants are highly aware of affective and relational aspects of collaborative learning,
and that these components influence their decision making within specific contexts. For example, in their interviews,
the participants in the performing arts highlight, in particular, the meta and relational aspects of collaboration in
their theories of collaboration. Then, through analysis of interactions in both the corporate and rural community
settings we see how relational aspects and elements of design afford collaborative engagement. All three data sets
reveal that intentional collaboration requires aspects of: 1) the meta - perspective-taking (seeking to understand the
orientation of the other), the establishment and regulation of joint attention, and a willingness to align one's goals
and efforts with others'; 2) the interpersonal aspects, which include maintaining resiliency and persistence when
faced with problems and presuming positive intent to contribute on the part of collaborators; and 3) design or the use
and repurposing of tools for sharing knowledge. Elements of all three ­ meta, interpersonal, and design- are present
in each data  corpus,   yet  each  study  affords  a  particular  perspective  on the  nuances   and multidimensionality     of
collaboration in everyday settings.

Perspectives          on   collaboration:          Musicians'         emergent       relational      dynamics       in    the
context of contemporary chamber performance
        In this study we investigate the theories new-music, chamber musicians hold on collaborative dynamics in
the context of their musical practice. This ethnographically-based study focuses on expert designers of collaborative
environments and participants in those environments, and explores how such individuals think about collaboration,
design for collaboration, participate in collaborative environments, and support collaboration of others. Professional
chamber musicians' success depends on their ability to work with others for productive rehearsals and performances
and the potential  to   work  with  colleagues    again   for future performances.   This  cycle affords the  potential  for a
successful  chamber-music     career.    Therefore,   the ability to  collaborate with  colleagues   remains  central  to  the
profession. Furthermore, musicians who focus their career on performing contemporary (or new-music) works are
situated in a context where innovation and adaptability are central. Performing new music means premiering pieces
from current-day composers who often compose pieces with unfamiliar or new rhythms, harmonies, gestures, and
techniques. These    `cutting-edge'   sounds   are  not   only  new  to  audiences, but require   innovative  techniques   and

                                                                                                                                3-3
        interpretations on the part of the instrumentalists. By exploring "the music of our time," as a participant states, these
        performers are asked to become what Hatano & Inagaki (1986) have termed adaptive experts in their domain. As
        adaptive experts, they are learning to be efficient and innovative through collaboration. Therefore, collaboration
        impacts and is linked to adapting expertise for these musicians, where innovation and efficiency happens with others
        and through others. Ultimately, the goal of our work is to better understand the ability to engage other people for
        help and advice in distributed efforts and the ability to adapt to new and changing group dynamics.
                  We    interviewed 14    professional   new-music,     chamber    musicians  to   understand    their  theories  on
        collaboration and working with others. The open-ended interviews afford an understanding of how collaborative
        processes have developed over time from the perspective of the collaborator. At the time of our data collection,
        these professional musicians were rehearsing in ensembles on a daily basis in preparation for a new-music concert at
        an internationally renowned venue in the Northeast of the United States. Rehearsals and performances were video-
        recorded. For the purposes of this paper, we focus on the interview data where professional musicians shared their
        perspectives  on collaboration   and  narratives on their  collaborative   experiences. Framed    in a   socio-histo-cultural
        tradition (e.g. Hutchins,   2002; Rogoff,  2003),   our  findings  suggest  that  musicians  believe    that successful  and
        enduring collaborations occur due to a multiplicity of factors that fall within meta-communicative knowledge, inter-
        subjectivity, and environmental properties. This helps us understand the complexity of collaborative dynamics, the
        interrelated aspects within a context, and the dimensions that remain pivotal for successful collaborative outcomes.
        These three interrelated dimensions parallel Rogoff's (2003) argument for an analytical framework on learning and
        development that foregrounds the individual, interpersonal, and contextual planes of analysis.
                  On  an individual   plane,  the musicians   speak  to   meta-communicative     knowledge,      which  includes  an
        awareness  and   monitoring   of between-person   states  of engagement,    strategies  that facilitate  joint attention and
        encourage   mutual  understanding,    and  strategies that elicit  ideas   from  collaborators.  For  example,    musicians
        demonstrate the ability to notice when the attention of a partner wanders and to reengage it. They ask others for their
        opinions and input and broadcast a joint solution so that the entire group is aware of the technical or interpretive
        musical ideas. Overall, there is a recruitment of distributed cognitive resources of the group to monitor solutions and
        elicit innovative ideas (Hutchins, 2002). On an interpersonal dimension, inter-subjectivity includes a resiliency and
        persistence in the face of interpersonal or problem-based challenges. Musicians display a willingness to build and
        elaborate on co-members ideas (even when communication proves ineffective), to elicit ideas from others, and try to
        clarify or incorporate them into common ground. Environmental properties include the use of conversational and
        technical tools to capture ideas, and working within the cultural norms and community practices of music.
                  Within these three foci, the musicians theories of collaboration point to two main types of collaborative
        models in their theoretical constructs (White & Frederiksen, 2005): (1) A multidimensional model (the context, the
        resources, the   technologies) that  includes, and  places   into  relationship, the many    factors  at play  in achieving
        productive collaboration and (2) two different process models - one that includes the developmental trajectory of a
        person  who   is becoming    a   professional musician   and    a second   that  discusses the   process  of   preparing  for
        performances, from the initial invitation to the performance.
                  Our analysis shows that from a multidimensional model, the importance of networks, including an accrued
        history with other musicians, technical and interpretive skills, professionalism (being on time, practicing), and the
        nature of interactions, including communication, humor, power dynamics, perspective-taking, and listening are all
        factors identified as essential by the musicians. From a process model, they report on individual past experiences
        and perspectives  that  inform   the context, yet the musicians'    collaborative theories   are intricately situated in  the
        norms and expectations of what it means to be a musician (i.e. the need to practice, the set up of rehearsals, and the
        demands    on   time).  Furthermore,  interpersonal   relations   remain central  as musicians    negotiate    technical and
        interpretive perspectives on the music. For example, Anika, an oboist, describes the process as one of negotiation,
                  "A rehearsal is to establish an understanding of the musical work as to want to represent it. And
                  so each person might have a certain concept when they come into it, but then you have to kind of
                  present your ideas. In some sense decide and then it makes a total different piece. That's what a
                  rehearsal accomplishes. And not only is that accomplished through words, spoken words, but also
                  through the musical phrases. You make a phrase and someone hears it and follows it or supports
                  your- that kind of thing."
        In this   quote  we see   meta-communicative      knowledge     (having  a concept),   inter-subjectivity  (presenting   and
        acknowledging    ideas),  and  environmental   influence  (within   a rehearsal  space;  the  use  of   verbal  and musical
        language) converging in Anika's experience. These three interrelated foci of analysis help reveal the dynamic in
        collaboration that leads to a process of knowledge sharing to build innovative musical practice or as Anika states ,"a
        total different piece."

3-
           Kara, a vocalist,    adds to  our understanding       of  the   collaborative   experience through    her  focus  on   the
interplay  between     the technical and    interpretive aspects     of  the music  as   a means   to get to the  creative   side of
collaborating:
           "...you feel comfortable enough with your part, how it works with the other parts to the extent that
           when you get to performance, you can sort of play with it a little bit and be more spontaneous with
           it. So you spend a lot of the time being exact and exact and exact and then get it into a situation
           where  it's exact  and  it's all together and    then     it can  loosen up   and  become   a  little bit  more
           individual."
           Once she feels comfortable with her part, Kara points to "letting go" of the exactness in order to allow
space   to innovate    and   spontaneously   express  interpretation.      Both    musicians,  in these   examples,   point  to   the
importance of being prepared prior to the rehearsals and the need to negotiate both the technical and interpretive
aspects of the music. By examining collaboration through the multidimensional and process models revealed by
these musicians,   we   begin   to  develop  a more   detailed     picture   of collaboration. Beyond     identifying  factors,  our
analysis reveals the weight attributed to each and the possible relationships or interactions among these factors ­
individually, interpersonally, and contextually.

Shift in Action: Mediated Collaborative Mosaics Dance with Adaptive Expertise in
an Informal Learning Ecology
           This paper describes findings from a mediated collaborative intervention (N=65), conducted by members of
academia and an aerospace company, to explore ways to enhance workers' learning in environments where change
and innovation are the norm. Many of these companies face an almost never-ending skills gap and are in need of
people who view the need for new learning as something that is positive rather than negative (Bransford, 2007;
Mead, Stephens, Richey, & Bransford, 2007; Robinson & Stern, 1997; Rogers, 2003; Schwartz, Bransford, & Sears,
2005). In these processes, employees' individual skills and their ability to share and generate knowledge within their
communities and social networks increasingly play a crucial role (Ackerman, Pipek, & Wulf, 2003). We explore
how understanding the way collaborators conceptualize and frame their collaborative behavior and thereby enrich
our knowledgebase for designing productive collaborative experiences in formal and informal settings.
           These companies often find themselves in dynamic and turbulent environments. As a result, organizations
are required to learn continuously and to reinvent their processes and products on-the-fly. One way to begin to
address change and innovation in organizations is to help people view themselves as "adaptive experts" (Hatano &
Inagaki, 1986)--where a preparation for future learning is an important part of expertise. Especially important is the
idea that "lifelong learning" involves much more than the simple addition of new skills and knowledge to one's
existing repertoire. In companies where workers are used to knowing how to do their routine task and hence are seen
as "masters of their trades", the change of role from being a "routine expert" to becoming an "adaptive expert" can
be a  difficult  transition  to make    (Bransford, 2007;     Levy,     2004;   National Academy    of  Engineering,   2005).    The
quality of collaborative interaction is emergent and occasioned by multiple aspects of context, our findings in the
aerospace   workplace      suggest that collaboration    is a  resource    that  people  can  not only  draw  upon    but   also can
improve over time and between contexts.
           Research    suggests that adaptive   expertise   is   a "habit    of mind"  developed   over   time,  and  that  the  best
combination   for  developing      adaptive expertise    may   be    "guided-inquiry"    designs  where   learners   first invent or
generate their own ideas followed by timely interventions to provide directed guidance (e.g., Schwartz, Bransford &
Sears: 2000). For example, Martin and colleagues (Martin et al., 2007; Martin, Rayne, Kemp, Hart, & Diller, 2005)
have studied the use of STAR.Legacy (Schwartz, Lin, Brophy, & Bransford, 2000), an inquiry method that blends
individual and group instruction for developing adaptive expertise among bioengineers.                    In the Legacy learning
Cycle, learners are given a complex problem to solve (Bransford, Vye, Bateman, Brophy, & Roselli, 2004; Hmelo-
Silver, Duncan,    &   Chinn,   2007).  This research    focused     on  a "STAR.Legacy"      collaborative-iterative  design    that
encouraged a blend of both individual and group discussions as opposed to traditional lecture. We found that in the
aerospace   workplace      a collaborative   stance involved       a process    of presenting    expertise, including   intentional
listening to fellow workers and peers, and "letting go" of prior conceptions, and preconceived ideas in order to
integrate new schemas. We were able to document (using interviewing techniques and extensive video analysis)
how the aerospace engineering collaborators all went through a shift from knowledge-establishing to knowledge-
sharing as  a consequence       of identity establishment     in a   new   work  situation  that  was unfamiliar   and  potentially
stressful.
           Martin  et  al. (2005)  showed    that bioengineers      who    learned concepts   related  to stem   cell ethics  in  the
context  of Legacy     Cycle  showed    greater   flexibility in   their  thinking  on   transfer problems   than  learners  whose

                                                                                                                                      3-
         original context for learning   was     lecture-based. We  suggest   that this  flexibility was  not only   evidenced in  the
         collaborative problem-solving endemic to the Legacy Cycle, but it was this flexibility that afforded the participants a
         relatively easy shift from knowledge-establishing to knowledge-sharing. Subsequent research by Martin (Martin et
         al., 2007) also suggests that the Legacy Cycle design promotes another defining characteristic of adaptive experts--
         their metacognitive  thinking.    They   found  that learners  are more   reflective about   the  importance  and utility of
         problem-relevant resources if they have first tried to invent a solution prior to receiving these resources. This fits
         research suggestions that invention-first helps create a "time for telling" information that enhance learning with
         understanding   and hence     later flexibility of use  (Schwartz  &  Bransford,    1998).   This study  also outlines how
         participants enhanced their metacognitive understanding through collaborative juxtaposing within and across groups
         (Dudertadt, 2008; Laschka & Pernpeintner, 2001; MacPherson, 2006; O'Mahony et al., In press; Rogers, 2003) and
         fits adroitly with literature on identity and self-esteem in and outside the classroom (Alexander, 2003).
                  The norms of training seemed to shift from "don't get caught not knowing something" to "these are great
         questions and they're pushing all of us to be more exact". From our perspective, these are the kinds of norms that
         help  develop   adaptive expertise.     Importantly, these norms   emerged     from  the collaborative  dance   that  ensued
         between individuals who were distanced geographically from each other, culturally ethnically and professionally at
         the start of the day, but through interactions with each other and the subject matter, closed this distance at the end of
         the day. The structure of the workshop also affected participants' interactions with the instructors.         In the lecture
         condition, most questions were asked by the instructors and answered by individual participants. There were few
         incentives and opportunities for participants to learn about one another's jobs and special areas of expertise, and to
         discuss  issues from    their different  perspectives.  In contrast, the  challenge-based    discussions    prompted  by  the
         STAR.Legacy design generated numerous questions that appeared to create opportunities for further discussions that
         had the potential to help everyone continue to learn once they left the workshop. Thus, knowledge of `whom in
         one's group knew what' seemed particularly useful to sustaining and accelerating new learning once employees left
         the workshop and returned to their jobs. The development of robust "social networks" is an important aspect of
         "preparation for future learning" views of transfer--views that are often not emphasized in more traditional work on
         transfer effects (Bransford & Schwartz, 1999; Schwartz, Bransford, & Sears, 2005). This finding seems similar to
         the  emergent   results of collaboration    descriptions   of musicians'   interactions  where    relations with colleagues
         influence future performance opportunities. The aerospace engineers working in their informal learning environment
         place particular emphasis on this in their collaborative interactions. These latter collaborators would appear to agree
         with unfolding literature that describes the idea that `who you know' is more valuable in today's competitive work
         environment than `what you know'. Furthermore, a notion of how to navigate the intricate social and corporate
         corridors of knowing seems to be a skill of major consequence for individual survival and advancement (Axelrod,
         2007; Barron, 2003; Bransford, 2007; Council-on-Competitiveness, 2004; Eraut, 2004).
                  One of the key points of adaptive expertise and adaptive organizations is that they help people continue
         their future learning. The use of social networks is a powerful way to enable such learning. For people in the Legacy
         group, there were indeed reports of interactive follow-ups to learn more information about composites, but they
         were selective in the sense that not everyone interacted with everyone else from their course. Still, even a single
         addition to one's social network can make a great difference in productivity and opportunities for new learning.
                  By leveraging this kind of technological platform and pedagogical framework, this research is positioned to
         extend the initial design beyond the constraints of traditional learning modalities and, further, to connect students
         and knowledge in formal or informal environments--in part through establishing strong social connections and, in
         part, through the use of ubiquitous and easy to access technologies. Still, the company colleagues with whom we
         work agree strongly that a key to making all this work is to establish a culture of collaboration within a mindset of
         "adaptive expertise" where successful performance is seen as a combination of knowing who knows what and being
         willing to learn new things. Without this kind of change in assumptions of what it means to be competent, it can be
         difficult for people to take the risks that put them in positions to learn new things. This work adds to the research on
         collaboration by looking at the complexity of how adults collaborate within professional work settings. Learning
         about collaboration by designing collaboration that is prescribed enhances that understanding where it is emergent or
         a part of everyday "naturalistic" practice. For the professionals and community members in our research, there are
         emergent roles and scripts, and we show that the participants speak to collaborative moments that unfold in their
         work as they seek to make meaning with innovative solutions and practices.

       Designing           appropriate             computer-supported                    collaborative           learning         for
       environment sustainability in the Himalayas.
                  Indigenous  people    in   the world   have struggled to  keep   their unique  approaches   to life and  traditional

3-
knowledge systems intact with the advent of industrialization and more recently globalization. They have adapted
and  blended their values,  beliefs   and practices to subsist  in mainstream     society (Rogers    2003).  Most  of this
knowledge has its roots deep in a place and thus is extremely localized. We believe this knowledge plays a very
important role in conservation and sustainability practices within an area.
         The problem of sustainability and conservation in the Himalayan region has been a growing concern over
the last few decades. In her book, Ancient Futures: Learning from Ladakh, Noebrg-Hodge (Norberg-Hodge, 1991)
describes a Himalayan culture where the traditional customs that contributed to sustainability are being replaced by
more modern practices. Thus Ladakh represents a smaller version of the global environmental crisis. As learning
scientists, we need to approach the problem in a manner that aims to transform the way our students interact with the
community and environment. The cultural and traditional practices specifically focused on conservation in the area
need to be taken into consideration, meaning there is a significant need to respect indigenous knowledge. We would
also need to help learners' link ideas from ecology and formal science knowledge to their own lives, potentially
requiring significant conceptual change.   Finally, any  educational   initiative on  sustainability would   need  to help
learners negotiate different worldviews and value systems about development and livelihood. These initiatives call
for  an understanding  of how   members    of these communities    collaborate to  establish and   share  indigenous  and
exogenous knowledge.
         In June 2006 we chose participatory video (PV) to support the knowledge-building community approach to
help the children of Kande village, India and Chaughari and Dalchowki village in Nepal to collaborate with their
community    members  to  learn about   local/indigenous knowledge.    Although    during the intervention    the children
operated the video cameras, and decided on the questions to be asked, there was extensive involvement from local
adults that initiated the process of expanding the influence of the project to the larger community. PV allows the
participants to choose the questions that would be asked and also lets the participants visually share perceptions and
perspectives of their place and  culture.  Thus putting  less emphasis  on  the   use of  language   and the  participant's
ability to express themselves verbally. PV has advantages in the development context; videocameras can capture
views of nonliterate members of the community, and cameras also require little power. The cameras themselves can
be mailed away for repair, and the postal system provides an effective, albeit slow, way of getting rich data from
place to place. It is reminiscent of pre-Internet Computer Supported Collaborative Learning projects such as the
Electronic Quills project which connected rural schools in Alaska via mailed floppy disks (Bruce & Rubin, 1993).
         The PV   approach  allowed    students to  collaborate with the larger   village community      in understanding
environmental issues. For example, in Kande village in India the students asked one of the members of the women's
group about their biggest concern for the area. The conversation was as follows:
         Student (male): what about the problems of the district (county)?
         Woman:          the biggest problem is that there is no paved road in our area
         Student (male): do you think getting a road will point you in the direction of development? Do you
                         think there are disadvantages to building a road?
         Woman:          Well there are some disadvantages as the land would be affected thus agriculture
                         will suffer.
The students later while watching the video passionately discussed the issue of the road. The students disagreed with
the adults on this issue. They felt that the road would bring in problems like excessive alcohol consumption in their
village, as accessibility to the wine shop would be easier with the road (alcoholism is a pervasive problem in many
towns in the area). PV allowed questions to be raised and differences to be surfaced between the child and the elder.
         Additionally, PV allowed students to turn information about the environment into actionable knowledge
that aligned with  indigenous   values. In the  Chaughare  village  in Nepal,  students   conversed   with  a 72-year-old
woman. The woman pointed out evidence of a major flood that had taken place fifty years earlier and discussed how
the flood had harmed the village. Students asked questions about deforestation in the region, leading naturally to a
conversation about the future.
         Student (male): I have come from the school down there and I will be asking you a few questions.
                         In the earlier days what did the forests look like? Were they very dense?
         Woman:          Earlier we used to get 4-5 bundles of grass in a day, now we barely manage to get
                         even one! Where is the jungle? These days if you set out to get grass at 6 am, you
                         can just find enough for 1 bundle by 4 pm.
         Student (male): People have to work so hard for just one bundle of grass these days.
         Woman:          Yes.
         Student (male): In the earlier days one person could rear many animals...
         Woman:          Yes in those days one person could rear two buffalos on his own, today it is difficult
                         for even two people to rear one buffalo!

                                                                                                                            3-
                   Student (male): What you mean is that the condition of the forest today is really bad as compared to
                                   the earlier days.
         Later in this transcript, we see that the student is able to connect local information with school-based knowledge
         about  the environment    (for instance, that deforestation   can lead  to  erosion),  leading to  a desire  for action and
         opening the possibility of a community-based dialogue.
                   Thus we are pursuing sustainability education through the knowledge building community approach. The
         knowledge building community approach has known to support a deep conceptual reorganization in students to
         foster learning   and progress   for adult   professionals (Scardamalia,    2003),  and  to  assist  in connecting   remote
         communities (Bruce & Easley, 2000).
                   We believe that knowledge-building communities with computer supported collaborative learning can be
         an important link between community concerns and education. We also recognize that the technology used in this
         region has to have a structure in which there is economic, political, cultural, and spiritual space for the community
         (Riedijk,  1982).  Sustainability and   land-use  literature  suggests this   approach   may result  not  only   in learning
         outcomes,  but  also  in important   ecological  outcomes.    In his review   of social  power  struggles   around   derelict
         landscapes, Miles (2000) suggests that environmental destruction takes place within a context and a value-structure.
         We    propose   that  community-based       environmental     stewardship,    aided   by  appropriate    information    and
         communication Technologies (ICTs), will counteract unsustainable land and development processes, not so much
         because negative economic and social forces go away, but because local community/cultural attitudes will shift and
         hopefully  converge   across   diverse local  constituencies, imbuing     the landscape  and   its resources with   new, or
         renewed, value.
                   In conclusion, research on professional musicians, aerospace engineers, and village community members
         help us   understand  the multidimensionality    of collaboration    ­ the  interrelated meta,  interpersonal,   and design
         elements. Yet, each study provides a particular perspective on the nuances of collaboration in the relational space,
         the environment, and in the participants' shifts to sharing and constructing knowledge in everyday settings. This
         research has important implications for how we understand collaboration as a resource for innovation and how we
         design for collaborative environments in learning contexts.

       References
         Ackerman, M. S., Pipek, V., & Wulf, V. (2003). Sharing Expertise: Beyond Knowledge Management. Cambridge
                   MA: MIT Press.
         Alexander, P. (2003). The Development of Expertise: The Journey from Acclimation to Proficiency. Educational
                   Researcher, 32, 10-14.
         Axelrod, J. (2007). Rising above the gathering storm: Energizing and employing America for a brighter economic
                   future. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.
         Barron, B. (2000). Achieving coordination in collaborative problem-solving groups. The Journal of the Learning
                   Sciences, 9, 403-436.
         Barron, B. (2003). When smart groups fail. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 12(3), 307-359.
         Bransford, J. D. (2007). Preparing people for rapidly changing environments. Journal of Engineering Education.
         Bransford, J. D., & Schwartz, D. L. (1999). Rethinking transfer: A simple proposal with multiple implications. In A.
                   Iran-Nejad & P. D. Pearson (Eds.), Review of research in education (Vol. 24, pp. 61-100). Washington DC:
                   American Educational Research Association.
         Bransford,  J. D., Vye,   N. J., Bateman,    H., Brophy,   S. P., &  Roselli,  R. (2004).  Vanderbilt's   AMIGO     Project:
                   Knowledge   of  How    People  Learn   enters Cyberspace.    In Duffy  &  J. Kirkley  (Eds.),  Learner-Centered
                   Theory and Practice in Distance Education: Cases from Higher Education. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
         Bruce, B. C., & Easley, J. A., Jr. (2000). Emerging Communities of practice: Collaboration and communication in
                   action research. Education and Action Research, 82, 243-259.
         Chizhik, A. W. (2001). Equity and status in group collaboration: Learning through explanations depends on task
                   characteristics. Social Psychology of Education(5), 2.
         Cohen, E. G. (1994). Restructuring the classroom: Conditions for productive small groups. Review of Educational
                   Research, 64(1), 1-35.
         Council-on-Competitiveness. (2004). Innovate America: National Innovation Initiate Report, Thriving in a World of
                   Challenge and Change.
         Dillenbourg, P., Baker, M., Blaye, A., & O'Malley, C. (1996). The evolution of research on collaborative learning.
                   In E. Spada & P. Reiman (Eds.), Learning in Humans and Machine: Towards an interdisciplinary learning
                   science (pp. 189-211). Oxford: Elsevier.

3-
Dudertadt,  J. J.  (2008).  Engineering    for a changing  world:   A roadmap    to  the future of  engineering   practice,
          research, and education. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan.
Eraut, M. (2004). Transfer of knowledge between education and workplace settings. In H. Rainbird, A. Fuller & A.
          Munro (Eds.), Workplace learning in context (pp. 201-221). London: Routledge.
Hatano, G., & Inagaki, K. (1986). Two Courses of Expertise. In H. Stevenson, H. Azuma & K. Hakuta (Eds.), Child
          development and Education in Japan (pp. 262-272). New York: Freeman.
Herrenkohl, L. R., & Guerra, M. R. (1998). Participation structure, scientific discourse, and student engagement in
          fourth grade. Cognition and Instruction, 16(4), 431-473.
Hmelo-Silver, C. E., Duncan, R. G., & Chinn, C. A. (2007). Scaffolding and Achievement in Problem-Based and
          Inquiry Learning: A response to Kirschner, Sweller, and Clark (2006). Educational Psychologist, 42(2), 99-
          107.
Hutchins, E. (2002). Cognition in the wild (5th ed.). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
John-Steiner, V. (2000). Creative collaboration. New York: Oxford University Press.
Johnson, D. W., Johnson, R. T., & Stanne, M. B. (1998). Impact of goal and resource interdependence on problem-
          solving success. Journal of Social Psychology, 129(5), 621-629.
Jones, I. (2002).  Social  relationships,  peer  collaboration, and children's oral  language.  Educational   Psychology,
          22(1), 63-73.
Laschka, B., & Pernpeintner, A. (2001, September 10-14). Aerospace Education in Germany. Paper presented at the
          2001 Aerospace Congress, TU Muenchen, Germany.
Levy,   J.  (2004).     The    Future   of   Learning    Technology.         Retrieved    September      4,  2006,   from
          http://www.clomedia.com/content/templates/clo_feature.asp?articleid=548&zoneid=30
MacPherson, B. (2006). Changes in the Aeronautical Manufacturing Business [Audio recording]. Seattle, WA: LIFE
          Center, University of Washington.
Martin, T., Pierson, J., Rivale, S. R., Vye, N. J., Bransford, J. D., & Diller, K. R. (2007). The function of generating
          ideas in the Legacy Cycle. Arlington, VA: International Network for Engineering Education and Research .
Martin, T., Rayne, K., Kemp, N. J., Hart, J., & Diller, K. R. (2005). Teaching for adaptive expertise in biomedical
          engineering ethics. Science and Engineering Ethics, 11(2), 257-276.
Mead,  P.  F., Stephens,   R., Richey, M.,  &   Bransford, J. D.  (2007). A  Test of Leadership:    Charting Engineering
          Education    for 2020   and   Beyond.   Paper   presented   at the American     Institute of   Aeronautics  and
          Astronautics, Hawaii.
Miles, M. (2000). Reclamation: Nine Mile Run Greenway. In The Uses of Decoration: Essays in the Architectural
          Everyday. New York: John Wiley and Sons.
National Academy of Engineering. (2005). The Engineer of 2020. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.
O'Mahony,   T.  K., Bransford,    J.  D.,  Vye,  N. J., Richie,  M.,  Linn,  K., Dang,   V., et al.  (In press).  Creating
          environments     for continuous   learning:   Adaptive  organizations   &   adaptive  expertise.  Cognition  &
          Instruction.
Riedijk, W. (1982). Appropriate technology for developing countries. Delft, the Netherlands: Delft University Press.
Robinson, A., & Stern, S. (1997). Corporate Creativity: How Innovation and Improvement Actually Happen. San
          Francisco, CA: Bennett-Koehler.
Rogers, E. M. (2003). Diffusion of Innovation: Fifth Edition. New York: Free Press.
Rogoff, B. (2003). The cultural nature of human development. New York: Oxford University Press.
Rummel, N., & Spada, H. (2005). Learning to collaborate: An instructional approach to promoting collaborative
          problem solving in computer-mediated settings. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 14(2), 201-241.
Schwartz, D. L., & Bransford, J. D. (1998). A Time for Telling. Cognition and Instruction, 16(4), 475-522.
Schwartz, D. L., Bransford, J. D., & Sears, D. (2005). Efficiency and innovation in transfer. In J. Mestre (Ed.),
          Transfer of learning: Research and perspectives (pp. 1-51). Greenwich, CT: Information Age Publishing.
Schwartz,  D.  L., Lin, X.,    Brophy, S., &   Bransford, J. D.  (2000). Toward   the development    of  flexibly adaptive
          instructional designs. In Instructional Design Theories and Models (Vol. II, pp. 183-213). Hillsdale, NJ:
          Lawrence Erlbaum.
Stevens, R. R. (2000). Divisions of labor in school and in the workplace: Comparing computer and paper-supported
          activities across settings. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 9, 373-401.
White, B., & Frederiksen, J. (2005). A theoretical framework and approach for fostering metacognitive development
          Educational Psychologist, 40(4), 211-223.

                                                                                                                            3-
