          How Learners Use Awareness Cues About Their Peer's
       Knowledge? Insights from Synchronized Eye-Tracking Data
                     Mirweis Sangin, Gaëlle Molinari, Marc-Antoine Nüssli, Pierre Dillenbourg,
   Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), School of Computer and Communication Sciences,
                     CRAFT, EPFL-CRAFT CE 1 631 Station 1 CH-1015 Lausanne Switzerland,
             Email: mirweis.sangin@epfl.ch, gaelle.molinari@epfl.ch, marc-antoine.nuessli@epfl.ch,
                                              pierre.dillenbourg@epfl.ch

          Abstract:   In an   empirical  study, eye-gaze   patterns  of pairs   of students   were  recorded  and
          analyzed in a remote situation where they had to build a concept map collaboratively. They
          were provided (or not), with a knowledge awareness tool that provided learner A with learner
          B's  level  of knowledge      measured   through   a  pre-test.  Previous   results   showed   that   the
          awareness tool positively affected learning gain by enhancing the production of elaborative
          talk and   knowledge    negotiation.  In   the  present paper,    we  describe   the  actual  use  of  a
          knowledge     awareness   tool during    the  course of interaction    by  analyzing   the gaze    paths
          recorded   during   the experiment    and  how  they   relate to   learning performance    and    verbal
          interactions.  The   results  showed     that learners  refer   to  the  knowledge     awareness    tool
          episodically during the course of collaboration, mainly to assess the epistemic value of the
          information    provided   by  the  peer,  especially when     the  peer  seems   uncertain    about   his
          understanding.   The    potential  of the    synchronized    eye-tracking   method    for  research    in
          computer supported collaborative learning is discussed.

Introduction
          In a large empirical study (Sangin, Molinari, Dillenbourg, Nüssli, 2007), participants learning in dyads
were provided with cues about their partner's prior knowledge of a particular topic through what we refer to as a
Knowledge Awareness Tool (KAT hereafter). The results of this study are summarized below. This contribution
aims at deepening these results by exploring the way learners used the KAT information during the course of
collaboration.  We    used   two  eye-tracking  devices   to  record   peers'   eye-gaze   data during   the  collaboration
sessions. We report and discuss analyses of the eye-gaze data regarding the use of the KAT, and their relation
with learning outcomes and verbal interactions. The potential of synchronized eye-tracking data for research in
computer supported collaborative learning is discussed in light of the results.

Knowledge Awareness in Collaborative Learning
          The role of social interaction in the development of knowledge is now broadly admitted by educational
researchers (Wertsch, 1978; Slavin, 1983; Palincsar, 1998). According to Dillenbourg (1999), learners benefit
from collaboration because they produce interactions such as explanation (Jeong, 1998), argumentation (Baker,
1994), mutual-regulation (Blaye, 1988) or conflict resolution (Doise & Mugny, 1984). The extent to which these
verbal interactions   between     peers lead to  elaboration   of new   knowledge     depends    on  the  quality   of these
interactions.  Roschelle and Teasley (1995) summarized this set of interactions as the process of building and
maintaining a shared understanding of the task learners are involved in. Many CSCL researchers have since
been  inspired    by  psycholinguistic   concepts   such  as "shared    knowledge"    or   "common      ground"  (Clark   &
Brennan, 1991). Grounding is the process through which individuals engaged in a conversation try to ensure
their mutual understanding.
          In order to build a common ground and make the communicative process effective, learners must have
some representation of their partner (Clark 1996; Clark & Murphy, 1982). We refer to the process of building a
representation    of the partner(s) beliefs,  knowledge    and   intentions  as  mutual    modeling  (Dillenbourg,     1999;
Sangin,   Nova,   Molinari   & Dillenbourg,   2007).    A growing    body    of literature highlights   the importance   of
knowing what the partner knows and does not know for speakers (Clark & Marshall, 1981; Krauss & Fussell,
1991; Nickerson, 1999, Schober, 1998). For Krauss and Fussell (1991), speakers formulate their messages in
order  to be  understood   by  the  audience. They     argue that this  process   of "perspective   taking"  is  necessarily
probabilistic and that there is no simple mechanism to identify with certainty what is mutually known (Krauss
and Fussell, 1991). The communicators draw on two distinct sources of information to formulate their messages,
the inferred prior knowledge and the current feedback, which are dynamically related and feed each other.
          In  the same   line of  research,  studies   showed  that people   are   biased  in the  direction  of their  own
knowledge when estimating the audience's knowledge (Steedman & Johnson-Laird, 1980, Nickerson, 1999; Chi
et al., 2004; Bromme, Jucks, Runde, 2005). More knowledgeable people are more likely to overestimate the
audience's   knowledge    while   those  who  are  less-knowledgeable     tend  to underestimate    it. Misunderstandings
occur  when    the   speaker  holds false beliefs   about  the listener's   knowledge.     Overestimating    the attendee's

                                                                                                                               2-2
         knowledge    may   produce   explanations    that are too   difficult to understand   while   underestimating  a partner's
         knowledge may lead the speakers to provide information that is already known (Wittwer, Knückles, Renkl, in
         press).
                   Consequently, these considerations are central to collaborative learning situations where peers build
         upon each other's knowledge and learn through mutual appropriation of knowledge and skills (King, 1998).
         Holding   an accurate   model   of  the partner's  knowledge      may  help   co-learners to  provide explanations  on  an
         appropriate level of elaboration. We do not claim that students permanently maintain an explicit and detailed
         model   of their   partner's knowledge,    but    rather that some    correct  representation  of  the partner   smoothes
         collaborative  processes.    In  the domain    of   Computer      Supported    Collaborative   Learning   (CSCL),    some
         researchers proposed to provide learners with tools that enhanced their awareness of the partner's knowledge.
         Ogata and Yano (2000) proposed the notion of knowledge awareness to increase collaboration opportunities of
         shared knowledge construction in an open ended collaborative learning environment. More recently, Leinonen
         and  Järvelä  (2006)  proposed    a  visualization  tool  as  a   knowledge   externalization  aiming  at supporting   the
         interpersonal  evaluation    of knowledge    and  showed    its   positive effect  on group   performances.  To  sum   up,
         providing learners with an external help that allows them to accurately assess the partner(s) knowledge has the
         great   potential to trigger  germane    socio-cognitive    processes    that by  extension   may  enhance   collaborative
         learning performances.

        Goal and research questions:
                   Our experimental study investigated whether providing learners with cues about their partner's prior
         knowledge affects the learning performances in distant collaborative learning tasks (Sangin et al., 2007). This
         contribution does not report the basic results but provides new analyses obtained by using two eye tracking
         machines. We nonetheless summarize the main results here:

             1.    Learners   provided   with  cues   about    their peer's    knowledge    during  the collaboration   obtained a
                   significantly higher learning gain than participants who were not provided with these cues.
             2.    This effect  was   (statistically) mediated    by   the  fact  that the  Knowledge    Awareness    Tool  (KAT)
                   enhanced participants' accuracy in estimating their partner's knowledge.
             3.    Analyses   of verbal     interaction showed       that  the KAT     increased   the  production  of  elaborated
                   "information providing" utterances, which were positively and significantly related to learning gains.
                   The KAT also enhanced exploratory talk (Mercer, 1996) about conceptual knowledge.

                   The obvious interpretation of these results is that information about the partner's knowledge allows
         learners to build a more accurate model of their partner's knowledge. This model serves as basis for audience
         design (Clark & Murphy, 1982), perspective taking (Krauss & Fussell, 1991) and making processes that benefit
         communication efficiency and ultimately enhance the collaborative learning gain. However, these results also
         raise at least one additional question: How did the participants use the information provided by the KAT?              The
         present paper is aimed at providing an answer to this new question by analyzing the actual use the learners made
         of  the Knowledge    Awareness     Tool. In  order  to   do this, we  analyzed    the eye-gaze data   recorded during  the
         collaboration in order to address the following sub-questions:
             A)    When do the learners consult the KAT?          Do they look at it once at the beginning or do they refer to it
                   episodically during the course of interaction?
             B)    Is there a relation between the amount of time spent consulting the KAT and respectively the learning
                   outcomes and the accuracy in estimations of the partner's knowledge?
             C)    Do the participants look at the KAT during specific moments and what are these moments?

       Method
        Participants and design:
                   Sixty-four first year students (18 women and 46 men, mean age = 21.2 years) of the Swiss Federal
         Institute of Technology   in    Lausanne  participated   in the   study. They   were  involved  in curricula  that did not
         involve advanced neurophysiologic notions and had basic but sufficient knowledge about how to use computers.
         They were randomly assigned to 32 dyads. Sixteen dyads were assigned to each of the two following conditions:
         (1) experimental   (KAT)     condition, in which   the   participants  were   provided  with  the Knowledge    Awareness
         Tool; (2) control condition, in which they were not provided with the KAT. Peers did not know each other
         before the experiment. Students were remunerated 30 Swiss Francs for their participation.

        Instructional Material and Apparatus
                   Instructional Material.    The     Instructional  Material     consisted of   an   explanatory  text about   the
         neurophysiologic phenomenon of "action potential" written with the help of domain experts (a neurobiology

2-2
researcher and a biology teacher). The text was divided into 3 chapters: "the resting potential", "the initiation of
the action potential" and "the propagation of the action potential".
        Apparatus. We developed an automated experimental setup running on two computers connected to
two eye-tracking screens (TobiiTM 1750) distributed in two different rooms. The experimental setup allowed us
to automate all the procedure (i.e. learning phases and tests). During the collaborative phase, participants used
an on-line concept-map building software (CmapTools, IHMC). They were provided with a microphone-headset
during this phase in order to communicate with each other and their verbal interactions were recorded.

Procedure and scoring
        Each partner was located in separate rooms, in front of two eye-tracking setups running the automated
experimental setup. The experimental session lasted for approximately 90 minutes and consisted of 6 phases, the
main phases being individual reading (2) and collaborative concept mapping (4):
    (1) First, the  participants' prior knowledge     of the  instructional material  was  tested through  an  open-
        question in order to detect potential experts of the domain.
    (2) During the individual reading phase, participants were asked to carefully read the instructional texts
        during 12 minutes. The three chapters were freely accessible in any order.
    (3) A pre-test (test1) was administrated. It consisted of 30 items: two multiple-choice questions and eight
        inference  verifications  for each   of the  three chapters.   The multiple-choice  questions  included  four
        possibilities with one or more possible correct answers. The minimum score for these items was 0 and
        the maximum 4. The inference verification items consisted of true or false assertions. The score was 0
        for incorrect answers and 1 for correct answers.      The test1's overall range was 0 to 48 (0 to 16 for each
        chapter). All items were validated by experts of the domain and their variability was tested in a pilot
        study.
    (4) Participants  were  provided    with instructions  about   the collaborative phase  and with   a short  video
        tutorial on how to use the CmapTools© interface. Then they had 20 minutes to draw a collaborative
        concept-map    describing   the content  of  the   texts. They   were able to communicate     orally through
        headsets. The participants of the experimental condition were provided with the KAT on the bottom
        part   of the screen   (see Figure   1): it  represented   the partner's pre-test  scores on  each   chapter.
        Participants of the control condition were not provided with the KAT. During this phase, the two peers'
        on-screen eye-gaze movements were recorded.
    (5) The post-test (test2) was administrated including the same items than the pre-test but in a different
        order.
    (6) Finally, participants were asked to estimate their partner's knowledge at the post-test for each of the
        three chapters on a 7-point likert-like survey.

        The Relative Learning Gain (RLG) was computed for each chapter as the different between the post-
test and pre-test score divided by the difference between the pretest score and the maximal score. The total RLG
was obtained   by  calculating the  mean   of   the RLG    of the  three chapters. The accuracy   of  participants in
estimating their  partner's knowledge   was   computed     by taking,  for each  chapter, the absolute   value of  the
difference between the A's estimation of B's knowledge, and the B's score on the test2. The total estimation
accuracy score was the mean of the three chapters (for more details, see Sangin et al., 2007).

               Figure 1. Screenshot of the KAT condition during the concept-map building phase.

                                                                                                                         2-2
        Coding of verbal interaction:
                   Verbal interactions were recorded and transcribed verbatim. In order to test our hypotheses about the
         quality  of interaction,  we  used a  quantitative content  analysis method   (Strijbos, Martens,  Prins   &  Jochems,
         2006). The segmentation and coding were separated in order to enhance the precision. Utterances were used as
         unit of  analysis. An    utterance is defined  as  a  "unit of  meaning"  (Neuman,    Webb   &   Cochrane,    1995)  of
         conceptual understanding. The reliability of segmentation and coding was computed by using the proportion of
         agreement between two independent judges on 13% of the corpus. The level of agreement reached 86%. The
         coding   scheme   was  developed   in order to focus   on   the following aspects  of  the  verbalization:  elaborative
         information seeking and providing, elaboration of conflict, knowledge negotiation and mutual-regulation (see
         table 1). This paper reports results on aggregated relevant coding categories.

         Table 1: Mutually exclusive coding categories of peers' interaction.

                               category           code     Description
          Content-             Information        IP       Utterances where the speaker provides new information about
          related              Providing                   the  content   in  the  form    of  statements  or  concept-map
          categories                                       improvements.
                               Information        IS       Utterances where the speaker asks for new information or asks
                               seeking                     for validation of a certain piece of domain-related information.
                               Contradicting      CT       Utterances where the speaker explicitly contradicts his partner
                                                           by providing an alternative piece of information.
          Non-content-         Collaboration      CM       Utterances related to the strategic management of the task (i.e.
          related              management                  concept-map building) and the interaction (i.e. turn-taking)
          categories           Knowledge          KC       Utterances where the speaker provides a cue about the quality
                               Cues                        of his knowledge and understanding
                               KAT Reference      Kref     Utterances with an explicit reference to the KAT
                               Others             OT       Utterances   which did  not fit the previous   categories (e.g  off-
                                                           task, repetitions, incomplete sentences etc.).

        Eye-gaze data collection:
                   The eye-gaze    data was   gathered using   two   eye-tracking screens  (Tobii©   1750)  connected    to  two
         identical computer    setups.  The  eye-movements     of each   peer were  recorded   during  the 20 minutes     of the
         collaborative concept-map building phase. For each dyad, the two sets of gaze data and the coded interactions
         were computationally synchronized with less than 30ms lag (the maximum delay offset tolerated). We used
         computational scripts to compute the amount of gaze-data falling in the KAT informational zone (see figure 1)
         for  the learners  in the KAT   condition.  KAT-episodes,    during  which  the   learners were  looking   at the KAT
         information, were also automatically detected. A sequence was considered a KAT-episode when at least 20% of
         the eye-gazes fell on the KAT zone during at least 2 sec. Each KAT-episode lasted as long as the amount of eye-
         gaze data falling in the zone represented more than 20% of the overall gaze-data. We detected an overall of 106
         KAT-episodes with a minimum duration of 2 sec, maximum duration of 154 sec and a mean duration of 8.2 sec.
                   As the present paper is aimed at assessing the actual use of the KAT, only the KAT-condition dyads
         were considered for the following analyses. Due to technical issues regarding gaze records (e.g. missing data,
         lack of quality in eye-gaze data, synchronization issues etc.), five pairs were removed from the data reported
         here. Hence the reported results concern 10 pairs / 20 participants of the KAT condition.

       Results
        A. When do the learners look at the KAT?
                   When do the learners look at the KAT? Do they need it once at the beginning of the collaboration
         phase or do they refer to it during the course of the collaboration? To answer this question, we calculated the
         average ratio of eye-gaze falling in the KAT informational zone. Figure 2 represents this mean value plotted
         against time: the maximum peak is reached at the very beginning of the collaboration. As one can see, a large
         amount of gazes-on-KAT occur during the first 60 seconds of the collaboration. This corresponds to the moment
         when the KAT is first introduced (i.e. the beginning of the collaboration phase). However, the succession of
         subsequent smaller peaks suggests that learners also referred to awareness cues about their partner's knowledge
         more locally.

2-20
 Figure 2. Means of eye-gaze data falling in the informational parts of KAT during the course of collaboration.

B. How is the use of the KAT related to learning outcomes?
         We found a positive and significant correlation between the number of gazes-on-KAT and the learners
relative learning gain (r(20) = .54, p = .01). This result suggests a rather high relation between the amount of
time the learners spent consulting the KAT and their relative learning gain: the more they look at KAT, the more
they seem to learn.
         We    also computed     the correlation  between   the  number  of    gazes-on-KAT   and   the accuracy  in
estimating the partner's knowledge. However, the correlation is not significant (r(20) = .07, ns). This lack of
correlation can partly be explained by two outlier learners who spent considerably more time referring to the
KAT than the rest of the participants. These learners belonged to the same dyad and intensively talked about the
KAT  during    a relatively long episode   (154 sec)  which partly  explains  the second highest  peak  of Figure  2.
However, despite these outlier learners, no significant conclusion can be drawn about a relation between the
time spent looking at the KAT information and the accuracy in estimating the knowledge level of the partner.

C. Do learners consult the KAT on specific occasions?
         We    previously   reported that  learners consult the    KAT  on   a regular  basis during the   course of
collaboration. We explored qualitatively the episodes during which they actively consulted the KAT information
by analyzing what types of utterances were produced during these episodes. Table 2 summarizes the amount and
percentage of utterances of each type. The first row (All) reports the overall distribution of utterances of each
type produced    by the  20  participants  in the  KAT   condition.  The second   row   (KAT-episodes)   reports  the
distribution of  utterances of each   type produced   by both   of the peers  during KAT-episodes.   The   third row
reports  the utterances produced  by   the KAT-viewer    during  the KAT-episodes.   By  KAT-viewer     we mean   the
learner whose gaze data was taken to detect the current episode. And finally, the fourth row reports utterances
produced by the viewer's partner when the KAT-viewer was looking at the KAT.
         We    used Pearson's  chi-square  test to  compare the  distribution  of utterances  which occurred during
KAT-episodes (KAT-episode) to the general distribution of overall utterances (All). The test reported that the
two distributions were independent (2 = 1193, p < .001). A closer look at the residuals showed that the main
differences  in  these two  distributions  come  from  the Knowledge    Cues   (KC), Information  Seeking   (IS)  and
explicit reference  to the  KAT  (KRef)   categories. Thus, this   analysis shows  that more  of the KC,   and KRef
utterances and fewer of the IS utterances occurred during the KAT-episodes compared to the overall distribution
of utterances.

Table 2: Overview of interaction results (Columns are coding categories listed in Table 1)

                     IP          IS        CT          KC            CM            KRef        Other        total

                                                                                                                        2-2
                    All      494          99        55           86           259             36           322        1347
                            (30.9%)   (6.2%)      (3.2%)       (5.4%)      (24.9%)        (2.3%)       (27.2%)      (100%)
                 KAT-        71           8         4            35            22             30           40         210
             episodes       (28.5%)   (3.2%)      (1.6%)     (14.1%)       (20.5%)        (12.1%)      (20.1%)      (100%)
                 KAT-        24           5         3            13            12             15           16          88
              viewer        (22.4%)   (4.7%)      (2.8%)     (12.2%)       (23.4%)        (14%)        (20.6%)      (100%)
            Viewer's         47           3         1            22            10             15           24         122
                  Peer      (33.1%)   (2.1%)      (0.7%)     (15.5%)       (18.3%)        (10.6%)      (19.7%)      (100%)

                  We also compared the distribution of the utterances produced by the KAT-viewers' during episodes
         where they were consulting the KAT information, to the distribution of utterances produced by their peers. The
         Pearson's Chi-square test reported that these two distributions were also independent (2 = 162.4, p < .001). A
         closer look to the residuals suggested that the differences are mainly explained by the IP, the IS and the KC
         categories. Indeed  if  we refer to the results presented  in  table 2, we  can  see that there   are  twice as many
         Information   Providing  utterances produced    by the  viewer's peer   during  KAT-episodes      than by the viewer
         himself (47 vs. 24). This means that, there is twice the chance that learner A was looking at the KAT when the
         partner  B  was providing  information  than  when    A himself  was  providing  new  information.     Furthermore, it
         appears that during the KAT-episodes, the KAT-viewers produced more Information Seeking utterances than
         their peers (5 vs. 3). These results also support the fact that there is more chance of having a Knowledge Cue
         provided   by the  KAT-viewer's    peer occurring   when   the  KAT-viewer   is  looking  at the   KAT   information.
         Another interesting fact is that the KAT-viewers produced fewer utterances than their partners when they were
         consulting the KAT (88 vs. 122). In other words, when A was looking at the KAT, it is more likely that B was
         talking rather than A himself.
                  The following excerpts (translated from French) illustrate what happens during typical KAT-episodes.
         In these examples, the viewer is the learner who is consulting the KAT during the episode in question and the
         peer is his partner. The timelines of the utterances and the corresponding viewer's fixations on the KAT are
         represented   under each  excerpt.  The first line is the  representation of the viewer's  utterances    timeline, the
         second line represents the peer's utterances timeline and the third line represents the viewer's fixations timeline.
                  The first example is a typical KAT-episode occurring at the beginning of the collaboration where the
         learners discover   the KAT,   exchange   each  other's scores   and talk about  it. After   exchanging   their score
         represented in the KAT, the viewer says that she studied a little bit of biology during her past studies and it
         probably helped her performing on the pre-test [utterance (4)]. The viewer's peer reports never having studied
         that topic before.

         Example 1.
           Speaker       N°         utterance                                                                         code
             peer        (1)        Actually you have my scores.                                                      Kref
            viewer       (2)        OK you have 50-56-50                                                              Kref
             Peer        (3)        And you did 56-44-25 [laughing]                                                   Kref
            Viewer       (4)        Actually I did a little bit of biology in the past. It probably helps.             KC
             Peer        (5)        Oh! .. Ok! Personally I almost never studied this.                                 KC

                  The   second   excerpt  provides an    example   of  a situation  where  the   viewer's    peer  describes a
         phenomenon but is not able to remember the name. The viewer consults the KAT at that moment.

         Example 2.
           Speaker       N°         utterance                                                                         code
             Peer        (1)        There was an ion's transportation in the channels ... I mean it worked             IP
                                    better when it was larger.
             Peer        (2)        But I don't remember how it was called.                                            KC

       Discussion and conclusions
                  We used a new investigation method consisting of the synchronized eye-gaze data of pairs who learned
         collaboratively in a remote concept-map building task. Peers' eye-gaze data were synchronized with their verbal
         interaction to investigate the actual use they made of a Knowledge Awareness Tool that provided them with

2-22
cues  about  their  partner's   knowledge.    The  first question   we  asked    was  whether    the learners   consult   the
information  provided    by   the KAT   only  once   or  whether  they refer  to  it on  a regular  base.  This  question  is
legitimate  given   the  fact that  the  information    provided  by  the KAT     remains,    after all, quite  basic. Eye-
movements allowed us to show that they consult the information episodically. It seems that learners do not use
this information simply at the beginning to build a mental model of their partner but that they also refer to it
when they need to update their model or to use it as grounding support.
         The    second   question   was  whether     the time  spent   consulting    the   KAT   was  related   to learning
performance.    The amount     of  time  spent  looking   at the  KAT   information     was   positively  correlated   to the
collaborative   learning  gain.   Even  though  no   causal  conclusion can   be  drawn,   it is interesting to   know    that
looking at the KAT is positively related to the collaborative learning gain. An even more intriguing result is the
lack of correlation between the time-on-KAT and learners accuracy in estimating their partner's knowledge.
Further analyses showed that this lack of relation is partly explained by outlier learners who spent considerably
more  time-on-KAT       than  the  average  population.   Another   explanation   could    be  the  rather  low  number    of
subjects available to compute the correlation. However, it is worth noting that the KAT information, i.e. the
partner's score at the pre-test does not indicate the partners score at the post-test, since knowledge is expected to
evolve during the collaboration.
         Analyses of gaze-on-KAT episodes provided insights about the main situations where learners seem to
refer to the KAT information. Obviously they refer to it broadly at the beginning when they exchange their
scores and discuss about the strengths and weaknesses of each other's knowledge. More interestingly, they also
refer to it when their partner provides verbal cues about the quality of their knowledge. It seems that during
these moments of epistemic uncertainty, learners compare the verbal cues provided by the peer about his own
knowledge    and  the   information    provided  by  the  KAT.    Furthermore,    they   also seem   to  consult   the KAT
significantly more when their partner is providing new information. Apparently in some situations, the KAT
serves co-learners to assess the information provided by their partner. One of the main effects of the KAT seems
to be the fact that it allows learners to become aware of epistemic uncertainty related to their understanding and
allows them to deploy strategies to cope with it. It may also explain why participants of the KAT condition
performed more knowledge negotiation (e.g. more exploratory talk) than participants of the control condition
who were more focused on task completion aspects (e.g. more cumulative talk; Mercer, 1996).
         Recent technological advances provided new, cheaper, faster and less constraining eye-tracking devices
which fostered research efforts in Cognitive Science and Human-Computer Interaction to investigate cognitive
processes   and usability.  However     these investigations  are  restricted  to individual   settings. In this  paper,  we
reported investigation where pair learners' eye-gaze data were used to analyze the collaboration process on a
deeper level. Dual-eye-tracking method appears to be a new "window into the mind" of co-learners, and hence
is of a great   potential for  CSCL    research.  It allows  opportunities   for  more   fine-grained    analyzes  of  socio-
cognitive processes such as grounding, mutual regulation and so forth. Many new opportunities to further our
understanding    of socio-cognitive     processes  such   as  shared   visual  attention   (Richardson     & Dale,    2005),
referential breakdowns     and    conversational repairs  (Cherubini   et al., submitted)     become  possible,   providing
promising research perspectives.

References
Baker, M. (1994). A model for negotiation in teaching-learning dialogues. Journal of Artificial Intelligence in
         Education, 5 (2), 199-254.
Blaye, A. (1988). Confrontation socio-cognitive et resolution de problemes. Doctoral dissertation, Centre de
         Recherche en Psychologie Cognitive, Université de Provence, 13261 Aix-en-Provence, France.
Bromme,     R., Jucks,  R.,  &    Runde, A.   (2005a).   Barriers and  biases  in    computer-mediated     expert-layperson
         communication.       In  R.   Bromme,    F.   W.    Hesse,  &  H.    Spada    (Eds.),   Barriers   and   biases   in
         computermediated knowledge communication ­ and how they may be overcome (pp. 89­118). New
         York: Springer.
Chi, M. T. H., Siler, S., & Jeong, H. (2004). Can tutors monitor students' understanding accurately? Cognition
         and Instruction, 22, 363­387
Clark, H. H. (1996). Using language. Cambridge: University Press.
Clark, H.H. & Brennan S.E. (1991) Grounding in Communication. In L. Resnick, J. Levine & S. Teasley (Eds.),
         Perspectives    on   Socially  Shared   Cognition    (127-149).  Hyattsville,     MD:   American    Psychological
         Association.
Clark, H.H. & Marshall, C.R (1981) Definite reference and mutual knowledge In A. K. Joshi, B. L. Webber, and
         I. A. Sag (Eds), Elements of Discourse Understanding. Cambridge University Press.
Clark, H. H., & Murphy, G. L. (1982). Audience design in meaning and reference. In J. F. Leny & W. Kintsch
         (Eds.), Language and comprehension (pp. 287­299). Amsterdam: North-Holland Publishing Company.

                                                                                                                                 2-2
         Cherubini,   M.,   Nüssli, M.-A.,  Dillenbourg,  P.  (2007). Deixis and  Gaze   in Collaborative   Work   at a  Distance
                   (over a shared map): a Computational Model to Detect Misunderstandings. Submitted to Eye Tracking
                   Research & Applications Symposium (Etra2008), March 26-28, Savannah, GA.
         Dillenbourg, P. (1999). What do you mean by collaborative learning? In P. Dillenbourg (Ed.), Collaborative
                   learning: Cognitive and Computational Approaches (pp. 1-19). Oxford: Elsevier.
         Doise, W., & Mugny, G. (1984). The social development of the intellect. Oxford: Pergamon Press. Driver, R.,
                   Guesne, E., & Tiberghien, A. (1985). Children's ideas in science. Buckingham, UK: Open University
                   Press.
         Jeong, H. (1998). Knowledge co-construction during collaborative learning. Unpublished Doctoral Dissertation.
                   University of Pittsburgh, PA.
         King, A.   (1998).   Transactive   peer  tutoring:  Distributing cognition and  metacognition.    Computer-Supported
                   Cooperation Scripts 52. Educational Psychology Rev. 10, 57-74.
         Krauss,   R. M.,   &   Fussell, S. R. (1991).   Perspective-taking in communication:    The    determination   of  others'
                   knowledge and referential language use. Social Cognition, 9, 2-24.
         Leinonen, P., & Järvelä, S. (2006). Facilitating interpersonal evaluation of knowledge in a context of distributed
                   team collaboration. British Journal of Educational technology, 37(6), 897-916.
         Mercer,   N.  (1996).   The quality   of talk in children's  collaborative activity  in the   classroom.  Learning    and
                   Instruction, 6, 359-377.
         Newman, D. R., Webb, B., & Cochrane, C. (1995). A content analysis method to measure critical thinking in
                   face-to-face   and    computer  supported   group  learning. Retrieved    May    20,   2004. Available   from:
                   http://www.qub.ac.uk/mgt/papers/methods/contpap.html.
         Nickerson, R. S. (1999). How we know ­ and sometimes misjudge ­ what others know: Imputing one's own
                   knowledge to others. Psychological Bulletin, 125, 737­759.
         Ogata, H. and Yano, Y. (2000). Combining Knowledge Awareness and Information Filtering in an Open-ended
                   Collaborative Learning Environment, International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education, 11,
                   33-46.
         Palincsar,   A. S.  (1998).   Social  Constructivist  Perspectives  on Teaching    and  Learning.   Annual     Review  of
                   Psychology, 49, 345-375.
         Roschelle, J. & Teasley S.D. (1995) The construction of shared knowledge in collaborative problem solving. In
                   C.E.  O'Malley    (Ed),  Computer-Supported      Collaborative Learning.   (pp.   69-197).   Berlin: Springer-
                   Verlag.
         Richardson, D. C., and Dale, R. 2005. Looking to understand: The coupling between speakers' and listeners'
                   eye movements and its relationship to discourse comprehension. Cognitive Science, 29, 1045­1060.
         Sangin, M., Molinari, G., Nüssli, M.-A., Dillenbourg, P. (2007). "I know what you know": how awareness cues
                   about    the peer's   prior-knowledge  affect collaborative  learning in   dyads.   Journal  of the  Learning
                   Science. manuscript in preparation.
         Sangin,   M., Nova,    N., Molinari,  G. Dillenbourg,   P. (2007). Partner Modeling     is Mutual.  Proceedings    of the
                   Seventh   International  Conference    of Computer  Supported    Collaborative   Learning    (CSCL),  July  16-
                   July 21, New Brunswick, NJ (USA).
         Schober,   M.   F. (1998).  Different kinds   of conversational  perspective-taking. In    S. R. Fussell & R.   J. Kreuz
                   (Eds.), Social and cognitive psychological approaches to interpersonal communication (pp. 145­174).
                   Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
         Slavin, R. (1983). Cooperative learning. New York: Longman.
         Steedman, M. J., & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1980). The production of sentences, utterances and speech acts: Have
                   computers anything to say? In B. Butterworth (Ed.), Language Production: Speech and Talk. London:
                   Academic Press.
         Strijbos, J.W.,    Martens, R.L.,  Prins, F.J.,  Jochems,  W.M.G.   (2006) Content   analysis:   What  are they    talking
                   about? Computers & Education, 46, 29-48.
         Wertsch, J.V. (1978). Adult-child interaction and the roots of metacognition. The Quarterly Newsletter of the
                   Institute for Comparative Human Development, 2(1), 15-18.
         Wittwer, J., Nückles, M., & Renkl, A. (in press). Is underestimation less detrimental than overestimation? The
                   impact of experts' beliefs about a layperson's knowledge on learning and question asking. Instructional
                   Science.

       Acknowledgments
         This research was funded by the Swiss National Science Foundation (grant #102511-106940).

2-2
