     Learning with Ecosystem Models: A Tale of Two Classrooms
   Steven Gray, Cindy E. Hmelo-Silver, Lei Liu, Rebecca Jordan, Heisawn Jeong, Russell Schwartz, Heather
 Finkelstein, Daniel Wolsten, Marylee Demeter, Suparna Sinha,        Rutgers University, 10 Seminary Place New
                                           Brunswick, NJ 08901 USA
Email: grays@eden.rutgers.edu, chmelo@rci.rutgers.edu, leiliu@eden.rutgers.edu, jordan@aesop.rutgers.edu,

         Abstract: This paper explores how the RepTools toolkit was appropriated in two different
         classroom  cultures. The   RepTools  toolkit consists  of hypermedia     about   a complex   system,
         physical  models, and   NetLogo  simulations,   designed    to help  students understand    complex
         systems in the context of aquarium ecosystem. This paper reports on the nature of the different
         enactments of two teachers using the same tools. Although both classrooms showed similar
         learning gains, Interactions Analyses (IA) found differences between the enactments in two
         main areas; (1) providing opportunities for inquiry and language used to communicate and (2)
         teacher  interpretation of the computer     model.  These   findings suggest   that  how    tools are
         appropriated is greatly influenced by teacher beliefs and classroom culture and that there may
         be multiple paths to productive use of such tools.

Introduction
         Social constructivist and sociocultural perspectives on learning emphasize the role of tools and artifacts
in mediating  learning   (Cole,  1999;  Engeström,    1999;   Palincsar,  1998).   In  such   views,  computer-based
simulations and  models   provide   affordances  for engaging  in  scientific practices   such as modeling     complex
phenomena (Clement, 2000).      The norms for how these tools will be enacted as a part of classroom practice are
affected by social influences such as teacher and technological scaffolding, student collaboration and discourse
practices such as argumentation and explanation (Hmelo-Silver & Barrows, in press; Leinhardt & Steele, 2005).
Even with an increasing emphasis on student-centered learning, the teacher plays important roles in setting the
norms for   classroom   discourse (Webb   et al. 2006).  In  a comparison     of  two  enactments    of a  technology-
supported curriculum, Puntambekar, Stylianou, & Goldstein (2007) found significant differences in the learning
outcomes between the students of the two participating teachers using an innovative hypertext system as part of
a simple machines curriculum. The more effective teacher helped connect activities within the unit and among
concepts and principles while the less effective teacher spent more time giving instructions to the students and
focusing on isolated  task completion.  These   differences  led  to distinct classroom     cultures and   ultimately to
differences in what students learned.    Such   studies provide   natural quasi-experimental    settings   in which   to
examine how different approaches to computer-supported inquiry may affect student learning.          In a similar vein,
we examine the use of computer models in the domain of aquarium ecosystems. In particular, we report on how
two teachers created different inquiry opportunities for students and appropriated the computer tools in different
ways to foster student learning about complex systems.
         Understanding the idea of complex systems is difficult, however necessary in modern society to be
considered scientifically literate (Sabelli, 2006). Such systems are composed of multiple interacting levels with
heterogeneous components    and   aggregate  behavior   that goes  beyond    the sum   of the  parts (Hmelo-Silver    &
Azevedo, 2006). Examples of complex systems range from ecosystems to gasoline combustion engines. With
emergent processes,   the behaviors  of the  constituent structures  affect  the  aggregate   behavior  of  the system
through  localized interactions  (Jacobson   &  Wilensky,    2006; Wilensky    &  Reisman,     2006).  Many    of these
interactions are invisible and dynamic, making them difficult to understand (Feltovich, Coulson, & Spiro, 2001).
A deep understanding of complex systems requires perceiving the relations among components in the system,
particularly among different levels such as structure and function. To learn about complex systems, students
need experiences   that engage   them   with complex    systems  phenomena     (Jacobson    &  Wilensky,    2006).    In
particular, we argue that technological tools are critical for learning about these systems because they can make
the invisible visible, allow interactions to be slowed down, sped up and replayed, as well as allow learners to
manipulate  different   aspects  of the system   and   gain  dynamic     feedback  that   supports   building   a deep
understanding. However, simply providing the tools is not sufficient--they must be appropriated in productive
ways as we discuss in the context of the RepTools project.

The RepTools Toolkit
         The RepTools toolkit includes a function-oriented hypermedia (see Liu et al, 2007 for more details)
and two NetLogo computer models (Wilensky & Reisman, 2006). The hypermedia introduces the aquarium
system with a focus on function and provides linkages between structural, behavioral and functional levels of
aquariums. By exploring this hypermedia, students can construct a basic understanding of the system to prepare
them for inquiry activities with the simulations and as a reference to help students interpret the simulations. The

                                                                                                                            1-
         two simulations present models of aquaria at different scales. The fish spawn model is a macro level simulation,
         simulating how fish spawn in a natural environment. The purpose of the model is to help students learn about
         the relationships among different aspects of an aquarium ecosystem, such as the amount of food, filtration, water
         quality, reproduction, and fish population. The nitrification simulation presents a micro level simulation of how
         chemicals reach   a  balance to  maintain  a healthy    aquarium.  This simulation  allows students  to  examine   the
         bacterial-chemical interactions that are critical for maintaining a healthy aquarium. In both simulations, students
         can adjust the values of variables and observe the results of the adjustment. Figures 1 and 2 show example
         screens from the two models. Counters and graphs provide alternative representations for students to examine
         the results of their inquiry. Students can observe the simulations, generate hypotheses, test them by running the
         simulation and modify their ideas based on observed results.

                 Figure 1. Screenshot of the Fish Spawn Model            Figure 2. Screenshot of the Nitrogen Cycle Model.

                 To develop the curriculum used with these tools, the research team met with the participating teachers
         for a one-week summer professional development workshop and as needed during the school year to develop
         instructional plans.  This was a collaborative project with the goal of developing an instructional sequence that
         would fit each teacher's context and therefore be malleable under teacher established conditions in a classroom.
         Elsewhere, we have demonstrated that both teachers' classrooms had similar outcomes (Liu et al., 2007).

        Methods
                 The participants were 145 middle school students from two public schools who volunteered to take part
         in this study. 70 were seventh graders taught by Teacher A and 75 were eighth graders taught by Teacher B. The
         study was conducted as part of students' science instruction.       In both classroom settings, the teachers used the
         RepTools  toolkit  to help   students learn  about    the aquarium   system. Two   months  prior  to the   study, both
         classrooms   had a  physical aquarium   placed     in the classroom. Students  used the RepTools   on   laptops   while
         working in small groups, which varied from 2 to 6 students. Each teacher taught five classes. In each class, two
         focus groups were video and audio taped during the whole curriculum unit. Students completed individual pre
         and post tests (see Liu et al., 2007 for results).
                 These video data were analyzed using Interaction Analysis (IA), which involves collaborative viewing
         of video clips of a group of researchers to examine the details of social interaction (Jordan & Henderson, 1995).
         The basic goal of IA methodology is to use the video data to understand what people are doing during their
         social interactions and if, how, and what people are learning. We selected representative clips of critical events
         from both    classrooms.  These  video    clips include    typical teacher-student interactions and  student-student
         interactions during the critical events of analyzing the phenomena of the NetLogo models. We conducted ten IA
         sessions successively in our research group meetings to collaboratively review the selected video clips, describe
         observations and generate hypothesis.     The goal of the IA was to gain insight on teacher-student interactions and
         develop a better understanding of how information was accomplished in the two classrooms.
                 The teaching styles for both teachers were distinct from the onset. The first teacher (Teacher A) created
         a teacher-centered classroom culture while the second teacher (Teacher B) adopted an inquiry-based approach to
         instruction. Both   teachers shared   the overarching     goal of  fostering students' understanding    of an aquatic
         ecosystem, however, the strategies employed to reach this goal with the use of the RepTools differed. Teacher A
         used worksheets    with  open-ended   questions     for groups  while  they  explored  the RepTools,    and  expected
         homogeneous progress for the whole class and therefore provided more directions than Teacher B. Teacher B
         was more inquiry-oriented and tended to scaffold groups' progress with explanatory questions and prompted
         students to explain their observations. In addition, Teacher B tended to allow heterogeneous progress among the
         groups and   facilitated student learning   by  using     open-ended questioning.  Both  teachers used   the  unit for
         approximately two weeks. In both classrooms, the teachers made connections to the physical aquarium as part of
         the curriculum unit. The students explored the hypermedia in groups followed by other activities such as class
         discussions  and  construction   of concept  maps      of  the system.  Students were   introduced   to the  NetLogo

1-0
environment   and   then  collaboratively explored  the two NetLogo    models.    They  were   encouraged    to make
connections across the two simulations and with the physical aquarium found in their classroom.

Results
        The IA demonstrated differences in 2 major aspects between the two teachers; (1) how they created
different kinds of learning and inquiry opportunities for students and; (2) how each teacher interpreted the use
and purpose of the computer tools in their instruction. Although these aspects inevitably run together in creating
classroom culture, it is of particular research interest to consider how such distinct styles and differences in
approach can ultimately result in the similar learning gains found in Liu et al. (2007). Although both classes
were  classified as  equally successful   in terms  of  learning outcomes  from   a  cognitive   perspective, from  a
sociocultural perspective, Teacher B was more successful in enculturating his student to the scientific practices
that one would engage in to understand complex systems (Crawford 1991).
        It was clear that the two teachers held different beliefs about the nature of learning science, which led
to differences   in their classroom   enactments.  Specifically,  Teacher A  viewed     learning  as knowing    about
scientific content knowledge and judged student learning by evaluating content knowledge and task completion.
In contrast, Teacher B viewed learning science as an epistemic process of reasoning and understanding and
promote student learning by asking for elaboration and explanation of observed phenomena. As to assessment of
student learning, Teacher A focused on prescribed artifacts (e.g., worksheets) while teacher B emphasized on
the quality of student discourse (e.g., elaboration and explanation).

Creating Opportunities for Inquiry
        The first major distinction between the two classroom settings is in the strategies the teachers used to
provide opportunities for inquiry practices as well as in language used to communicate information. Teacher A
used  typical IRE   model  which  focused  students  on listening and responding    to  the teacher  (Cazden,   1986).
Further, she tended to use everyday language in the class as a way to connect scientific content with students'
prior knowledge.    In contrast, Teacher   B applied quite different  strategies in his class. He   paid tremendous
attention to promoting students' reasoning and fostering important inquiry practices as he guided students, in
essence, to engage in self-directed tool exploration. Further, he used scientific language in his discourse as way
to incorporate new vocabulary into student learning. From the outset, the teachers conducted the units very
differently.  Teacher A engaged in whole-class discussions mixed in with content explanations whereas Teacher
B began each class with guiding questions, introducing the unit by discussing the particular fish in the classroom
aquarium and their endemic environment. As well, they differed in the opportunities they provided for student
inquiry and the nature of the language they used to foster conceptual understanding.

Teacher A: Adoption of Student Language and Promotion of Short Answers
Teacher A's interaction with students was characterized by short-answer questioning and adoption of students
language. Although Teacher A initiated classroom discussion by incorporating ideas that the students already
knew, she concentrated on definitions for terms (e.g., non-living things) and    posed questions to the class as a
whole that required usually one-word (e.g., "yes" or "no") responses as shown in this next example:

        Teacher A: First of all you understand that certain things are living and certain things
        aren't.  Right?   Is ammonia a living creature?
        Class: No!
        Teacher A: It doesn't grow, it doesn't reproduce, it doesn't respond.    How do I get more
        ammonia in the tank?
        Class: Pee
        Teacher A: Pee.    It's not like its reproducing and making more.  You want more.      You
        want more, you get more fish and more fish do what?
        Class: Pee!

        The questions asked were largely oriented towards reproducing declarative knowledge. The students
seemed to have an understanding of what the teacher expected from their responses and obliged the teacher by
answering "yes" or "no" to the teacher's inquiries, intent on responding correctly. By initiating such a short-
answer questioning interaction with students, Teacher A did not provide opportunities for students to engage in
scientific reasoning.
        Another     example  of  this type of interaction  occurred  when  Teacher   A   tried to help   the students
understand   ideas  about  scale as   she explained  how   the NetLogo    nitrification model    simulates aquarium
ecosystem on a micro level scale. The following excerpt exemplifies how Teacher A directed the students in a
formal manner, where there was little room for deviation, or redirection, as the questions required short answers.
She used more content-focused approach to instruction with few opportunities for students to engage in inquiry;

                                                                                                                         1-1
         rather Teacher A asked largely rhetorical questions while she outlined what she considered to be the important
         facts as this next example demonstrates:

                   Teacher A: Does the ammonia just keep adding up in the tank?
                   Class: No
                   Teacher A: If kept adding up, what would happen to the fish?
                   Class: They die.
                   Teacher A.  They die.     So you remember when you did the nitrogen cycle we had all these red dots
                   first, then the squares came up?
                   Class: Yeah
                   Teacher A: What did the square represent?
                   Class: Bacteria
                   Teacher A: What does bacteria do?
                   Class: It eats it.
                   Teacher A: So is bacteria living?
                   Class: Yes
                   Teacher A: How do you know?
                   Class: Cause it eats it.
                   Teacher A: Right.     All living things, do they eat?
                   Class: Yes
                   Teacher A: Does every living thing eat?
                   Class: Yes
                   Teacher A: Does every living thing poo?
                   Class: Yes...
                   Teacher A: Do they reproduce when they are getting fed and are happy?
                   Class: Yes...
                   Teacher A: So the more ammonia you have, the more ammonia bacteria you make.          Now,
                   what does the ammonia poo?     O a, sorry I mean bacteria.   What does it poo?
                   Class: Nitrites
                   Teacher A: Right.     It eats ammonia. This is the ammonia....

                   Teacher A also adopted student language and incorporated it into her explanation as a way to connect
         to student understanding. When the students answered her question about the source of ammonia as "fish pee",
         she incorporated it into her description of the nitrogen cycle. In an attempt to use their language and adopt their
         register, Teacher A went on to explain that bacteria "eat" the ammonia and "poos" nitrates that is eaten by other
         bacteria. It is important to note that Teacher A adopted student language as a way to convey the behavior of
         structures in a complex system as opposed to adhering to the scientific language used in the RepTools software.
         Teacher A's interactions suggests that she attempted to scaffold student understanding by connecting to their
         prior knowledge as a way to explain new scientific concepts.

        Teacher B: Use of Scientific Terminology and Process-Inquisitions
                   Teacher B   initiated  class  discussion differently.  He typically asked  open-ended   questions. In one
         example, Teacher B asked the students "what is needed in the system?" This type of question served as a way to
         ignite conversation.  This    type of  question  left the future direction of the conversation in the hands  of the
         students, based on   their   responses. One student    answered   "space." Teacher B  responded   by saying  "Why?
         That's a one-word answer. I need..." at which point the student elaborated, "because...it helps with the lifestyle
         of the fish." Teacher B did not reject this answer, but asked the class to qualify the statement and pushed the
         students to delve further into the reasons as to why space is important in an ecosystem. Requiring students to
         justify their responses engages them in the scientific practices of explanation and argumentation provides an
         invitation for the students to continue their elaboration (Duschl, Schweingruber, & Shouse, 2007).
                   Teacher B also incorporated new scientific terminology into student understanding. By using terms like
         "ammonia" and "excrete" students adopted new terms into their vocabulary in their attempts to explain their
         understanding and in their hypotheses. In many of examples we studied, we found students adopting a scientific
         register by qualifying    their statements with  language   introduced by   the teacher. Where Teacher  A    adopted
         student language in her explanation, in Teacher B's class we found the students adopting the teacher's scientific
         language, both in student-teacher interactions, and in student-student group interactions. Teacher B's students
         used terms modeled after teacher explanation to explain behaviors such as "excrete," "ammonia" and "produce."

                   Alexis: What would happen [if there were no fish]?
                   Courtney: Well first of all, uh, snails wouldn't have anything to eat.

1-
        Ron: We're not talking about snails.
        Alexis: We're talking about fish.
        Courtney: But they need to have... they wouldn't make the water dirty. So then the fish
        wouldn't have...
        Ron: Alright, so they wouldn't produce waste. We're not talking about the snails.
        Alexis: I just think that there would be no point. What are we going to have a plant farm
        in water?
        Courtney; Basically, nothing would be able to work because the bacteria...
        Jenn: Everything lives on fish.
        Courtney: The fish produce ammonia, which bacteria makes less harmful and snails keep
        the water clean by cleaning the waste and the algae.
        Ron: OK, so fish are the basis of all this... ecosystem.

        The use of appropriate language became a norm for this group of students as they elaborate their ideas,
construct explanations, and challenge each other with questions. They appropriated the language of the domain
and appeared to use it comfortably.

Interpretation of Computer Models
Second, the IA demonstrated that the different teaching styles and classroom cultures had a clear effect on the
use and interpretation of the computer simulations.  We found that Teacher A used the NetLogo simulation as a
device to motivate student learning, while Teacher B used it as a cognitive tool to develop reasoning skills and
scientific epistemic practices.

Teacher A: Technology Use to Provide Instruction
        Teacher A interpreted the NetLogo computer models as a teaching aid meant for instruction. Teacher A
explained to the students that the NetLogo simulation was a model of real-world phenomena that is not normally
seen. Rather than formally  encouraging    hypothesizing about   observations   taking  place during the modeling
simulation, she seemed concerned with ensuring that the students understood the concept of a model as a tool.
She tended to use  the  micro    level simulation as an illustration to help   students visualize the microscopic
processes. The following example highlights her appropriation of the tool in this manner as she began to explain
the nitrification process to the entire class and discussed a representation key (a handout she provided for the
class that helped the students recognize what the individual model structures represent).

        Teacher A: Let's go over the key. Did you figure out what this is?
        Class: Yeah.
        Teacher A: What is it?
        Class: Plants.
        Teacher A: Brilliant, that's a plant, you got that one. [Writes it on board] Did you get the red dots
        What's that?
        Class: Ammonia.
        Teacher A: Very good. OK now I'm going to make it a little harder. White dots?
        Class: Nitrite.
        Teacher A: Because what appeared first?
        Class: Ammonia.
        Teacher A: Red dots. And what appeared second?
        Class: White dots.
        Teacher A: And then you started seeing...
        Class: Nitrate. [pause] Nitrite.
        Teacher A: [changes "Nitrate" to "Nitrite" on the board] See this is where our fish tank went different.
        This is supposed to come second. Remember our fish --- we did it the other way, it was kind of weird.
        So then after the white dots appeared you saw yellow dots so they would be the....
        Class: [mixed response of "Nitrite" and "Nitrate"]

        As this example demonstrates, Teacher A used the simulation to reinforce the content that she had
already explained to the students, rather than as a tool for student inquiry. It seemed important that the students
correctly explain the nitrification process in terms of the objects in the simulations and not, as in the case of
Teacher B, as a way to foster student inquiry and scientific exploration.

Teacher B: Technology Use as a Cognitive Tool

                                                                                                                       1-
                 Teacher B used the model as a cognitive tool to stimulate student cognitive engagement. In contrast to
        Teacher A, Teacher B used the RepTools toolkit with a clear cognitive goal. He required the students to apply
        certain cognitive skills, such as the development and testing of hypotheses and the collection of empirical data
        to support  and  monitor ideas.   Unlike   Teacher A, he   explained how  to use  the     RepTools   to foster deeper
        understanding by promoting student interaction with the tool that mirrored parts of the scientific method. The
        following excerpt shows how Teacher B scaffolded students to develop and support specific hypotheses based
        on the data they collected. In this way, Teacher B regarded the RepTools as more than an illustrative device
        meant for instruction (like Teacher A) and instead allowed the students to understand through manipulation,
        interaction, and interpretation.

                 Teacher B: Now how are we going to know...
                 Jenn: For the nitrite should I put grey or white?
                 Teacher B: Well on here, it looks kind of white to me. Now, how are you going to know whether the
                 blue boxes are snails, bacteria, what's the other stuff you said, algae, stuff like that?
                 Courtney: I don't think it's bacteria because the red is ammonia and it's not eating, it's not getting rid
                 of it.
                 Teacher B:   How do you know that?
                 Courtney: Because, um well, you can see the ammonia on top of it and it's not doing anything to it.
                 Teacher B: Well it's paused right now.
                 Courtney: Well also because the ammonia is increasing and while these things are increasing too it's
                 not decreasing the amount of ammonia.
                 Teacher B: It's not?
                 Courtney: No, well that's what I observed. Am I wrong?
                 Teacher B: No, no.
                 Ron: Say that again, Courtney...
                 Courtney: I said, I think that the blue can't be bacteria because bacteria eats ammonia and while the
                 blue is increasing the ammonia is still increasing too so if the blue was bacteria...
                 Jenn: What about the purple?
                 Courtney: I'm not talking about the purple.
                 Jenn: Do you think the purple could be bacteria?
                 Ron: I'm going to start it again and we'll see if it starts eating any bacteria.
                 Jenn: No, it starts building up more but now look at the purple.
                 [students are speaking at the same time]
                 Jenn: The purple might be bacteria

                 Again, as with Teacher A, small group tool-use mimicked the way in which Teacher B presented the
        tool to the students. Our analysis   showed   that students gathered information, hypothesized,      and  tested then
        independently iterated through these steps as a way to construct an understanding of the system. Teacher B's
        students used the tool as a way to develop a deeper understanding through inquiry and observation. In the next
        example, a group of students in Teacher B's class attempted to make sense of the simulation and elucidate the
        representations of the figures on the screen.  One student noticed that "nitrate thrives in unclean water" which
        elicited the comment "so is nitrate good or bad?"     The students went on to develop an experiment to test this
        question by allowing the water quality to go down so that they could observe what happened, and then develop
        hypotheses as to why.

                 Hal: Okay, I think the red dots are ammonia [laughing].
                 Mindy: Now why would you get that idea?
                 Hal: I don't know.
                 Keith: Nitrate thrives in unclean water.
                 Hal: So nitrate is bad or good?   Isn't nitrate good?
                 Anna: And then whatever's after ammonia, that's bacteria.
                 Mindy: It's an earthquake, ahh.   Okay, now they're like equal.
                 Anna: Okay.   So let's do this...
                 Hal: Well why is it unclean water?
                 Keith: Max out everything.   Stop changing the water.
                 Anna: Everything's gonna start rushing inside.
                 Mindy: Okay, maybe bacteria dissolves nitrates.
                 Anna: See, the bacteria came.
                 Mindy: Because before we didn't have that much bacteria...
                 Anna: And now there's a lot of bacteria too...

1-
         Mindy: ...which means that they're eating all the ammonia and the nitrate...nitrite
         Anna:...And then nitrite came.

         Here the students went beyond interpretation of the literal meaning of the representations. They also
tried to understand   the significance of the  nitrification process in the  aquarium.    The  students  were co-
constructing knowledge as they questioned each other and built on each other's ideas working in a community
of inquiry.

Discussion
         Our most notable finding was that the two teachers created very different enactments that used the
RepTools in very different ways and that these differences mediated very different classroom conversations.
Specifically, the teacher who  took  a content-oriented approach   (Teacher   A)  tended  to encourage  classroom
discussion that linked content knowledge to prior knowledge and used the technology to motivate students.      In
comparison, the teacher who took an epistemic approach (Teacher B) tended to encourage classroom discussion
that emphasized scientific terminology and reasoning.   He used the technology to introduce scientific language
and to foster reasoning.
         These differing approaches had consequences for the nature of the classroom discourse.        While both
teachers encouraged   a   mix of large and  small group discussions,    the first teacher adopted a short-answer
approach that reinforced the concepts but limited the extent to which students could engage in the epistemic
practices of science. The second teacher was able to promote reasoning and engagement in inquiry practices.
While promoting epistemological thinking is an important goal for a middle school science classroom (e.g.,
Reiser, Smith, Tabak, Steinmiller, Sandoval & Leone 2000), teachers may have a hard time balancing inquiry-
related demands with the need to promote content knowledge (see discussion in Holbrook & Kolodner 2000).
         In classrooms, creating opportunities for students to think critically about complex phenomena means
that students need opportunities to ask questions, generate and test ideas, and collect data and evaluate evidence
(Jeong & Songer, in press). Teacher scaffolding is critical for helping learners both engage in inquiry practices
and developing deep understanding of science content (Duschl et al., in press; Krajcik, Blumefield, Marx, Bass,
Fredricks, & Soloway 1998).    While computer-based tools can provide extraordinary opportunities for engaging
inquiry in these ways (Lajoie, Lavigne, Guerrera, & Munsie, 2001; Lee & Songer, 2003), our results support the
notion that orchestrating tool-mediated learning about complex systems is a difficult task and how different
teachers appropriate  and  interpret these  tools in their   classrooms can   lead  to very  different enactments
(Puntambekar, Stylianou, & Goldstein, 2007).      Despite these differences, comparable and impressive content
gains occurred in both classrooms but our observations suggest that opportunities to engage in inquiry practices
were, however, different in the two classrooms.
         What is clear from this study and others (e.g., Puntambekar et al., 2007) is that providing computer-
based tools is not a guarantee that they will be used in a particular way.   It is important for researchers in the
learning sciences to understand what the tradeoffs are in different kinds of enactments. Some enactments are
reasonable adaptations whereas others might be what Ann Brown (1992) considered lethal mutations.          In this
research we   advanced   our  understanding of how   different modes  of    using the  same  computer-based tools
supported different kinds of learning opportunities and have the potential to lead to the development of different
kinds of learning outcomes.

References:
Brown, A. L. (1992). Design experiments: Theoretical and methodological challenges in creating complex
         interventions in classroom settings. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 2, 141-178.
Cole, M. (1999). Cultural psychology: Some general principles and a concrete example. In Y. Engeström, R.
Miettinen & R. Punamaki (Eds.), Perspectives on activity theory (pp. 19-38). New York: Cambridge University
         Press.
Clement, J. (2000). Model based learning as a key research area for science education. International Journal of
         Science Education, 22, 1041-1053.
Crawford, K. (1991) Cultural processes and learning: expectations actions and outcomes. Paper presented to the
         Cultural Perspectives Subgroup of the Theory Group at ICME 7, Quebec.
Duschl, R. A., Schweingruber, H. A., & Shouse, A. W. (2007). Taking science to school: Learning and teaching
         science
in grade K-8. Washington D.C.: National Academies Press.
Engeström, Y. (1999). Activity theory & individual and social transformation. In Y. Engeström, R. Miettinen &
         R. Punamaki (Eds.), Perspectives on activity theory (19-38). New York: Cambridge University Press.

                                                                                                                       1-
         Feltovich, P. J., Coulson, R. L., & Spiro, R. J. (2001). Learners' (mis)understanding of important and difficult
                concepts. In K. D. Forbus & P. J. Feltovich (Eds.), Smart machines in education: The coming
                revolution in educational technology (pp. 349-375). Menlo Park, CA: AAAI/MIT Press.
         Hmelo-Silver, C. E. & Barrows, H. S. (in press). Facilitating collaborative knowledge building. Cognition and
                Instruction.
         Hmelo-Silver, C. E., & Azevedo, R. (2006). Understanding complex systems: Some core challenges. Journal of
                the Learning Sciences, 15, 53-61.
         Hmelo-Silver, C. E., Duncan, R. G., & Chinn, C. A. (2007). Scaffolding and achievement in problem-based and
                inquiry learning: A response to Kirschner, Sweller, and Clark Jacobson, M. J., & Wilensky, U. (2006).
                Complex systems in education: Scientific and educational importance and implications for the learning
                sciences. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 15, 11-34.(2006). Educational Psychologist, 42, 99-107.
         Holbrook, J. & J.L. Kolodner. (2000). Scaffolding the development of an inquiry-based (science) classroom. In
                B. Fishman & S. O'Connor-Divelbiss (eds.) Fourth International Conference of the Learning Sciences
                (p. 221-227). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
         Jacobson, M. J., & Wilensky, U. (2006). Complex systems in education: Scientific and educational importance
                and implications for the learning sciences. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 15, 11-34.
         Jeong, H., & Songer, N. B. (in press). Understanding scientific evidence and the data collection process:
         Explorations of why, who, when, what, and how. In F. Columbus (Ed.), Science education: Issues and
                challenges. Hauppauge, NY: Nova Science Publishers.
         Jordan, B., & Henderson, A. (1995). Interaction analysis: Foundations and practice. Journal of the Learning
                Sciences, 4, 39-103.
         Krajcik, J., P. Blumfield, R. Marx, K. Bass, J. Fredricks, and E. Soloway. (1998). Inquiry in project-based
                science classrooms.   Journal of the Learning Sciences, 7, 313:350.
         Lajoie, S. P., Lavigne, N. C., Guerrera, C., & Munsie, S. D. (2001). Constructing knowledge in the context of
                Bio World. Instructional Science, 29, 155-186.
         Lee, H., & Songer, N. B. (2003). Making science accessible to students. International Journal of Science
                Education, 25, 923-948.
         Liu, L. (2007). Trajectories of collaborative scientific conceptual change: A classroom study in a CSCL
                environment. In C. Chinn, G. Erkens, S. Puntambekar (Eds.), Proceedings of Computer-supported
                Collaborative Learning (CSCL) Conference 2007 (CD-ROM), (pp.429-431).
         Liu, L. Hmelo-Silver, C., & Marathe, S. (2007).  RepTools: Representational tools to support learning about
                complex systems. In Proceedings of the NARST 2007 Annual Meeting [CD-ROM).
         Leinhardt, G., & Steele, M. D. (2005). Seeing the complexity of standing to the side: Instructional dialogues.
                Cognition and Instruction, 23, 87-163.
         Palincsar, A. S. (1998). Social constructivist perspectives on teaching and learning. Annual Review of
                Psychology, 45, 345-375.
         Puntambekar, S., Stylianou, A., & Goldstein, J. (2007). Comparing classroom enactments of an inquiry
                curriculum: Lessons learned from two teachers. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 16, 81-130.
         Reiser, B., B. Smith, I. Tabak, F. Steinmiller, W. Sandoval, & A. Leone. (2000), BeGuile: Strategies and
                conceptual scaffolds for scientific inquiry in biology classrooms.  Cognition and Instruction
         Sabelli, N. (2006). Complexity, technology, science, and education. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 15, 5-10.
         Webb, N. M., Nemer, K. M., & Ing, M. (2006). Small group reflections: Parallels between teacher discourse and
                student behavior in peer-directed groups. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 15, 63-119.
         Wilensky, U. &  Reisman,    K. (2006).  Thinking  like a  wolf, a sheep    or firefly: Learning biology   through
                constructing  and   testing computational theories ­ an  embodied    modeling    approach. Cognition and
                Instruction, 24, 171-209.

       Acknowledgments
         This research was funded by NSF CAREER grant # 0133533 to the second author. Conclusions or
         recommendations expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
         National Science Foundation.

1-
