   Support in Self-assessment in Secondary Vocational Education
             Greet Fastré, Marcel van der Klink, Jeroen van Merriënboer, and Dominique Sluijsmans,
                   Open University of the Netherlands, Valkenburgerweg 177, 6419 AT Heerlen
                Email: Greet.fastre@ou.nl, marcel.vanderklink@ou.nl, jeroen.vanmerrienboer@ou.nl,
                                              dominique.sluijsmans@ou.nl

          Abstract: For students to become prepared for the workplace, the skill of students to assess
          themselves is of larger long-term significance than the specific professional competences they
          acquire.  This paper  discusses    the role  of  providing      support to   the students  in the  form  of
          information on the relevance of the assessment criteria on their self-assessment skills. It is
          hypothesized that students are more accurate in assessing themselves when providing them
          with information on the relevance of the assessment criteria. Furthermore, the influence of the
          accuracy on next task performance will be explored. Results will be available by the time of
          the conference.

Support in self-assessment in Secondary Vocational Education
          In order to perform well in the workplace, students need professional competences, but they also need
to be able to make judgements on their own strengths and weaknesses for lifelong learning to occur (McDonald,
Boud,    Francis  &  Gonczi,   1995).   Despite   the  importance       placed    on  student's  self-assessment   in current
education,   it appears  that  students  are  not always      able   to assess   themselves    accurately,  because   they  are
insufficiently able to decide on which criteria they should assess themselves.
          In current assessment practices, students are often asked to come up with self-generated criteria and
standards on which they want to assess themselves. However, it appears that students at the beginning of their
study are not able to identify the standards and criteria themselves because they do not have a clear view on
what is expected of them when it comes to their learning outcomes. For example, if student nurses have never
seen a single patient before, how can they know which competences are important in patient-contact, or what
constitutes "good practice" for this contact. It is thus the question if novice students should be asked to self-
generate the assessment criteria.
          If students  are given   assessment    criteria, still, most    of the  time, only a   few assessment    criteria are
relevant for a certain task. When students need to become competent self-assessors, they should not only be able
to make an accurate assessment, but they should also be capable in taking a good decision on which criteria are
relevant and which criteria are not relevant for assessing a task (Sadler, 1989). This is certainly true in the case
of assessing real-life whole tasks. In real-life tasks, resembling professional life, a large database of potential
performance criteria could reasonably be considered. The whole set of criteria can be split up in two parts:
relevant and irrelevant criteria. In today's educational practices, often, no information on the relevance of the
criteria is  available for the students   in advance.  The    question    arises  if  students  are capable   of selecting  the
relevant criteria from the whole set of criteria. Regehr and Eva (2006) state that when students get the freedom
of choosing on which criteria they want to assess themselves, there is a risk that they will only highlight the
criteria on which they perform well or which they like because people naturally strive at creating a positive
feeling. The risk is that students will thus not recognize exactly those learning needs that are really necessary.
          Furthermore, if students are confronted with the whole set of assessment criteria without information
on the   relevance  of those   criteria for the  task at   hand,   a  lot of  their  cognitive capacity    will be needed   for
choosing the relevant criteria from the whole set of criteria. Because cognitive capacity is limited (Sweller, van
Merriënboer & Paas, 1998), possibly, insufficient capacity is left for an accurate assessment. The accuracy of
the self-assessment may thus be influenced by the fact that students have to select their own criteria.
          In this study,   self-assessment   is defined    as the    involvement    of  students in  selecting  standards   and
criteria from a predefined set of standards and criteria, making judgments about the extent to which they have
met these standards and criteria and coming up with points of improvement. When students get better at self-
assessment,   their task performance     will   also improve      because    they have  a  more  accurate    view  on what   is
expected from the tasks (Dochy, Segers & Sluijsmans, 1999).
          In this study, the following hypotheses will be explored:
H1: Students    who  receive   information   on  the  relevance      of the  criteria  can  produce  a     more accurate  self-
assessment than students who do not receive information on the relevance of the criteria.
H2: Students with a high accuracy of self-assessment are more competent in selecting points of improvement
than students with a low accuracy of self-assessment.
H3: A    positive relation  exists between    the accuracy        of student's   self-assessment    skills and  student's   task
performance.

                                                                                                                                   3-
                In Dutch Secondary Vocational Education students differ in the amount of study time spent at school
       and  in the  workplace.  First, there  is  a school-based  trajectory  where   the  student  spends  60%   of his time at
       school, and 40% in the workplace. Second, there is a practice-based trajectory where the student only spends
       20% of his time at school, and 80% in the workplace. Most of the students in the school-based trajectory are
       younger (age 16-19) than those in the practice-based trajectory (mostly adult students), and it can be assumed
       that both groups differ with regard to motivation and other variables. This research explores the effect of these
       differences on their self-assessment skills and their task performance.

       Method
       Participants and Design
                One hundred and six first-year students of a Secondary Vocational Education in Nursing participated in
       this study.  The  experimental     design  was a 2x2   factorial  pre-test - post-test design    in which  the effects of
       `information   on  the relevance   of  the criteria' (Relevant  criteria vs. All   criteria) and `variability in  learning
       trajectory' (School-based vs. Practice-based) were studied.
                The students of the school-based trajectory and the practice-based trajectory were randomly assigned to
       one of the two conditions of information on the relevance of the criteria. Fifty-two students, of which 40 are
       school-based   students  and  16   are work-based,    are  in the relevant   criteria-condition  in which  they   received
       information on the relevance of the assessment criteria. Forty-nine students, of which 27 are school-based and
       22 are work-based, are in the all criteria-condition in which they did not receive information on the relevance of
       the criteria. All participants were rewarded with a cinema ticket.

       Learning materials
                Learning environment. The electronic learning environment called `Care Village' (figure 2) consisted
       of learning  tasks and  an  electronic    portfolio. A database   with   three types  of learning   tasks was  developed
       according   to the principles   of the Four-Component      Instructional   Design   (4C/ID)   method  (van   Merriënboer,
       1997): 1) worked-out example tasks, 2) completion tasks, and 3) conventional tasks. Every task consisted of a
       case description (given situation, goal situation and solution process), leading questions to understand the case,
       an assignment to perform at school, and an assignment to perform in the workplace.

                                                       Figure 1. Care Village.

      References
       Dochy, F., Segers, M., & Sluijsmans, D. (1999). The use of self-, peer and co-assessment in higher education: a
                review. Studies in Higher Education, 24(3), 331-350.
       McDonald, R., Boud, D., Francis, J., & Gonczi, A. (1995). New Perspectives on Assessment. Paris: Unesco.
       Regehr,  G.,   & Eva,  K.  (2006).  Self-assessment,   self-direction, and   the   self-regulating  professional. Clinical
                Orthopaedics and Related Research 449, 34-38.
       Sadler, D. R. (1989). Formative assessment and the design of instructional systems. Instructional Science, 18,
                119-144.
       Sweller, J., Van   Merriënboer,    J.  J. G., &  Paas,  F. (1998).  Cognitive    architecture  and  instructional  design.
                Educational Psychology Review, 10(3), 251-294.
       Van   Merriënboer,  J.  J. G.   (1997).   Training   complex   cognitive   skills. Englewood     Cliffs, NJ:  Educational
                technology publications.

3-30
