       Laboratory Learning: Industry and University Research as Site for
                                         Situated and Distributed Cognition
               Wendy Newstetter, Department of Biomedical Engineering, Georgia Tech, wendy@bme.gatech.edu
                         Aditya Johri, Department of Engineering Education, Virginia Tech, ajohri@vt.edu
                         Volker Wulf, University of Siegen & Fraunhofer-FIT, volker.wulf@uni-siegen.de

                  Abstract: In this symposium we present findings from qualitative studies of both university
                  and industrial research laboratories, and their partnerships, to illuminate how learning takes
                  place in these settings. Research laboratories are unique in providing a window on learning of
                  content as well as learning to participate. Both kinds of learning are central to the functioning
                  of the laboratory as an organization and to the growth of individual researchers within the
                  laboratory. We highlight common themes across the different settings and showcase some of
                  the differences that lead to different outcomes. We discuss institutional level as well as micro-
                  interactional    level issues  related  to learning.  The   three  studies  that make   up    this session
                  examine biomedical engineering, interactive media research, and applied computer science.

       Introduction
                  For    some   decades,   research   laboratories  have been    sites  for  ethnographic    studies  of science   and
         engineering  practices    (e.g, Bucciarelli  1994,  Latour  &  Woolgar,    1986,    Lynch,  1985)   and   for studies  of the
         organization  of    work  (Owen-Smith,     2001). Within   the field  of   learning  sciences, research   laboratories  have
         often served  as    sites for observational  (Dunbar    1995)  and   ethnographic   studies of  cognition    (See e.g., Hall,
         Wright & Wieckert, 2007; Ochs & Jacoby 1997). In this symposium, we build on this prior work by arguing that
         much  can  be   gained    from  studies of  such  highly  situated and   advanced    learning  communities      charged with
         discovery and knowledge development on the frontiers of science. We contend that studying learning situated in
         research labs   makes     good  sense  for several  reasons.  First, as  sites  for learning,  laboratories   often  combine
         formal/informal, tacit/explicit, and other such dualities of learning into practice (Barab et al, 2003). Further,
         efforts in the K-12 arena to move from cookbook to inquiry-driven science, to bring greater parity between
         science as practiced by scientists and science as "practiced" by students could benefit from and perhaps made
         richer by findings on learning in these labs. But perhaps most importantly, research laboratories serve as the
         training grounds for the majority of STEM practitioners because such labs are where science and engineering
         graduate  students   conduct    their Ph.D.  research.  These  labs  are   also where  science   and   engineering   identity
         trajectories at the   undergraduate    level are  often strengthened    and   career paths  that include    graduate   school
         become a vision. Findings from numerous post-hoc survey studies of undergraduate research experiences attest
         to the positive impacts of working in a lab (Kremmer & Bringle, 1990; Morely, Havick, & May, 1998 July;
         Ryder,   Leach, &    Driver,  1999;   Seymour,   Hunter,  Laursen,   &   Deantoni,   2004;  Zydney,    Bennett,   Shahid,  &
         Bauer, 2002), particularly for women and minorities (Conefrey, 2000; May, 1997; Morely et al., 1998 July).
         These  findings     have  undoubtedly   influenced    the U.S.  National   Science   Foundation's      push  to create  more
         opportunities for post-secondary students to participate in and be mentored through the Research Experience for
         Undergraduate (REU) program. However, apart from studies (e.g. Hall, Stevens & Torralba, 2002) there has
         been  very   little investigation of  what   actually happens   in   these labs from   a  learning  perspective   that  could
         account for these positive effects. Thus, it is critically important to identify features of laboratory settings that
         are conducive to documented positive learning experiences and think seriously about how those features could
         be translated into designs for instructional settings.     Moreover, with increased university-industry partnership,
         the relationship between university research labs and innovative work in the industry also needs to be examined.
         This symposium aims to bring important findings on lab-based learning to light for those purposes. The three
         studies presented here look at university research, research in the industry, and university-industry partnership.

        Learning in and through Situated Activity
                  Recent     work   in the field  of  learning  sciences emphasizes      the  importance     of learning   in activity
         (Greeno, 2006). According to this perspective, students learn as they engage in meaningful activities where they
         are involved not only in the learning of content but in meaning-making activities that require them to put their
         content  learning   into  perspective,  gain conceptual   understanding,    and  to  become    part of  a   community.  This
         framework follows in the tradition of socio-cultural theories of learning (Rogoff, 2003; Vygotsky, 1978), the
         situated learning    perspective  (Lave    & Wenger,    1990),  and  work   in  cognitive   science    that emphasizes    that
         students come with preconceived notions, schemas, of the world around them and teaching and learning start
         from understanding their perspective (NRC, 2000 ). Learning theory relevant to research-based learning defines
         the students  as    active  learners  who   are motivated   by  a  desire  for  mastery   (NRC,     2000).   The  theoretical

3-0
framework    of the  learner/researcher     is based   on   the constructivist  learning   theory    (Vygotsky,  1978)    and
pedagogies,   including  communities      of practice  (Wenger,    1998),   in which   the learners   as  "newcomers"     are
engaged into the practice of the "research" community under the direction and support from the faculty as the
"old-timers" (Lave & Wenger, 1990). In addition, studies show that engaging students with authentic practices,
in our case laboratory sites, is critical if they are to adopt an identity of a researcher (Edelson & Reiser, 2006;
NRC, 2000). In this apprentice-style learning and teaching model, the learner/researcher works collaboratively
with faculty, graduate students, and employers by relying on the mentors' expertise and resources to cultivate
initiative and take primary responsibility for the project (Collins, 2006). Furthermore, engaging such learners
with authentic practices is critical for them to engage with different facets of being a researcher. As Mills (1959)
remarked, "Only by conversations in which experienced thinkers exchange information about their actual ways
of working can a useful sense of method and theory be imparted to the beginning student (p. 195)."

Organizational and Institutional Aspects of Learning
         From the standpoint of how learning is organized, ethnographic studies of labs can be an invaluable
resource. Studies of research laboratories in organization theory are not new and since Tom Allen's classic study
of communication patterns within research laboratories, especially in regards to the role of proximity, several
scholars have studied research labs. Industrial research laboratories have gotten their fair share of attention and
PARC and Bell Labs have provided many case studies of failed and/or successful innovations. Owen-Smith
calls lab ethnographies "the shop floor studies of the knowledge economy" since they shed light on the practices
and   organization  of producing    and  developing    knowledge   and   innovation,   the primary    concerns   of the   new
economy. Theories from learning sciences, especially distributed cognition, emphasizes that the organization of
an activity ­ the artifacts, the actors ­ is crucial for any system to work as a cognitive system. But other than a
few field studies such as those of a navigation system on the ship or airline cockpits, we have few field studies
that examine how a system at the scale of an organization is designed or assembled. The lack of studies that
investigate the institutional aspects of learning systems has been highlighted by Jones et al. They argue that, "On
its own, the availability for analysis of interaction related to other levels is not enough...you need a theoretical
approach that explicitly takes the meso level into account, not just in terms of explanations but also to direct
attention to those features of a setting that may remain invisible while attention is focused on macro or micro-
level analysis (p. 40)." Therefore, studying a research laboratory comprehensively allows us to understand not
just the interactions at the bench-top or in a conference room, but also how they relate to other aspects of the
laboratory. This is critical if we are to examine the complexities of learning. Ethnographies of research settings
are also related  to the idea   of  a community     of practice  (Lave   &    Wenger,  1990;  Wenger      1998). A  research
laboratory   brings to light several   the  aspects of a    community    of practice  due  to its organization.    There  are
peripheral and full members, many practices emerge within the lab, and there is an abundant use of artifacts in
those practices. Yet, a community of practice account leaves many questions answered especially around the
dynamics   of  organizing    -- how   do  communities     change  over   time,  what  affects do     newcomers     have on  a
community? In particular, one aspect that has been associated with CoPs but not really investigated in detail is
the idea of "boundary crossing." In current research laboratories several different kinds of boundaries can be
characterized.  Given    the increase    in interdisciplinary   work, one   critical boundary    is  that of disciplines.  In
addition, given the increased movement of research around the world research labs now have people with very
different national and cultural backgrounds. What role does this diversity play and how do people work across
their differences?   Researchers,    in  addition  to  their research    lab,  often have  relationships   that  span   other
institutions and   research  communities.      What    role  do  such networks     play?   At the    institutional  level the
embeddedness of the CoP or the organization within a particular setting also shapes the learning ­ how people
learn and  what   they need     to learn in  order to  be innovative.    So studying  a   larger system   provides   a  better
understanding   of   the relationships      among  different    aspects. It   also opens   up    the question    of how    do
organizations learn and what does it mean for an organization to learn and the members of that organization to
learn? Do more intelligent collectives shape individual learning and vice-versa?

Ethnographic Studies of Research & Innovation
         Here we report on investigations of learners and learning in industry and university-based laboratories
and university-industry partnerships. Early ethnographic data revealed how learning trajectories intersected with
the developmental trajectories of the diverse technological artifacts, problems, and the various social systems
within  the  lab,  and  that learners    and   technology   have  evolving,    relational  trajectories.  To capture    these
trajectories both   cognitive-historical    analyses   of   the problems,     technology,  models,    and  researchers    and
ethnographic analysis of the practices in situ were utilized. Ethnographic data collection techniques included
participant observation and the generation of field notes during lab activity, meetings, and journal clubs, formal
and informal interviewing of lab participants at all levels from the PI to the new undergraduate student, and
artifact/document   collection.    These    ethnographic  activities  were    coupled with  cognitive-historical    analysis
centering around the simulation devices developed in the labs. For this part of the analysis the customary range

                                                                                                                                 3-
         of historical records (including grant proposals, drafts and published papers, artifacts, emails) were collected to
         recover how the salient representational, methodological, and reasoning practices had been developed and used
         by the researchers.
                   We frame the findings presented in the symposium in terms of a central issue that became salient to
         understanding the enactment of learning in these labs, that is, the necessity of forming relationships with other
         entities, both human and otherwise, within the lab and beyond the boundaries of the lab.     We focus on the social
         dimension of these relationships as well as the cognitive dimension foregrounding how various processes of
         distributing cognition create a complex but supportive environment for both learning and teaching. In the first
         two studies we start with a proposal for a certain kind of relationship achieved at the end of laboratory learning
         trajectories that  we  refer to  as "cognitive  partnering" move   on  to impression   formation   as  mediating  the
         potential for  laboratory  learning,  and  end  with  the role and   importance   of building  in  the  formation of
         relationships.

        STUDY 1: BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING IN THE UNIVERSITY
                   The first study covered a span of six years during which a mixed methods approach to data collection
         and analysis were utilized to illuminate the cognitive and learning practices found in a Lab A, a vascular tissue
         engineering laboratory and Lab D, a neuroengineering laboratory.       The former seeks to develop cardiovascular
         bio-substitutes, ultimately built from the cell up and readily available to patients suffering from heart disease.
         The major barriers being addressed in the lab are 1) developing strategies for endothelial cell sources and 2)
         developing certain mechanical properties in the bio-substitutes that can withstand the mechanical forces found
         the body. The intermediate problems that drive the research in this lab are producing "constructs" - living tissue
         that mimics properties of natural vessels - examining and enhancing their mechanical properties, and creating
         endothelial  cell  sources through  mechanical   manipulation  of  stem cells. In turn, Lab   D  studies dissociated
         cultures of 30 - 40 thousand mouse neurons by growing cell cultures on multi-electrode array (MEA) culture
         dishes, stimulating them with electrical impulses, and applying optical time-lapse microscopy and high-speed
         imaging to learn about distributed activity patterns and information processing in these cultured networks. Lab
         D often gives the cultured cells a "body", either simulated or robotic and an environment in which to behave.

        Building as Entree
                   In the bioengineering laboratories, a very commonly taken up newcomer/learner activity is building
         which tends to drive research in both labs. Building affords immediate opportunities for rapid participation and
         the build-up of requisite knowledge.     It can involve "wet" materials such as cells and collagen sleeves, in silico
         materials such as software or construction materials like wood frames and duct tape. It can involve the design
         and  development    of complex   in vitro environments  such   as bioreactors where  cells are  conditioned  or flow
         chambers where blood vessel forces are replicated for experimental purposes.         Or it can involve the design of
         makeshift Home Depot supplied enclosures in which cell cultures are nurtured and protected. Building can take
         a long time and require very sophisticated skills and knowledge as in Lab D where a specially designed two-
         photon microscope was under construction for two years.      Or it can be a short-term solution to controlling CO2
         in a cell culture   chamber.   With  all this building going on   as part of  the investigative  knowledge-making
         practices of   the labs, learner/agents  most  often establish first footholds  and  a sense  of  place  as builders.
         Designing and assembling different kinds of enclosures in Lab D and devices in Lab A is a kind of building
         knowledge that often falls to newcomers.      A second semester freshman described how he designed and built a
         much-needed    enclosure   for a microscope   and his  account tells us several things  about  the social   and work
         configurations in the lab and how they are constituative of rich learning opportunities.   The first notable feature
         is the democratic nature of work assignments.     The lab needed an enclosure and the undergraduate who asked
         questions and expressed interest became the lead designer.   This self-initiated move allowed the student to find a
         niche or foothold in the community---a place from where he could make a much-needed contribution. No one
         questioned whether he was qualified or had the required skills. Instead, they let him take over and then assisted
         him when he asked for help.      This project offered a rich learning context in which the student could explore
         alone or with the assistance of a more knowledgeable lab member. As an agent in determining the contributions
         he would make, he claimed a context for his own learning about the "dish" or culture of neurons and what it
         takes to keep them alive, the materials and heating units, the physical structure itself. What is significant in this
         account of self-identified learning opportunities is that the nature of the problems under investigation in these
         interdisciplinary labs affords multiple opportunities for increasing legitimate peripheral participation (Lave &
         Wenger, 1991). Building affords an immediate and easy opportunity for membership in and contribution to the
         lab setting, which serves as first steps towards full membership. At the same time, the numerous jobs to be
         tackled or sub-problems to be addressed allows for students to become free agents of their learning, much more
         so than in a traditional apprenticeship situation where practices are relatively static and entry points much more
         prescribed. The wide open knowledge frontier and relatively flat hierarchy make for hospitable first beginnings
         for new lab members, even undergraduate students.

3-
Cognitive Partnering
         In trying to understand the role of environment and learning, we follow up on Lave and Wenger's
proposal for    a "decentering   of  common   notions  of mastery   and pedagogy"    (Lave   &    Wenger, 1991)   p. 94).
Decentering for us means searching for mastery in varied forms and pedagogy as enacted through participation
in situated activities   and interactions. The   particular   argument we   advance  here   is that participation as  the
vehicle for learning extends to interactions not just with people, but just as importantly, with artifacts. This
argument   relates   to Lave and    Wenger's  notion   of both,  "absorbing  and   being absorbed   in--`the  culture of
practice' "(p.95). We have observed that artifacts are critical to this process of being absorbed into the practices.
It is our contention that research laboratories as instances of innovation communities are not well understood
unless  we  consider    learning  as relational with   respect  to people  and  community      as discussed in previous
sections, and artifacts.  We further contend that our understanding of such communities can extend the current
notion of distributed cognitive systems as it relates to learning (Hutchins, 1996). We find that artifacts as part of
the   cognitive system   in  such communities    afford   evolving  "cognitive  partnerships."    We use  the  notion of
cognitive partnering to capture our observations that researchers come to understand the technology they design
and   construct   as collaborators   in research (Osbeck      & Nersessian   2006). The   design    and construction  of
technology   for   simulation  and   experiment   help    the researchers   define their questions   and  deepen     their
knowledge. When scientists use the technology, for instance to manipulate cells, what is important is not the
final assay, which can be examined to test their original hypothesis. Rather, learning and knowledge innovation
occur during the entire process of building and designing the technology. The model-systems such as construct,
flow loop, or dish are not systems separated from the user but by their available inputs and outputs, but rather
more like partners in that they support and promote creativity. One researcher aptly noted that their research
involves "putting a thought into the benchtop to see if it works." From a distributed cognition standpoint, as an
instantiated thought, a model-system is an embodied mental model ­ a tangible artifact with a meaning that
evolves alongside the researchers' understanding. It thus serves as an important site of simulation ­ not just of
some biological or mechanical process, but also of the researchers' knowledge.
         Such partnerships are singular kinds of relationships formed with certain artifacts that are salient to the
lab research agenda. These relationships are interesting in that they are both negotiable and changing through
repeated and varied interactions manifesting in contrasting notions of representation and agency. Over time,
learner understandings of lab artifacts are constructed, revised, enhanced and transformed by learning through
and with those artifacts present in the community.     Moreover, we have discerned developmental patterns enacted
as changed understandings and uses of the artifacts both materially and cognitively. These dynamic relationships
are critical to knowledge acquisition and deepening forms of participation. And of central importance to these
cognitive relationships is their evolving nature (Nersessian et al., 2002). To get a better sense of these dynamic
and developmental relationships, we offer in the symposium an extended example that starts with cells and then
moves onto a lab designed device in which cells are embedded. This example derives from a yearlong series of
interviews with A22, a newcomer to the tissue-engineering lab, who had worked as a mechanical engineer in the
auto industry. She starts as a MA student but eventually switches to a PhD in bioengineering.

STUDY 2: INTERACTIVE MEDIA RESEARCH IN THE INDUSTRY
         The second study focused on an industrial R&D lab, TechLab, with offices in the U.S. and Asia, which
does work in computer software and hardware related areas. TechLab has offices in two geographical locations.
One office is located in a western state in the U.S. (TechLab U.S. or TLU) and covers the entire second floor of
a building. The other office is located in Asia (TechLab Asia or TLA) and covers several floors of a large
building. There are around 25 researchers at TLU and 70 researchers in TLA. In addition to the researchers, who
were the primary informants, the U.S. lab also has technical support staff, visiting researchers, administrative
staff, and interns. This research was conducted as a qualitative field study for a period of 5 months in which data
collection methods included participant observation of the laboratory settings, interviews with researchers and
managers, collection of archival materials available at the organization, and short surveys, primarily at the U.S.
site.

Learning as Mediated by Impression Formation and Interpersonal Relations
         TechLab study focuses on how participants in a community of practice (CoP) form impressions of each
other (Fiske, Lin, & Neuberg, 1999; Fiske & Neuberg, 1990) and how these impressions impact learning and
knowledge sharing. One of the primary concerns we have is how to focus the analysis so that we are able to
make   a cogent    case.  Theoretically,   we   use the   concept  of  "frames"   (Goffman,    1974)  to  examine    how
impressions form and the role of practice in this process. Frames "organize experience" and are the basis for our
interpretations of the lived world. In a sense our impressions of other people are interpretations that are socially
constructed. The     framework    we  have  come    up  with  to   explain this process  is this:  Any  organization  or
community of practice has several "practices" that are part of that community. These practices, we argue, are

                                                                                                                             3-3
         interpretations that are commonly shared by members of the community. Practices in an organization consist of
         numerous   interactions   and practices frame  how   we   interpret these   interactions through what    we  are calling
         "practice frames." Furthermore, what takes place within an interaction is an interpretation too, whether shared
         by  people  or  not,  and the frame    participants employ   for   that interpretation  is an "interactive  frame."   So,
         participants' impressions of others, who are part of an interaction, depend on how they interpret the practices
         and interactions since their understanding of what is going on is through a lens of practices and interaction.
                   Learning has been shown to be based on practice and one of core constituents of practice are other
         participants. Interpersonal relationships are known to form a critical component of learning (Vygotsky, 1978)
         but we  still do not   know   about  relationships  in  the world   of  work. To   function  effectively researchers   in
         TechLab had to be supported in various ways. They needed new hardware and software; they needed assistance
         with  traveling  arrangements   they   needed help   with   finances    and other  matters  considered   to be   "human
         resources"  function   such  as health  insurance   and   retirement.   Therefore, surrounding   the   core CoP    of the
         researchers were other communities. Overall these communities could be said to form a network of communities
         within which the individual members were networked through their relationships. People occupied positions in
         different  overlapping  communities    although they    identified primarily  with  one    community.   These   positions
         represented   their normative   assignment with     the organization    but often  went  beyond  that.  For  instance,  a
         research "manager" not only managed one research group but formed ties with administration and often played
         a critical role as  a knowledge   broker  between   administration    and   researches. Furthermore,   practices of   one
         community, for instance "brainstorming" by researchers, often overlapped with practices in other communities,
         such as the function and meetings of technical support staff. To brainstorm they often needed artifacts that were
         made available by the technical support staff. Furthermore, learning often took place across the CoP through the
         ties that stretched across two or more communities. For instance, the technical support and visual designers
         knew more about particular technologies ­ software and hardware ­ than the researchers and brought that to the
         table. The contractors and interns were often more experienced with certain topics and methodologies than the
         researchers. Looking at this dynamically, the newcomers to the organization, especially fulltime researchers,
         often brought expertise that was then shared with a particular group. Newcomers were often hired to bring in
         knowledge that was not there but for it to materialize and become embedded in the organization it needs to be
         shared  and   therefore making    ties became   critical.  Overall, being    an organizational  membership      involved
         participation in more   than  one overlapping   community    and   members    were  "networked   individuals  (Castells,
         1996;  Wellman,     2002)."   They   were embedded      in  communities     were   themselves  embedded      in  a large
         constellations of communities. Therefore, ties and networks that bridged different communities were critical for
         sharing knowledge across communities for learning. Work on distributed cognition and distributed intelligence
         has looked at the role played by artifacts that a person is surrounded but the role of other participants also needs
         in-depth examination. How do relationships form and how are they shaped? What role do they play in how and
         what people learn? More importantly, with more and more emphasis on collaborative learning it is critical to
         understand the role relationships might play in how people collaborate. Relationships can be investigated at
         different levels of analysis dyadic, group or team. All thinking and existence is relational as Cooley, and then
         Mead, tell us. Our development of symbols is a relational process and how we think of the other shapes who we
         think we are; who we are and how we act. If the self does not exist other than in relation to the `other' then as
         educationalists we need to pay more attention to the `other.'

        STUDY 3: APPLIED COMPUTER SCIENCE AS UNIVERSITY-INDUSTRY PARTNERSHIP
                   The last study looks beyond research and industry and at their partnership (Fischer, Rohde, & Wulf
         2007; Rohde et al. 2005). Beyond research is the next step, that of innovation and the critical issue here is ­ how
         do we prepare student to be innovative? We start with the observation that although engineering universities
         have a strong record in knowledge sharing with industries, ranging from cooperative research projects to student
         internship linked with the engineering curricula, computer science lab courses are not organized according to the
         model of engineering curricula but natural science curricula. This creates a gap in the learning of computer
         science graduates.    The study   is conducted  in  Germany    where    computer   science   faculties typically do   not
         encourage entrepreneurship. So, even in IT-related start-ups often the founders do not have a background in
         computer science. To tackle some of these problems, we developed a new course in applied computer science
         teaching based on socio-cultural theories of learning. In the course we partnered with local start-up companies to
         create lab-based multi-cultural and multi-functional groups of students to work on authentic IT projects (see
         Figure 1). The course was accompanied by a series of lectures in which university lecturers and practitioners
         present entrepreneurship and media relevant topics. The results of the evaluation of the course show that both
         networking on a technical and a social level offer new opportunities for university level education. Especially
         the work on real-world problems, collaboration in teams together with partners from start-up companies were
         evaluated very positive. Following a first instance of the course the didactical design was modified considerably
         according to evaluation results. By a more precise selection of start-up partners, larger lab teams, coaching of
         the lab groups by tutors, and increased motivation to use the technical community-system, collaboration and

3-
therefore the establishment of a common practice within the lab groups have been encouraged. This work builds
on  prior  studies that  have compared     school and   work  worlds   (e.g.  see Stevens,  2000)   to understand    the
similarities and differences in these settings. The work discussed in this study goes beyond that to look at how
these two domains can learn from each other.

Figure 1. Design of the computer supported course "Entrepreneurship and New Media" (cf. Rohde et al. 2007)

          We argue that universities can develop a core competency in providing community based learning and
provide a critical resource for regional innovation. Traditionally, universities focus primarily on instructionist
teaching. Such an understanding has been criticized from theoretical and practical points of view. We believe
that socio-cultural theories of learning and the concepts of communities of practice (CoPs) and social capital
hold considerable promise as a theoretical base for the repositioning of universities in the knowledge society.
This case study indicates how approaches to community-based learning can be integrated into a curriculum of
applied computer science. We also discuss the role these didactical concepts can play within a practice-oriented
strategy of regional innovation.
          Universities play an important role in the knowledge society (Brown & Duguid, 2000). Beyond their
traditional role in research  and  education,  they have    the potential  to exploit local knowledge    in (regional)
innovations and to provide opportunities for students to become lifelong learners. To realize these potentials,
universities ­  specifically  in the fields of applied   sciences  and  engineering   ­  will have  to   reinvent their
conception of education by taking the importance of industrial practice and social networks into account. In this
paper, we first describe a conceptual framework for community-based learning. We illustrate the framework by
presenting our approaches to community-based learning. Empirical data evaluating the different courses indicate
potentials and problem areas. Finally, we discuss lessons learned from our efforts to transform learning and to
create new educational opportunities and experiences at our residential, research-based universities. Compared
to approaches that try to extract the epistemology of CoPs and bring it into the classroom (Shaffer, 2004), the
Siegen experiences indicate that educational institutions should cross the boundary toward industrial practice to
an even   wider  extent. Supporting  the   enculturation of  students into CoPs   of companies    offers occasions   for
mutual learning among residential universities and regional industries. So, besides students, regional industries
and universities   can learn. From   the point of view   of  necessary personal   resources,  it should  be noted    that
community-based strategies of learning are labor- and qualification-intense on the part of the universities. They
require coaching    students  intensively; particularly  if these strategies  are taking place   in cooperation   with
practice (Rohde et al., 2005).Our findings also suggest that the relationship between universities and regional
industries will have to develop to a new level of intensity. Saxenian (1994) and other scholars in regional studies
have already hinted at the importance of leading research universities for development in the high-tech domain
(e.g., by educating a highly skilled workforce and attracting the support of high-tech companies). We stress the
bi-directionality of this relationship in particular. Under a community-oriented learning paradigm, a university
depends very much on its region to provide appropriate practices to nurture its different programs. In the Siegen
region, however, the software and media industry lacks density, thus limiting the opportunity to address specific
practices.  With   regard  to political  agendas  for   regional  development,    community-based      learning offers
interesting  perspectives. The   policy  followed   by   the Siegen   business    development    council points   in an
interesting direction. By supporting networks of practices that include the relevant actors of the university, the
potentials of community-based learning are well exploited.

Conclusion

                                                                                                                            3-
                  In this symposium we present three field studies that investigate learning in the real world of research
         and   innovation.   The   settings are    university research   lab, industrial  research   lab, and  university-industry
         partnership.    We  highlight  the variegated    nature of learning    beyond  the classroom     setting and examine    the
         situated, distributed, and practice based models of how people learn.

       References
         Barab,   S.  A.,  MaKinster,   J., &  Scheckler,     R. (2003).  Designing    system  dualities:  Characterizing    a web-
                  supported teacher professional development community. Information Society 19 (3), 237-256.
         Berger, P. L. and Luckman, T. (1967). The Social Construction of Reality. Anchor Books, New York.
         Borgatti, S. & Cross, R. (2003). A Relational View of Information Seeking and Learning in Social Networks.
                  Management Science, Vol. 49, No. 4, 432-445.
         Brown, J. S., & Duguid, P. (2000) The Social Life of Information, Harvard Business School Press, Boston, MA.
         Brown,   J.,   Collins, A., &  Duguid,    P. (1989).  Situated  Cognition   and  the  Culture of  Learning.   Educational
                  Researcher, 18, 32-42.
         Bucciarelli, L. (1994). Designing engineers. Cambridge,MA: MIT Press.
         Castells, M. (1996). The Rise of the Network Society. Blackwell, Malden, MA.
         Conefrey, T. (2000). Laboratory talk and women's retention rates in science. Journal of Women and Minorities
                  in Science and Engineering, 6(3), 251-264.
         Cramton, C. D. (2001). The Mutual Knowledge Problem and Its Consequences for Dispersed Collaboration.
                  Organization Science, 12(3), 346-371.
         Collins, A.    (2006).  Cognitive  Apprenticeship.    Sawyer,   K.  (Ed.). The  Cambridge    Handbook     of the Learning
                  Sciences.
         Dunbar,    K.   (1995). How    scientists really  reason:  Scientific   reasoning  in real-world   laboratories. In   R. J.
                  Sternberg & J. E. Davidson (Eds.), The Nature of Insight. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
         Edelson, D. C. & Reiser, B. J. (2006). Making Authentic Practices Accessible to Learners: Design Challenges
                  and Strategies.    Sawyer, K. (Ed.). The Cambridge Handbook of the Learning Sciences.
         Fischer, G., Rohde, M. & Wulf, V.         (2007). Community-Based Learning: The Core Competency of Residential,
                  Research Based University. International Journal of Computer Supported Cooperative Learning, Vol.
                  2, No. 1, 9-40
         Fiske, S. T., Lin, M. H., & Neuberg, S. L. (1999). The Continuum Model: Ten years later. In S. Chaiken, & Y.
                  Trope (Eds.) Dual process theories in social psychology (pp. 231-254). New York: Guilford.
         Fiske,  S.  T.  &   Neuberg,   S.  L. (1990).   A  Continuum     of  Impression    Formation, From    Category-Based     to
                  Individuating    Processes:  Influences   of   Information  and   Motivation on    Attention and    Interpretation.
                  Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, Vol. 23, pp. 1-73.
         Gabarro,    J. (1990).  The  development     of  working   relationships.  In Galegher, J.  and   R.E.   Kraut,  C. Egido.
                  Intellectual teamwork. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Hillsdale, 79-110.
         Goffman, E. (1974). Frame Analysis. Harper & Row: New York.
         Greeno, J. (2006). Learning in Activity. Sawyer, K. (Ed.). The Cambridge Handbook of the Learning Sciences.
         Hall,  R.,  Wright,  K.   &  Wieckert,    K. (2007).    Interactive and historical  processes of   distributing  statistical
                  concepts through work organization. Mind, Culture, and Activity, 14(1&2), 103-127.
         Hall, R., Stevens, R., & Torralba, A. (2002). Disrupting representational infrastructure in conversations across
                  disciplines. Mind, Culture, and Activity, 9(3), 179-210.
         Hutchins, E. (1991) The social organization of distributed cognition. In Resnick, L., Levine, J. & Teasley, S.
                  (Eds.)     Perspectives   on  Socially   Shared   Cognition    (pp.  238-287).   Washington,     DC:    American
                  Psychological Association Press.
         Hunter A. B., S. L. Laursen, and E. Seymour, Jan. 2007, "Becoming a Scientist: The Role of Undergraduate
                  Research in Students' Cognitive, Personal and Professional Development," Science Education, 91(1),
                  36-74.
         Jones, C., Dirckinck-Holmfeld, L., & Lindstrom, B. (2006). A Relational, Indirect, Meso-Level Approach to
                  CSCL       Design  in the   Next  Decade.    International   Journal   of Computer   Supported      Collaborative
                  Learning, 1:35-56.
         Kinkead, J. (2003). Learning Through Inquiry: An Overview of Undergraduate Research. New Directions for
                  Teaching and Learning, no. 93, Spring, 5-17.
         Kremmer,     J. F., &   Bringle,  R.  G.  (1990). The   effects of  an intensive   research experince    on the careers  of
                  talented undergraduates. Journal of Research and Development in Education, 24(1), 1-5.
         Latour,  B.,    & Woolgar,    S.  (1986).  Laboratory    Life:The    Construction  of Scientific  Facts.    Princeton: NJ:
                  Princeton University Press.
         Lave, J. & Wenger, E. (1990). Situated Learning: Legitimate Peripheral Participation. Cambridge University
                  Press.

3-
Lynch, M. (1985). Art and Artifact in Laboratory Science: A Study of Shop Work and Shop Talk in a Research
         Laboratory. London:: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
May, G. S. (1997). An evaluation of the research experiences for undergraduates program at Georgia Institute of
         Technology. Paper presented at the Frontiers in Education Conference, Pittsburgh, PA.
Mills, C. W. (1959). The Sociological Imagination. Grove Press: NY.
National  Research   Council   (2000). How   People   Learn: Brain, Mind,    Experience, and  School.  National
         Academy Press: Washington, DC.
Morely, R. L., Havick, J. J., & May, G. S. (1998 July). An evaluation of the Georgia Tech summer undergradute
         program of research in electrical engineering minorities. Journal of Engineering Education, 87(3), 321-
         325.
Owen-Smith, J. (2001). Managing Laboratory Work through Skepticism: Processes of Evaluation       and  Control.
         American Sociological Review, 66, 3, 427-452.
Osbeck, L. M., & Nersessian, N. J. (in press). The Distribution of Representation. To appear in the Journal for
         the Theory of Social Behaviour.
Pea, R.  D. (1993),  Practices of  Distributed Intelligence and  Designs for  Education. In Salomon,   G. (Ed.)
         Distributed Cognitions:   Psychological  and   Educational   Considerations. Cambridge:    Cambridge
         University Press.
Rohde, M. Klamma, R. & Wulf, V. (2005) Establishing Communities of Practice among Students and Start-Up
         Companies, in: Proceedings of the International Conference on Collaborative Learning (CSCL 2005),
         May 30 ­ June 4, Taipeh (Taiwan), 514-519
Rohde, M., Klamma, R., Jarke, M., & Wulf, V. (2007): "The Reality is our Lab: Communities of Practice in
         Applied  Computer   Science,"  in: Behavior  and Information Technology  (BIT),  Vol  26,  No 1, 2007,
         Taylor & Francis, 81-94.
Ryder, J., Leach, J., & Driver, R. (1999). Undergraduate science students' image of science. Jounal of Research
         in Teaching Science, 36, 331-346.
Stevens, R. (2000).  Divisions  of Labor  in School   and in the Workplace:   Comparing  Computer   and   Paper-
         Supported Activities Across Settings. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 9(4), 373-401.
Saxenian, A.  (1994):  Regional    Advantage:   Culture and   Competition  in Silicon Valley  and   Route  128,
         Cambridge.
Shaffer, D. W. (2004). Pedagogical Praxis: The Professions as Models for Post-industrial Education. Teachers
         College Record, 106(7), 1401-1421.
Seymour E., Hunter A.B., Laursen S.L., DeAntoni T., 2004, "Establishing the benefits of research experiences
         for undergraduates in the sciences: First findings from a three-year study," Science Education, 88(4),
         493-534.
Vygotsky, L. (1978). Mind in Society. Harvard University Press: Cambridge, MA.
Wellman,  B.  (2002). Little   Boxes,  Glocalization, and   Networked Individualism.  In  Tanabe,  M.  van den
         Besselaar, P. & Ishida, T. (Eds). Digital Cities, LNCS 2362, 10-25.
Wenger, E. (1998). Communities of Practice: Learning, Meaning, and Identity. Cambridge University Press.
Zydney, A. L., Bennett, J. S., Shahid, A., & Bauer, K. (2002). Impact of undergraduate research experience in
         engineering. Journal of Engineering Education, 91(2), 151-157.

                                                                                                                    3-
