       Extending the Joint Problem Space: Time and Sequence as
                      Essential Features of Knowledge Building

                    Johann W. Sarmiento, Gerry Stahl, Drexel University, Philadelphia, USA
                                  Email: jsarmi@drexel.edu, gerry.stahl@drexel.edu

         Abstract:    Our  attempts     at describing   the processes  involved   in learning  and   knowledge
         building activities depend on our ways of conceptualizing the context in which such activities
         take  place. Here    we   trace   the development    of  the concept   of  "problem   space"  from  its
         inception  within    the information-processing     perspective as  a  characterization  of individual
         problem-solving      activity. We    review  reformulations   and   extensions made   to  the  concept
         within the Learning Sciences, and explore them as attempts to better describe small-group
         interactions in complex knowledge-building contexts. Using a detailed analysis of sustained,
         online collaborative problem solving activity, we propose that a new aspect of the problem
         space needs to be carefully considered in order to fully account for these kinds of experiences:
         temporal and sequential orientation to inter-subjective meaning making.

Introduction
         At the core of most inquiry in the Learning Sciences lies the challenge of identifying, describing, and
assessing the  contexts    in which     knowledge    building  takes  place. Descriptions   of features, resources,  and
activities particular to each learning context serve as the building blocks for structuring inquiry about them and
offering accounts of their dynamics. As Sfard (1998) has argued, even the metaphors that we use to characterize
what learning is, work as lenses that focus our attention on particular aspects of learning interactions, while
obscuring   or ignoring   others.  In   this paper   we use  the  construct  of the  joint problem   space  and  trace its
development    within the   Learning    Sciences   as   a way  to present   an  expanding   view  of  what  needs  to  be
considered relevant and significant in descriptions of learning and knowledge building activity.
         In order to anchor our review of the evolution of the concept of "problem space," we will use data
originating from groups participating in the Virtual Math Teams (VMT) project. The VMT project at the Math
Forum    (http://mathforum.org/vmt)     investigates    the innovative use   of  online collaborative   environments   to
support effective secondary mathematics learning in small groups. Central to the VMT research program are the
investigation of the nature and dynamics of group cognition (Stahl, 2006a) as well as the design of effective
technological supports for quasi-synchronous small-group interactions. In addition, we investigate the linkages
between synchronous interactions (e.g., collaborative chat episodes) and distributed asynchronous interactions at
the level of   the online  community.      VMT    is currently studying  how    upper  middle  school   and  high school
students do mathematics collaboratively in an online environment that integrates electronic chat with a shared
whiteboard and a series of support tools for referencing and annotating objects. Particular attention is given to
the methods that students deploy to conduct their interactions in such an environment. Taken together, these
methods define a culture, a shared set of ways to "make sense together." The methods are subtly responsive to
the chat medium, the pedagogical setting, the social atmosphere and the intellectual resources that are available
to the participants. These methods help define the nature of the collaborative experience for the small groups.
Joint Activity and Joint Problem Spaces
         Joint activity, the kind of activity that takes place when multiple participants engage with each other,
offers a unique    context for the  investigation    of human  reasoning.   Not  only are  the reasoning   processes that
characterize joint activity visibly distributed across multiple participants (e.g., Hutchins, 1995; Salomon, 1993),
but they are also highly shaped by the way that material and conceptual artifacts are integrated into activity (e.g.,
Perkins, 1993; Schwartz, 1995) and the way that activity evolves over time (e.g., Brown & Campione, 1994;
Lave   &  Wenger,   1991;  Scardamalia       & Bereiter,  1991).  For  instance, in  Roschelle   (1992)  and Teasley   &
Roschelle's (1993), the authors analyze dyads using a physics software simulation to explore concepts such as
velocity and acceleration, and propose the notion of a joint problem space (JPS) to explain how collaborative
activity gets structured in this context . This "knowledge structure" integrates goals, descriptions of the current
problem state, and awareness of available problem solving actions. In addition, this space is characterized as
being "shared" in the sense that both members of the dyad oriented to its construction and maintenance.
         At  first glance, the  concept    of  a "joint problem   space" may    appear  strongly related to  the original
concept  of "problem   space"     advanced    within the  information  processing   perspective  on  individual  problem
solving  by Allan Newell and Herbert Simon (Newell & Simon, 1972). Newell and Simon were concerned with
building a "process theory" describing the performance of individual "intelligent adults in our own culture,"
working on short and "moderately difficult problems of a symbolic nature," (p. 3) where "motivation is not a
question and emotion is not aroused" (p. 53). To achieve this, they explicitly excluded group activity as well as
"long-term integrated activities" involving multiple episodes of action over longer periods of time (p.4). Central

                                                                                                                             2-2
         to their theory is the idea that to solve a task or problem, one must "adapt" to the environment presented by the
         problem (the "task environment") by constructing an internal representation of the problem's relevant elements
         (a "problem space").     The concept of problem space was introduced as a "neutral and objective way of talking
         about the responses of the subject, including his internal thinking responses, as he goes about dealing with the
         stimulus situation" (p.59). This space is commonly presented as a graph with nodes and links and is mostly
         viewed as internal or mental although sometimes related to external resources as well (e.g., Kotovsky & Simon,
         1990). A person is assumed to understand a task correctly when she has successfully constructed a problem
         space representation containing or "encoding": a set of states of knowledge including the initial state of the
         problem, the goal state, and the necessary intermediate states, as well as operators for changing from one state
         into another, constraints determining allowable states and moves, and any other encodings of knowledge such as
         problem solving heuristics and the like (pp. 59, 810). Problem solving proceeds as the subject works from the
         initial state in  her mental  space  in  a  process commonly     characterized           as "search"  on   the problem    space.
         Representation and search, as activities, become the central phenomena theorized. For instance, search methods
         such as breadth first, depth first, branch and bound, heuristic best first, etc. have been offered as descriptions of
         the processes followed by human problem solvers in different contexts (Newell, 1980).
                   The characterization of the joint problem space advanced by Teasley and Roschelle, despite superficial
         similarities, goes beyond    simply  being  a collective  reformulation   of         the  information processing   concept   of
         problem space1. From their perspective, social interaction in the context of problem-solving activity occurs in
         relation to a shared conception of the problem which is in itself constituted through the collaborative process of
         coordinating communication, action, and representation in a particular context of activity; not restricted to or
         primarily driven by individual mental states. This perspective as well as the authors' method of analysis are
         closely related with the ethnomethodological position regarding the nature of shared agreements as "various
         social methods for accomplishing the member's recognition that something was said-according-to-a-rule, and
         not the  demonstrable    matching   of substantive  matters"  (Garfinkel,           1967,   p.30). A common      understanding
         becomes a feature of an interaction (an operation, in Garfinkel's terms) "rather than a common intersection of
         overlapping sets" (Ibid). A "shared agreement" or a "mutual conception of the problem" is then the emergent
         and situated result of the participant's interactions tied to their context of activity. In the words of Roschelle and
         Teasley, it is "the coordinated production of talk and action by two participants (that) enabled this construction
         and maintenance (of the joint problem space) to succeed."
                   Beyond   the sole  identification of relevant   resources,  an  effective         account  of  the   problem    solving
         process  requires  a  description of   the  fundamental   activities involved.          Roschelle  (1992)  presents  the   most
         compelling description of such activities associated with the joint problem space when he states that the process
         of the students' incremental achievement of convergent meaning through interaction can be characterized by the
         four primary features of activity synthesized in Figure 1.
                             (a) the production of a deep-featured situation, in relation to
                             (b) the interplay of physical metaphors, through the constructive use of
                             (c) interactive cycles of conversational turn-taking, constrained by
                             (d) the application of progressively higher standards of evidence for convergence.
                 Figure 1. Primary features of the process of achieving convergent conceptual change. From (Roschelle, 1992)
                   Testing  the joint problem   space  construct   empirically requires,          then, the ability to  recognize   these
         features in interaction. In order to do this and to support the next steps in our exploration of the construct of
         problem space, we would like to introduce here one particular problem situation used as part of the Virtual Math
         Teams (VMT) project mentioned earlier:

                                                           Pretend you live in a world where you can only travel
                                                            on the lines of the grid. You can't cut across a block
                                                            on the diagonal, for instance Your group has gotten
                                                             together to figure out the math of this place. For
                                                           example, what is a math question you might ask that
                                                                       involves these two points?

                                                        Figure 2. Grid-world task.
                   One  could   argue that the  task presented in  Figure 2   does           not properly specify a   problem yet.   The
         "problem" at hand is, in fact, to create a problem. From the perspective of the construction of the joint problem
         space, participants are challenged with the creation of that "deep-featured situation" that could drive their joint
         action.  On   the  other hand,  for  the   information-processing    perspective,         the  foundational    activities which
         contribute to  the creation  of a problem   are, in fact, poorly understood.            As  a recent review   of psychological
         research on problem solving stated, "problem-solving research has not revealed a great deal about the processes

          1 This seminal paper straddled the cognitive and interactional perspectives, causing ideological barriers to publication
          (personal communication Roschelle to Koschmann at CSCL 02 and Teasley to Stahl at GROUP 07).

2-2
involved in problem recognition, problem definition, and problem representation (Pretz, Naples, & Sternberg,
2003, p. 9). It is only after a problem space has been constructed internally in the mind of a subject, at least
partially, that one can start to trace the solution process as a search process. However, observing these early
phases of problem solving can inform us a great deal about how problem spaces are constituted in interaction
and how some of the features of collaborative activity contribute to this important phase. For instance, in our
study of the ways that small online groups in VMT engaged with this task, we observed a number of activities
related to these early phases of collaborative problem solving. The groups often identified and appropriated
specific elements  of    the task, and  purposefully  and   iteratively structured   them into  a problematic  situation.
Resources such as graphical manipulations (e.g., grid annotations), related mathematical concepts (e.g., straight
distance), constraints (e.g., you can only travel on the lines of the grid), or analogous problems were used to
construct and evolve a set of possible inquiries about this world. We can characterize these constructions as
creating a   "deep-featured situation" in the sense that they embody the sustained exploratory activities of the
participants. As an example, many groups promptly oriented to finding the shortest distance between points A
and  B   in the grid    world, a  familiar problem   to  school-aged    students.  Some   purposefully  attended  to the
constraints of the grid world while others ignored them and proceeded to explore diagonal distances. Building
on this initial problem, many groups embarked on the problem of finding the number of shortest paths between
any two points on the grid. Figure 3 contains some snapshots of the artifacts the different groups created to help
constitute a problem from the original situation.

                        Figure 3. Snapshots of grid-world problem resources created by VMT groups.

         In this particular VMT situation, potential problems were constantly defined as sets of artifacts with
specific properties sometimes constituted as "discoverables." Multiple trajectories of reasoning were explored,
sometimes    in concerted    fashion, others in  parallel.  A central   aspect  of  the group's   activity seemed to   be
concerned   with "adding     structure" to the  resources  used to think    with.  From  an  interactional perspective it
certainly does not seem appropriate to characterize such activities as search, although, on the other hand, one
could certainly agree that a "space" or network of problem objects and relations was being constructed and that
specific features of the resources available were being attended to. Although representations emerged out of
these interactions, they were not preconditions for the joint work of the groups. Metaphors played a role in some
instances but perspectives, or points of view, seemed more interactionally relevant. In this context, the groups
did not necessarily orient to the application of "progressively higher standards of evidence for convergence" but,
within those teams that seemed more intensively engaged with the grid world, they seemed to orient strongly to
the continuity or "progressivity" of their inquiry. Overall, these collective problem solving activities appear to
be much     more interactive   than what   the  original concept   of   search  in a mental  problem   space  may  have
suggested (as Kirsh (forthcoming) has eloquently argued for individual problem solving as well). In contrast,
the interactional perspective represented by the construct of the joint problem space seemed to better capture the
observed    activities. Next,  we  continue  to trace the   evolution   of  the concept   of problem   space  within the
Learning Sciences and extend our empirical exploration of the relevant elements that characterize engagement
with problem-solving and knowledge-building activity in different contexts.
A Dual Space Model of Collaboration: Content and Relational Spaces
         Barron (2000; 2003) investigated triads of 6th grade students engaged in collaborative mathematical
problem solving. Her analysis proposed that it was necessary to differentiate between the social and cognitive
aspects of the interactions observed and investigate the ways in which both are interwoven in the establishment
of a joint  problem-solving     space,  especially, when    attempting   to characterize  successful   and  unsuccessful
collaborations. Both cognitive and social aspects were, in a sense, integrated in the features of collaborative
activity described by Roschelle (1992) and reproduced in Figure 1. However, Barron's analysis illuminates a
new set of specific activities that the participants engaged in when attending         to social and cognitive factors in
the development and maintenance of a "between-person state of engagement" (p. 349). Interestingly, patterns of
interaction related to a group's inability to attend to their common views of the problem or to coordinate their
reciprocal  participation    were  particularly salient  in groups    that  failed  to  achieve   and maintain  "mutual
engagement." As a result, such groups were unable to capitalize on the ideas and proposals of their members (p.

                                                                                                                            2-2
         311). Based on this, Barron proposes a dual-space model of collaboration integrating a content space pertaining
         to the problem being solved and a relational space pertaining to the ways that participants relate to each other.
         Naturally,  these  two    spaces  are  not separate  entities  but mutually   constitutive of each    other.  Participants
         simultaneously attend to and develop such spaces.
                  Similar dual schemes have been made, for instance, in the field of Small Group Research since Robert
         Bales (1953) first proposed his principle of "equilibrium" which states that a group continuously divides its
         attention between instrumental (task-related) needs and expressive (socio-emotional) concerns. More recently,
         McGrath (1991) suggested in his "Time, Interaction, and Performance" theory that work groups orient towards
         three  "inseparably    intertwined"   functions:   working   on  the  common     task together   (production    function),
         maintaining the communication and interaction among group members (group well-being function), and helping
         the individual member when necessary (member support function, p. 151). Poole (2004) also suggested that
         group   decision-making     discussions    can be   characterized   by  three  intertwining   "tracks" of    activity and
         interaction: task progress (goal oriented), relational track (interpersonal relationships), and topical focus (issues
         and concerns). Interspersed within these tracks are breakpoints, marking changes in the development of strands
         of work.
                  The power that these proposals have to advance our understanding of group activity lies, however, not
         in their ability to appropriately label dimensions of group interaction but in their ability to characterize and
         describe the practices that groups engage in. Consequently, the value of Barron's proposal, in our opinion, lies
         on her careful way of calling our attention to the interactional methods employed by the students in orienting to
         and constituting the "responsivity" and "connectedness" (p. 353) of their content and relational spaces while
         engaged in learning activity. In her descriptions, we see the participants' degrees of competence in attending and
         relating to their own "epistemic process" while "tracking and evaluating others' epistemic processes" (p. 310).
         Similar descriptions have been provided by Engle and Conant as "positioning" (Engle, 2006; Engle & Conant,
         2002).   In order   to expand    these concepts,    next we    extend  the  type  of  group  phenomena     studied    from
         collaborative interactions to longitudinal sequences of joint activity and attempt to inquire about ways in which
         the concepts of "joint problem space" and "dual problem space" are sufficient to understand them.
       Continuity of Joint Problem Spaces in Virtual Math Teams
                  Undoubtedly, the difficulty of constructing and maintaining a "cognitive" and "social" joint problem
         space--the intersubjective space of interaction emerging from the active engagement of collectivities in problem
         solving-- represents the central challenge of effective collaborative knowledge building and learning. Several
         studies  in addition   to Barron's  have   shown   that  what   determines  the  success  of the collaborative   learning
         experience   is the   interactional   manner   in  which  this  intersubjective  problem   space  is  created   and   used
         (Dillenbourg et al., 1995; Hausmann, Chi, & Roy, 2004; Koschmann et al., 2005; Wegerif, 2006). Furthermore,
         the complexity of the challenge of maintaining a joint problem space rises when, as in many naturalistic settings,
         joint activity  is dispersed  over  time   (e.g., multiple  episodes  of joint  activity, long-term   projects, etc.) and
         distributed across multiple collectivities (e.g., multiple teams, task forces, communities, etc.). As a result of
         these gaps, sustained collaborative learning in small virtual groups and online communities of learners might
         require that co-participants "bridge" multiple elements of their interactions continuously as they interact over
         time. Motivated by the need to understand such activities, we set out to investigate the challenges associated
         with such discontinuities of interaction over time within the Virtual Math Team (VMT) online community.
                  In VMT, participating teams might engage in multiple, collaborative sessions over time, they might
         work on several related tasks over time and learn about the work of other teams. To explore whether VMT
         teams   employ     specific   methods  oriented    towards    overcoming    the  discontinuities  of   time,  tasks,  and
         participation, during the spring of 2005 we conducted a pilot case study of five Virtual Math Teams. These
         virtual teams were each formed with about four non-collocated upper middle-school and high-school students
         selected by volunteer teachers at different schools across the United States. The teams engaged in synchronous
         online math interactions for four hour-long sessions over a two-week period. They used the ConcertChat virtual
         room environment (Wessner et al., 2006) which integrates a chat interface with a shared whiteboard. A new
         virtual room was provided for each of the sessions, so that participants did not have direct access to the records
         of their prior  interactions.  In  the first session, the   teams  were  given  a brief   description of  the grid-world
         presented in Figure 2, where one could only move along the lines of a grid. The students were asked to generate
         and pursue their own questions about this mathematical world. In subsequent sessions, the teams were given
         feedback    on  their  work   as well  as  on  the work   of  other  teams, and   were    encouraged   to continue    their
         collaboration.  Because    of the sequential   framing   of the tasks  provided  and  the  continuous  relevance  of   the
         properties of the grid world, we considered this a propitious setting for the investigation of members' methods
         related to  continuity  of  knowledge   building.  We   examined    each of the  18  sessions recorded,   paying  special
         attention to the sequential unfolding of the four problem-solving episodes in which each team participated, to
         the ways that prior activities were used as resources for later team work, and also to the ways that changes in
         team membership triggered issues of continuity.

2-2
         As  a     result of our analysis,   we  identified            a number     of  instances   where     the   teams  were  engaged  in
several types of "bridging activity" aimed at overcoming discontinuities emerging over the multiple episodes of
interaction. All teams, although in different levels of intensity, engaged in this type of activity over time. In
summary, the instances of bridging identified involved methods related to narrating or reporting past doings as
resources for constructing a new task, remembering collectively, and managing the history of the team, among
others. Constant comparison through different instances of bridging activity in the entire dataset led to our initial
characterization    of the   structural elements   that            define these     activities  and their     interactional   relevance. Our
analysis of  the   dynamics    of    bridging activity echoes             the construction      and maintenance         of a  "joint problem
space" (Teasley & Roschelle, 1993) and also agrees with the proposal that such a space integrates "content" and
"relational" dimensions (Barron, 2003). However, throughout our analysis of all instances of bridging activity,
we noticed that a third element of interaction reoccurred as a resource and a relevant concern of the participants:
The temporal       and sequential    unfolding  of activity            (see Figure     4). To   illustrate    this, let's  turn to an   actual
instance of bridging activity. The conversation reproduced in Figure 5 illustrates how a team oriented to past
team activity as resources for framing a current problem-solving task.

                                                                                144 mathis:letz start working on number 8
                              Time &Sequences                                   145 bob1:  we already did that yesterday
                                                                                146 qw:    we did?
                                                                              147 mathis: but we did it so that there was only right and
                                                                                           down
                                                                                148 bob1:  i mean tuesday
                                                                                149 mathis:i guess we will do it with left and up?
                       Continuity                                               150 qw:    It would be almost the same.151bob1:it's (|x2-x1|+|y2-y1|-2) choose (|x2-x1|-1)
                               &                                                152 bob1:  try it if you like
                          Bridging                     Knowledge                153 mathis: nah
       ManagingParticipation                           Artifacts &Reasoning     154 mathis:if you are so sure...Procedures155bob1:i'm not
                                                                                156 bob1:  actually
                                                                                157 bob1:  take out the -2 and the -1
                                                                                158 mathis:then letz check it
                                                                              ...
 Figure 4. Three dimensions of interaction and theirrelationship in bridging workFigure 5. Chat excerpt of bridging episode. Spring2005. Team B, Session two
         The    first  of  the three   basic  interactional           dimensions      that seem     to be     at play   in bridging   activity
corresponds to the creation, referencing, manipulation, assessment and re-use of a set of knowledge artifacts.
This involves constituting the problem-at-hand, identifying which resources are relevant to it, creating                                tasks,
constituting aspects of the problem situation and its resources as known or unknown, among other activities
Despite  the brevity      of the interaction  captured             in Figure  5,    we  can recognize     some      of  these artifacts (e.g.,
problem number 8, "only right and down", " left and up", (|x2-x1|+|y2-y1|-2) choose (|x2-x1|-1), etc.). We can
get a glimpse of ways in which they are attended to and manipulated (e.g., "only right and down" is debated as
being almost the same as "left and up", the formula provided is offered for assessment, etc.). Interwoven with
the development and use of knowledge artifacts, we also identified the active management of participation as a
second relevant dimension at play in this case of bridging activity. From this perspective, teams were actively
oriented towards, for instance, who was and was not involved in an activity, who could or should speak about a
particular matter and how, which activities (e.g., assessing and responding to assessments) were allocated to
participants, etc. In essence, the participants orient to the development in interaction of specific participation
frameworks (Goffman, 1981) which "position" team members in relation to each other, the resources at hand,
and the activities they are engaged in. This positioning activity, for example, situated participants as problem-
solving peers, experts, explainers, etc. In addition, the activities they engage in over time position them with
different types of access, rights and duties with respect to relevant knowledge artifacts. The excerpt in Figure 5
illustrates this, especially toward the end of this passage, when Bob1 attempts to position Mathis as someone
who could do the checking of his solution formula. After Mathis declines and Bob1 states his lack of confidence
in the correctness of the formula a new participation framework gets enacted, in which the group together can
engage in the work necessary to check and possibly correct the solution provided for this problem.
         The first two dimensions of interaction observed matched, very closely, the "content" and "relational"
spaces theorized by Barron. However, a recurring third element present in episodes of bridging activity captured
our attention   both   because    of   its centrality in           the   interactions   analyzed    as  well     as its novelty  within   the
theoretical frameworks       considered:    the temporal            or   sequential   organization     of     experience.  Temporality   and
sequentiality are constructs that are often taken for granted and which have only until recently recovered their
centrality in analyses of joint activity (e.g., Arrow et al., 2004; Lemke, 2001; Reimann, 2007; Sawyer, 2003,

                                                                                                                                                  2-2
        Stahl 2006b). Our analysis suggests, however, that in the types of interactions that we observed, participants
        orient to time and sequences as central resources for the organization of their collaborative activity. As can be
        seen in Figure 5, VMT participants visibly oriented to what was done in a different episode of activity or at a
        different           time, to  the  relationship    between what            was done       before    and  what is   being done            now, or           to what
        possible actions might be available at a particular moment as related to what had been achieved so far.
                            The excerpt reproduced in Figure 6, illustrates a case in which a team is collectively engaged in trying
        to         reconstruct       parts of   their previous    session           while  initiating       their   current   problem            solving    activity.
        Remembering of past activity unfolds as a collective engagement in which different team members participate
        dynamically.           Some     of  the  current   team  members            were not      present   in  the previous   session           and yet,   they        are
        instrumental in the reconstruction of that past and in shaping its current relevance. This was the fourth session of
        team E. Towards the beginning of the session (8:22:09 PM) the facilitator (MFMod) suggested in the chat that
        during the summer the team members could work with their friends on a new problem he posted: the "circle
        problem." Later, he added that they could pursue the circle question in "this chat" if they wanted or "any other
        questions and worlds" that they thought of. Following about a minute of silence, the facilitator posted a message
        in which he reported how in the previous session the team had "worked on finding a formula for the number of
        shortest paths between any two points A and B on the grid (...) explored multiple possibilities and figured out
        that x+y and x^2+y^2 work (where x and y correspond to the # of units you need to travel along x and y axis to
        get from A to B) but only for some points, not all". Then he suggested that they could continue "exploring more
        cases" and see if they could find "a general formula," work on the circle problem he had posted earlier, or on
        any other problem from the "original questions" presented at the beginning of their VMT experience. The team
        then oriented toward finding a task for themselves, and the following interaction took place:
               119 8:27:42   drago:      ok                                                  138  8:33:42   meets:    sure...
               120  8:30:11  gdo:        where did u guys last leave off (To 119)            139  8:33:45  meets:     so basically...
               121  8:31:20  MFmod:      I think that the above section I wrote is           140  8:33:45  gdo:       o yea
                                         where the group last was         (To 114)           141  8:33:49  gdo:       i sort of remember
               122  8:31:36  MFmod:      yes?                                                142  8:33:55  meets:     we want a formula for the distance
               123  8:31:42  drago:      well                                                                         between poitns A and B
               124  8:31:48  gdo:        i dont remember that                                143  8:34:02  drago:     yes...
               125  8:31:51  drago:      actually, my internet connection broke              144  8:34:05  meets:     ill amke the points
                                         on Tuesday                                         (meets draws two points on the existing grid on the shared whiteboard)
               126  8:31:56  drago:      so I wasn't here                                    145  8:34:09  MFmod:     since some folks don't remember and
               127  8:32:12  MFmod:      so maybe that is not the best place to                                       weren't here why don't you pick up
                                         pick up                                                                      with this idea and work on it a bit
               128  8:32:14  estric:     i wasnt able to be here on tuesday                 (meets labels the two points on the grid A and B)
                                         either                                              146 8:34:55   meets:     okay
               129  8:32:50  gdo:        how bout u meets                                    147 8:34:59   meets:     so there are those poitns A and B
               130  8:33:01  meets:      uh...                                               148 8:35:08   meets:     (that's a 3by2 rectangle
               131  8:33:11  meets:      where'd we meet off....                             149 8:35:28   meets:     we first had a unit square
               132  8:33:16  meets:      i remember                                         (meets draws the lines of a 3 by 2 rectangle with points A and B in its opposing
               133  8:33:22  gdo:        i was in ur group                                  corners)
               134  8:33:24  meets:      that we were trying to look for a                   150 8:35:44   meets:     and we know that there are only 2
                                         pattern                                                                      possible paths......
               135  8:33:27  gdo:        but i didn't quite understand it                    ...
               136  8:33:34  gdo:        can u explain it to us again meets
               137  8:33:38  meets:      with the square, the 2by 2 square, and
                                         the 3by2 rectangle
                                      Figure 6. Chat excerpt of bridging episode. Spring 2005, Session Four, Team E
                            This sequence involves a number of interesting interactional features. In particular, a set of temporal
        and sequential markers (e.g., Tuesday, last, again) and the mixing of different verb tenses are used to index prior
        events and constitute a present task. In the facilitator's feedback, the declarative assertions constructed with
        past-tense verbs (e.g., you worked on finding a formula, you explored multiple possibilities, you figured out that
        x+y and x^2+y^2 work, etc.) were followed by future-oriented suggestions: you may want to continue exploring
        more cases and see if you can find a general formula, you can work on the problem I posted earlier, etc. The
        uptake by the team of the task assessments and proposals made by the facilitator also involved similar resources.
        Gdo's request in line 120 for a report of where the group "last" left off seems to use a communicative marker
        that allows parties in conversation to segment or index specific portions of experiences and relate them in ways
        that allows them to form sequences of participation and activity. Gdo is orienting the group back to a specific
        aspect of "last Tuesday," and after Drago and Estric both positioned themselves as not having participated in last
        Tuesday's session, Meets is then asked directly in lines 129 and 136 to re-produce a past ("again") explanation
        for the rest ("us").
                            One of the things that is remarkable about the way this interaction unfolds is the fact that although it
        might appear as if it was Meets who individually remembered what they were doing last time, the activity of
        remembering               unfolds   as   a collective    engagement           in  which       different    team members                participate.        This      is
        accomplished by marking and using time as a central resource to organize participation and to advance their
        current problem solving. To organize their present activity, they reproduce a sequence of previously-constructed
        cases (the square, the 2by2 square, and the 3by2 rectangle) and link them to knowledge artifacts and the related
        knowledge of the group (e.g., stating in line 150 that for the unit square "we know that there are only 2 possible

2-00
paths"). In fact, later in this interaction there is a point where Meets remembers the fact that they had discovered
that there are six different shortest paths between the corners of a 2x2 grid but he reports that he can only "see"
four at the moment. Drago, who did not participate in the original work leading to that finding, is able to see the
six paths and proceeds to invent a method of labeling each point of the grid with a letter so that he can name
each path and help others see it (e.g., "from B to D there is BAD, BCD ..."). After this, Meets was able to see
again why it is that there are six paths in that small grid and together with Drago, they proceeded to investigate,
in parallel, the cases of a 3x3 and a 4x4 grid using the method just created.
         All   of these   resources, the knowledge     artifacts    used and  referenced,  the   sequential  organization  of
cases, and   the  temporal    markers   of  prior   activity,   are positioned   in  different ways     with relation  to  the
participants in a temporal or sequential space. The concept of "deictic field" developed by Hanks (2005) seems
especially useful to define the relationship between this new "space" and the existing content and relational
spaces. Hanks describes the deictic field as composed first by "the positions of communicative agents relative to
the participant frameworks they occupy," for example, who occupies the positions of speaker and addressee as
well as  other  relevant   positions. Second,    the  deictic   field  integrates "the   positions occupied   by   objects    of
reference", and finally    "the multiple dimensions whereby the former have access to the latter" (p. 193). From
this perspective, participants constitute, through interaction, the relevant relative dimensions whereby they are to
manage the positioning of agents and relevant objects of reference. In our analysis, we have confirmed that the
content and relational dimensions are, in fact, relevant to collaborative problem-solving teams. However, in
expanding the range of phenomena analyzed to longitudinal interactions, we have also uncovered time and the
sequential   unfolding  of  interaction  as a third   relevant     and important    dimension   of activity.  In  the excerpt
reproduced in Figure 6, the interactional field is being constituted by the participants to include problem-related
objects and communicative agents associated with a prior interaction and in doing so, they position themselves
and those resources within specific participation frameworks. Our central claim is that this third dimension is
essential to understanding collaborative interactions of this type. This dimension is essentially interwoven with
the  content  and  relational  dimensions    of   the  joint  problem    space.   Such   interdependency     can  be  seen as
characterizing the longitudinal knowledge building of activity systems like the Virtual Math Teams.
Conclusions
         The   theory   of group  cognition   (Stahl,  2006a)      takes as  one  of its central principles   the  dialectical
relationship between social interaction and the construction of meaning. From this perspective, the organization
of  action and    the   knowledge    embedded    in   such   action   is an  emergent    property  of   moment-by-moment
interactions among actors, and between actors and the activity system in which they participate collectively. The
content space and the relational space, in Barron's terms, are mutually constitutive from this perspective. Group
Cognition offers a candidate description for how the dynamic process of building knowledge might intertwine
the content and relational spaces:      "Small   groups     are the  engines  of  knowledge    building. The     knowing   that
groups build up in manifold forms is what becomes internalized by their members as individual learning and
externalized in their communities as certifiable knowledge." (p. 16). Time and the sequential organization of
activity might    be  a resource and   an   aspect  of interaction     that plays a  significant   role in how    groups   and
individual achieve this.
         In fact, in our analysis of how groups "sustain" their group cognition while engaged in brief episodes of
online mathematical problem solving, we          alluded to two ways in which time might be an important element of
individual episodes of problem-solving activity(2006b). On the one hand, the collaborative activity involved in
solving a problem can be "spread across" hundreds of micro-level interactions. On the other hand, individuals
might  internalize    the  meaning   co-constructed    through      interactions  and "sustain"    the  group    cognition by
engaging in later individual or group work. In either case, groups are described as sustaining their social and
intellectual work    by "building    longer sequences    of   math   proposals,   other  adjacency  pairs  and   a variety of
interaction methods."     The analysis presented here of interactions that bridge gaps across sessions confirms and
extends  these  findings   by suggesting    that in longitudinal    interactions, temporal   and   sequential  resources   are
central to constituting activity as continuous by constructing and maintaining a joint problem space. Interaction
is taken here in the full sense ethnomethodologists give it, as the "ongoing, contingent co-production of a shared
social/material   world,"  and   which,  as  Suchman        argues  "cannot  be   stipulated in  advance,    but requires  an
autobiography, a presence, and a projected future (Suchman, 2003). At the moment, our characterization only
provides   a tentative    framework   to   organize   our   developing      understanding  of  collaborative     learning  and
knowledge    building   over  time.  We  have    just began   the   work  of describing   in more   detail   the interactional
methods   that allow    teams to construct  and   manage      this  expanded  problem    "field" (e.g., Sarmiento    & Stahl,
2007; Stahl, 2006b; Stahl et al., 2006) by interweaving content, relational and temporal aspects of interaction.
References
Arrow, H., Poole, M. S., Henry, K. B., Wheelan, S., & Moreland, R. (2004). Time, change, and development: The temporal
         perspective on groups Small Group Research, 35 (1), 73-105.
Bales, R. F. (1953). The equilibrium problem in small groups. In T. Parsons, R. F. Bales & E. A. Shils (Eds.), Working papers
         in the theory of action (pp. 111-161): Free Press.

                                                                                                                                   2-0
        Barron, B. (2000). Achieving coordination in collaborative problem-solving groups. Journal of The Learning Sciences, 9 (4), 403-436.
        Barron, B. (2003). When smart groups fail. Journal Of The Learning Sciences, 12 (3), 307-359.
        Brown, A., & Campione, J. (1994). Guided discovery in a community of learners. In K. McGilly (Ed.), Classroom lessons:
                Integrating cognitive theory and classroom practice (pp. 229-270). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
        Dillenbourg, P., Baker, M., Blaye, A., & O'Malley, C. (1995). The evolution of research on collaborative learning. In P.
                Reimann & H. Spada (Eds.), Learning in humans and machines: Towards an interdisciplinary learning science (pp.
                189-211). Oxford, UK: Elsevier.
        Engle, R. A. (2006). Framing interactions to foster generative learning: A situative explanation of transfer in a community of
                learners classroom. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 15 (4), 451-498.
        Engle, R. A., & Conant, F. R. (2002). Guiding principles for fostering productive disciplinary engagement: Explaining an
                emergent argument in a community of learners classroom. Cognition and Instruction, 20 (4), 399-483.
        Garfinkel, H. (1967). Studies in ethnomethodology. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
        Goffman, E. (1981). Forms of talk. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
        Hausmann, R., Chi, M., & Roy, M. (2004). Learning from collaborative problem solving: An analysis of three hypothesized
                mechanisms. Paper presented at the 26nd annual conference of the Cognitive Science society.
        Hutchins, E. (1995). Cognition in the wild. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
        Kirsch, D. (forthcoming). Problem solving and situated cognition. In P. Robbins & M. Aydede (Eds.), Cambridge handbook of
                situated cognition. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
        Koschmann, T., Zemel, A., Conlee-Stevens, M., Young, N., Robbs, J., & Barnhart, A. (2005). How do people learn? In F. H. R.
                Bromme & H. Spada (Eds.), Barriers and biases in computer-mediated knowledge communication. Amsterdam: Kluwer .
        Kotovsky, K., & Simon, H. A. (1990). Why are some problems really hard: Explorations in the problem space of difficulty.
                Cognitive Psychology, 22, 143-183.
        Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Univ. Press.
        Lemke, J. L. (2001). The long and the short of it: Comments on multiple timescale studies of human activity. Journal Of The
                Learning Sciences, 10 (1-2), 17-26.
        McGrath, J. E. (1991). Time, interaction, and performance (tip): A theory of groups. Small Group Research, 22 (2), 147-174.
        Newell, A. (1980). Reasoning, problem solving and decision processes: The problem space as a fundamental category. In R.
                Nickerson (Ed.), Attention and performance viii. Hillsdale, NJ: : Erlbaum.
        Newell, A., & Simon, H. A. (1972). Human problem solving. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
        Perkins, D. N. (1993). Person-plus: A distributed view of thinking and learning. In G. Salomon (Ed.), Distributed cognitions:
                Psychological and educational considerations (pp. 88-110). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
        Poole, M. S., & Van de Ven, A. H. (2004). Central issues in the study of change and innovation. In M. S. Poole & A. H. V. d.
                Ven (Eds.), Handbook of organizational change and innovation (pp. 3-31). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
        Pretz, J. E., Naples, A. J., & Sternberg, R. J. (2003). Recognizing, defining, and representing problems. In J. E. D. a. R. J.
                Sternberg (Ed.), The psychology of problem solving (pp. 3-30). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
        Reimann, P. (2007). Time is precious: Why process analysis is essential for cscl, International Conference on Computer-
                supported Collaborative Learning 2007. New Brunswick, NJ.
        Roschelle, J. (1992). Learning by collaborating: Convergent conceptual change. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 2 (3), 235-276.
        Salomon, G. (1993). Distributed cognition. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
        Sarmiento, J., & Stahl, G. (2007). Group creativity in virtual math teams: Interactional mechanisms for referencing,
                remembering and bridging, Creativity & Cognition 2007 (pp. 37-44). Washington, DC: ACM Press.
        Sawyer, R. K. (2003). Group creativity: Music, theater, collaboration. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
        Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (1991). Higher levels of agency in knowledge building: A challenge for the design of new
                knowledge media. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 1, 37-68.
        Schwartz, D. L. (1995). The emergence of abstract representations in dyad problem solving. Journal Of The Learning Sciences,
                4 (3), 321-354.
        Sfard, A. (1998). On two metaphors for learning and the dangers of choosing just one. Educational Researcher, 27 (2), 4-13.
        Stahl, G. (2006a). Group cognition: Computer support for building collaborative knowledge. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
        Stahl, G. (2006b). Sustaining group cognition in a math chat environment. Research and Practice in Technology Enhanced
                Learning, 1 (2), 85-113.
        Stahl, G., Zemel, A., Sarmiento, J., Cakir, M., Weimar, S., Wessner, M., et al. (2006). Shared referencing of mathematical
                objects in online chat. Paper presented at the International Conference of the Learning Sciences (ICLS 2006).
        Teasley, S. D., & Roschelle, J. (1993). Constructing a joint problem space: The computer as a tool for sharing knowledge. In S.
                P. Lajoie & S. J. Derry (Eds.), Computers as cognitive tools (pp. 229-258). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
        Wegerif, R. (2006). A dialogic understanding of the relationship between cscl and teaching thinking skills. International Journal
                of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning (ijCSCL), 1 (1), 143-157.
        Wessner, M., Shumar, W., Stahl, G., Sarmiento, J., Muhlpfordt, M., & Weimar, S. (2006). Designing an online service for a
                math community. Paper presented at the International Conference of the Learning Sciences (ICLS 2006).
         Acknowledgments
           This research is part of a collaborative effort of the members of the VMT project supported by the NSDL, IERI and SLC programs of the
           U.S. National Science Foundation. More information about VMT and its contributors can be found at www.mathforum.org/vmt

2-02
