                                     Designing for Dispositions

                     Melissa Gresalfi, Adam Ingram-Goble, Indiana University, Bloomington,
                               Email: mgresalf@indiana.edu, aingramg@indiana.edu

         Abstract:   The  purpose    of this paper  is to share  the results of  the  first round   of a design
         experiment, the purpose of which was to intentionally provoke in students particular ways of
         engaging with statistics.    Specifically, in this study, we sought to design a curriculum which
         would   support  students'   procedural,  conceptual,   and  critical engagement      with content, in
         order   to  develop   dispositions  towards     engaging   with statistics  that   involved:  viewing
         representations as reflecting real   phenomena; viewing operations and representations as tools
         that can be intentionally leveraged    to develop and support particular arguments;       and viewing
         justification  and evidence    as crucial components    of  convincing  arguments.    We   present the
         design framework and rationale, findings and analysis from the first round of implementation.
         Implications for both design and learning are discussed.

Introduction
         For the last 20 years, increasing numbers of researchers have demonstrated that what students learn
cannot be separated from how they learn it (Boaler, 2000; J. S. Brown, Collins, & Duguid, 1989; Cobb, Stephan,
McClain,   &   Gravemeijer,  2001;   Greeno,   1991;   Hutchins,  1995;  Lave,  1988, 1997)    and  that knowing      is an
interaction   among  myriad    components    of   complex   systems.    Rather   than focusing     on  some  amount      of
knowledge   that an  individual   can acquire,  this conceptualization   of  learning shifts   attention to the  kinds   of
practices that people participate in, and the ways people come to relate to each other within a particular activity
setting.  Learning   is therefore   considered  to be  a  change  in participation,  through   which   one  "becomes"     a
different person with respect to the practices of that activity setting (Lave & Wenger, 1991; Wenger, 1998;
Wortham,    2004).   This    perspective   suggests  that renewed    attention  be   paid   to the  nature  of  students'
mathematical engagement--as inseparable from the specific content with which students engage--as a critical
aspect of what students actually come to know and who they come to be.           We focus on students' participation
with particular content by investigating the development of dispositions; that is, ways of being in the world that
involve ideas about, perspectives on, and engagement with information which can be seen both in moments of
interaction and in more enduring patterns over time (Gresalfi & Cobb, 2006). Dispositions, unlike the word
"predisposed," do not refer to innate or internal stable characteristics of individuals. Rather, dispositions capture
emergent continuities (Gresalfi, submitted) in students' participation in a particular activity system.      As Thomas
& Brown,    note, dispositions involve "attitudes or comportment toward the world, generated through a set of
practices which can be seen to be interconnected in a general way.... Dispositions are not descriptions of events
of practices, they are the underlying mechanisms that engender those events or practices" (italics added).               In
short, dispositions refer not only to what one knows but how she knows it; not the skills one has acquired, but
how he leverages those skills.
         It is clear that the  dispositions  that  students develop  towards   a particular    content area are  built   up
through their experiences with that content (Gresalfi, Boaler, & Cobb, 2004; Kilpatrick, Swafford, & Findell,
2001; Lampert, 1990; Schoenfeld, 1988). However, less is known about how to deliberately foster particular
dispositions towards learning. To make progress on this question, we conceptualize dispositions at three levels:
engaging information in local events (taking up intentionally designed opportunities to learn in an activity or
assignment); ways of approaching information in a particular subject area or setting (emergent continuities in
the opportunities   that are   taken up);  and  ways   of seeing  and  engaging  the  world    across  settings  (lens   or
perspective   on the world     that impacts  decisions   about  what  to  work   on  and    how  long   to  persist).    By
distinguishing between engagement in moments of interaction and dispositions across activities and settings, we
are deliberately  focusing   at  different   timescales  which   are mutually   reinforcing    (Lemke,   2000);  indeed,
participation in moments of interaction can be considered to be evidence of, and reinforcing to, more enduring
participation over time.    This paper focuses on designing for students' engagement with content with an eye
towards fostering emergent dispositions.
         In this design experiment, we specifically attended to the affordances we were creating for students'
engagement     with  content   by   creating  opportunities   for students'    procedural,     conceptual,  and  critical
engagement.    Procedural engagement, drawing on Pickering's (1995) notion of disciplinary agency, involves
using procedures accurately. As has been documented in the TIMSS study, this is a commonly observed practice
in  American   classrooms   (United   States Department    of Education:  National    Center   for  Education  Statistics,
2003),   with  students  often practicing  accurate  use  of  procedures, often  without    knowing    when   to use     the
procedures, or why one might procedure might be more useful than other. In contrast, Conceptual engagement
involves knowing what to do, when to do it, and why it makes sense.            Similar to Pickering's (1995) notion of

                                                                                                                               1-
         human agency, conceptual engagement captures the work of sense-making in mathematics.                    It is this level of
         engagement that is the goal of many reform programs, which seek to support students to, for example, "learn
         with  understanding"     (National Council    of Teachers    of   Mathematics,   2000).     Finally, critical engagement
         requires  interrogating  the   usefulness,  impact,  or   consequentiality   of  the   selection of   particular  tools on
         outcomes.   These different ways of engaging are not separable, but rather cumulative--conceptual engagement
         cannot  occur    without a robust  understanding    of procedures;    likewise,  one   cannot  critically engage  without
         having a conceptual understanding of content.       Our purpose in attending to these three levels of engagement is
         to provoke dispositions towards engaging statistics: procedural dispositions involve using procedures accurately
         and viewing justification and evidence as crucial components of convincing arguments; conceptual dispositions
         involve viewing representations as reflecting real     phenomena, as opposed to simply numbers without meaning,
         and  critical dispositions   involve viewing     operations  and   representations   as tools  that  can  be  intentionally
         leveraged     to develop   and  support  particular arguments.     We  conjecture    that dispositions    develop through
         students'   engagement     with   content  in  contexts,    and   involves:  (1) adopting    disposition-relevant  goals,
         (2) becoming knowledgeably skillful to achieve those goals, and (3) attuning to the affordances of situations in
         which that knowledge is useful.      One question addressed by the larger project is how many experiences with
         materials are required to develop a new disposition towards engaging, and what kinds of tasks and contexts
         afford the realization of this trajectory.
                   The work discussed here represents the first of many planned rounds of conjecture testing and revising.
         Like  many    design experiments,    the  purpose   of this  study  was  to  advance    both  theoretical  and   pragmatic
         understandings (Barab & Squire, 2004; A. L. Brown, 1992; Cobb, Confrey, diSessa, Lehrer, & Schauble, 2003),
         and thus to not only to engender the development of particular dispositions in students, but also to more clearly
         conceptualize the mechanisms associated with the development of these dispositions.            Specifically, our goal was
         to better understand  how    particular  design  choices  afforded    particular forms  of  engagement,   and  how  other
         aspects  of classroom    practice  shaped  the ways    that students  recognized    or  took up  those   affordances. The
         questions addressed in this first round of implementation are listed below; other questions that will be addressed
         in future implementations are discussed in the implications section.
              x    What design decisions promote intended aspects of engagement?
              x    How do these designs promote engagement?
              x    Are there some ways of engaging that are easier to support than others?

       The designed curriculum
                   The Quest Atlantis Project (www.QuestAtlantis.org) is an educational videogame that uses a 3D multi-
         user environment to immerse children, ages 9-12, in meaningful learning trajectories across multiple disciplines.
         QA is a highly researched curriculum that has been under development for the last five years (Barab, 2007;
         Barab,  Jackson,   & Piekarsky,    2006;   Barab,  Thomas,    Dodge,    Carteaux,   &   Tuzun,   2005).   The  QA  virtual
         environment involves engaging dilemmas and consequential narratives which provide an overarching structure
         that lends form, meaning, and cohesion to a collection of activities, each with its own identifiable rules and
         challenges.   Through    the design  of  academically   useful    and motivating    spaces, we   can position  elementary
         students within rich worlds where they act with agency and consequentiality and use disciplinary knowledge to
         solve meaningful tasks.
                   Multiplayer educational games create several opportunities for student engagement that are frequently
         lacking in traditional schooling. In Quest Atlantis, students take on particular roles and engage various plot
         lines, which can evolve and change based on the choices that they make.                In this way, students are central
         players in an unfolding storyline that requires participation in academically meaningful activities, either in the
         real or simulated world.     Thus, although students are "playing," their actions have more consequentiality than
         their "real world" interactions in schooling. Play, in particular, affords many robust opportunities to form new
         and  different   relationships to  content, because    of   the repositioning    of the student  in   relation to content
         (Gadamer, 1975; Vygotsky, 1967).        As a consequence, a player's dispositions may be modified if the game is
         successful in its invitation to examine and reexamine the meanings of the design.            In this way, well-designed
         videogames hold the potential to position students in relation to content in particular ways by affording different
         kinds  of engagement,    while  simultaneously   setting  out   a trajectory of  participation that  has  implications  for
         more enduring relationships with content and a new way of seeing the world (Gee, 2003; Lee & Hoadley, 2007;
         Shaffer, 2006).

        City Statistics
                   The statistics unit designed for Quest Atlantis, called City Statistics, takes place in Normal Village, and
         was created to support students' engagement with the following content standards (NCTM, 2000):
              x    Select and use appropriate statistical methods to analyze data.

1-
    x    Describe the shape and important features of a set of data and compare related data sets, with
         an emphasis on how the data are distributed;
    x    Use measures of center, focusing on the median, and understand what each does and does not
         indicate about the data set;
    x    Compare different representations of the same data and evaluate how well each representation
         shows important aspects of the data.
    x    Develop and evaluate inferences and predictions that are based on data.
    x    Propose and justify conclusions and predictions that are based on data and design studies to
         further investigate the conclusions or predictions.
         As the unit begins, students are summoned by the leader of the city council to help in a time of crisis
for Normal Village.      Students are told that the citizens of Normal Village are leaving because of poor living
conditions. In an attempt to improve the quality of life for its citizens, the city council wants to make some
changes, but they need help making decisions about three issues: which brand of swings they should purchase
for the park in order to maximize their longevity; which brand of bicycle the city should offer for rental based
on which   is the safest;   and what items  should be in  the park's  snack stand in   order to maximize   profit but
minimize conflict among parents and children. The council stresses that they need recommendations that are
defensible--based on evidence, not just opinions.     Students are hired as statistical consultants whose task is to
make recommendations to the city council about what they should do with respect to three central issues.           In
order to make these recommendations, students encounter various stakeholders who have different opinions and
resources that are useful in evaluating the pros and cons of each decision.  All dilemmas are designed to support
different conclusions depending on the statistical method leveraged for analysis (e.g. students might make a
different recommendation if they calculate the mean of a data set than if they consider the mode or look at the
distribution of the data set). As students help to redesign the city by making arguments for or against particular
decisions, they engage with increasingly advanced statistical content, and are challenged to offer increasingly
sophisticated explanations and justifications of their decisions.
         The unit was designed to afford three levels of engagement: Procedural engagement was afforded by
creating opportunities for students to use statistically based reasoning accurately, for example by calculating
measures   of center correctly.  Conceptual   engagement  was   afforded by creating   opportunities  for students to
explain why their recommendations were sound and believable, both through explicit instructions in activities,
and by evoking an external evaluator (the city council) who needs to understand why different recommendations
are made, in order to have sufficient information to make a decision. Finally, critical engagement was afforded
by creating   activities that had more   than one  possible recommendation,   so  that  students   could compare  the
implications of their method of analysis on the way the situation was ultimately represented, and the resulting
conclusions that they drew.

Methods
         The study was conducted with 25 students in a 6th grade class in a small city in the Midwest.       Students
in this class had some experience with Statistics from their regular mathematics curriculum.          Many students
were familiar  with  the    definitions of mean,  median,   and mode,   as  evidenced   by   their work   on the  first
assignment of the unit.   All students had previous experience with the Quest Atlantis 3-D environment.
         The intervention unit, Normal Village, was implemented during the students' technology time, and was
taught by the first author, rather than the students' usual teacher. The unit took 8 days to cover over a two-week
period. Students worked independently at computers, although they communicated with other students through
informal talk to others seated nearby, and through chat and e-mail functions that are an integral part of the Quest
Atlantis environment. Students had three Quests, or analyses, to complete. Each Quest was reviewed and either
accepted or returned for revision. Students could not fail the Quests, and had multiple opportunities to revise.
Although students worked at their own pace, the entire class gathered together after most of the students had
finished each  Quest     to share different findings  and   reflect on justifications, implications,  and  remaining
questions.

Data collection
         Three forms of data were collected: (1) video of individual student participation; (2) video of whole-
class conversation; and (3) records of student work.   Three pairs of students were videotaped every day as they
worked through the unit; the pairs were chosen to represent a heterogeneous selection of the classroom, with
male, female, high-, and low-achieving students captured. When whole-class discussions were videotaped, the
camera was stationed at the back of the room, in order to capture the greatest number of students possible.
Students' work, which is the primary source of data discussed in this paper, was collected and evaluated initially
through the Quest Atlantis system, and then later coded according to the themes discussed below.

                                                                                                                          1-
        Analysis
                   Three  Quests per  student were  collected and  coded  in order  to capture   students' engagement  with
         content.   Some  codes  were  created apriori, according  to the envisioned   categories  that the curriculum was
         designed to foster.  Other categories were emergent through our review of the activities (Strauss & Corbin,
         1990); this was appropriate based on our desired goal to understand how particular elements of the designed
         curriculum supported both envisions and unimagined ways of engaging. For the purposes of this paper, we are
         limiting  our  discussion to the  apriori defined codes.   We   coded  for students'    procedural dispositions by
         attending to whether students explained how they knew that they used their chosen method accurately (method
         accurate). Notably, this is a very high standard for procedural understanding, as many students are accustomed
         to allowing their work to stand alone without explanation of how they know that their work is accurate (heard,
         for example, in the oft-repeated phrase: "if it's right, why do I have to explain it?). Thus we are not attending
         here to whether students used the procedures accurately, but rather whether they explained how they knew that
         they had used the procedures accurately.    We coded for conceptual dispositions by attending to whether they
         justified their conclusion by telling about the tools they used (justify), and we coded for critical dispositions by
         attending to   whether they justified the choice of method that they used in their analysis (justify method) , and
         whether they connected their recommendation to the real world of the scenario (real world).    Codes were created
         and refined by two coders, and were coded independently, with an initial agreement of 70%.          Disagreements
         were resolved by discussions between the coders until consensus was reached. For the purposes of this initial
         round of analysis, we looked only for evidence of the style of students' engagement, rather than attempting to
         determine whether or not they had developed dispositions. The implications of this distinction are discussed
         below.

       Results
                   The results of students' procedural, conceptual, and critical engagement are discussed below.   Tables 1-
         4 depict the counts of codes for each Quest. The coding scheme allowed for a code to only appear once per
         quest; so in Table 1, 3 instances  of  "explain" for method accurate in Braking Distance means that 3 students
         explained how they knew that their procedure was accurate in the Breaking Distance Quest.

        Procedural engagement
                   "What made me decide to choose the WURK brand swings was one of the graphs that I saw. It
                   was the sorted data graph and it showed that the WURK brand swings have more consistent
                   time that they lasted than c3 brand swings do. The WURK brand swings lasting time range
                   was eight, and the c3 brand swings lasting times range was twenty-seven. I think that it is
                   better to have a swing brand whose swings will always last for about the same amount of time
                   so that you can estimate the number that you need to buy and so you don't get a few bad and
                   short lasting swings with long lasting ones." (Male student, coded "explain")

                   Students' procedural engagement was captured by examining whether and how students' explained
         how they knew that they had used procedures accurately to lead to their conclusions. As seen in Table 1, in the
         first activity very few   (3/26) students correctly  explained  how  they  knew  that   they had   used procedures
         accurately, despite the fact that all 26 students had used some kind of method to analyze the data. This trend
         changed over the activities, with more students justifying the accuracy of their procedures in the 2nd (16/26)
         activity.  However, there was a decrease in the percent of students who justified their procedures in the final
         activity, with only 10/25 students explaining how they knew that their method was accurate. One conjecture that
         might account for this difference comes from the nature of the activity itself, which is discussed below.

         Table 1: Students' justification of accurate use of procedures.

                                Breaking Distance              Swings                          Snack Cart
          Explain               3                              16                              10
          Incorrect             2                              1                               1
          No mention            21                             8                               13
          No method             0                              1                               1

        Conceptual engagement
                   "With the information, we made a bar graph comparing the two brands. In the graph, you can
                   easily see that the Speedy Spokes take a lot less time to stop then (sic) the racy Rider. The
                   Speedy spokes on average got 38.3 feet before they stop. The Racy Rider got 53.10 feet before

1-00
          they stopped. Since the object of this was to have the shortest length before they stop, the
          Speedy Spokes beat the Racy Riders by 15.8 feet.        Thus from this data, the Speedy Spokes are
          a safer brand of bikes to ride" (Male student, coded "justification")

          Students'  conceptual      engagement was    captured   by examining     their use    of  justification, and  their
connection of the scenario to real-world implications. Table 2 illustrates students' use of justification. A very
low standard was used for this code; we were interested in learning simply if students went beyond making a
recommendation      to   include WHY      they  had  made    their recommendation.       All   students used justification
throughout    all three  activities. This might be   due  to the   nature of   the activities, which  all explicitly    asked
students to make a recommendation and explain what evidence they are drawing on to support their ideas. In
addition, it  might    be   due to   something  external  to  the  curriculum,     and  students   might  have     been very
accustomed    to  using  justification in all mathematics    activities. In  a similar  trend,  a  dramatically    increasing
number of students began to refer to the real world of the scenario in their justifications, suggesting that students
were  using   disciplinary   content  to make   sense  of particular situations    (see Table   3).  This is an important
element of critical engagement--seeing your actions as having implications on the real world.

Table 2: Students' use of justification.

                          Breaking Distance               Swings                           Snack Cart
 Yes                      26                              26                               25
 No                       0                               0                                0

Table 3: Students' connection of their recommendation to the scenario.

                          Breaking Distance               Swings                           Snack Cart
 Full                     7                               11                               19
 Mention                  19                              8                                6
 No Mention               0                               7                                0

Critical engagement
          "Yes, I do think that the candy made a difference to the sales, in a positive way. From your
          first look at the graph, it is quite clear to observe and see that the clump of data points in July,
          the sale  amounts     that were  most common      for that month,    moved    to the  right in  August,
          meaning    that   the  common    sale amount    for   August    was  higher,   when    the  candy  was
          introduced. Interestingly, July sales ranged from $.80 to $2.70, while the sales for August
          ranged from $.40 - $2.70.      Although candy seemed to help the snack cart's sales, when candy
          was actually introduced, some sales became smaller, making the range $.40 to $2.70.             In July,
          no sales were as little as $.40, which makes you question whether candy really did help the
          snack   cart's sales.  To  get down   to the precise  answer    of this  question, it seems   logical to
          calculate the total amount of sales for each month. In July, the total sale was $153.05, while
          the sales in August were $164.75.        This shows that candy did help the snack cart's sales;
          however, the snack cart also lost some adults who enjoyed the healthy snack, and didn't allow
          their children to buy much candy. Therefore, although candy raised the sales, I do not think it
          is the solution to increasing sales." (Female student, coded "relevant for situation" for choice
          of method)

          Students' critical engagement was captured by examining whether students explained how they had
chosen their particular methodology, or even that they had been aware that there was a choice to be made (see
Table 4). In the first activity, half of the students began by explaining how their method was reasonable based
on the situation that they were trying to understand.       By the second activity, there was a slight change, with 5
students attempting to explain how they chose their method, but not doing so in a robust way. However, similar
to the trend observed in Table 1, students' use of justification decreased in the snack cart activity, with only
12/25 justifying their choice of method.

Table 4: Students' justification of their choice of method.

                          Breaking Distance               Swings                           Snack Cart

                                                                                                                                 1-01
          Relevant for
          situation              14                                  15                                 11
          Good                   0                                   5                                  1
          Arbitrary              6                                   4                                  6
          No justification       6                                   2                                  7

       Discussion
                  The   results of   this first   round  of   implementation   were    both exciting  and  surprising.   Although  our
         analyses suggested that the kinds of engagement we had designed for were realized in the transition between the
         first and second activities, there was little evidence of change in the desired direction in the final activity.       These
         disparities speak   directly    to our    first question    of  which    design  decisions   promote    particular  forms  of
         engagement.      Specifically,   we   found     that the  progression   we    developed   appeared  to  support  productive,
         conceptual,  and   critical engagement--but          only within   the  first two  activities. When     unpacking   students'
         engagement with these activities (question 2: how did the designs promote particular forms of engagement), we
         found that role of context in problems was perhaps not quite as straight-forward as we had originally thought.
         Although it was clear that the context served as a significant resource for students to consider the implications of
         their decisions, it appeared that it could also be a distraction.
                  This could be seen in students' justifications and arguments in the final snack cart activity. This activity
         dealt with the issue of whether or not the town should include candy in their snack cart. The debate was about
         whether or not candy raised sales, and whether or not candy raised sales enough to warrant making some parents
         angry.  During the last year American schools have by and large removed candy, sodas, and other high-sugar
         content snacks from the premises, even banning them from being brought for celebrations or sent in home-
         packed lunches. Many school children are aware of the issues at play in the debate, so we designed the Snack
         Cart scenario with the hopes of leveraging prior knowledge and experience to enrich the arguments brought
         about in our design. However, we found that the context was so enticing that the mathematical practices and
         properties of the Quest did not take hold of the students. Their focus lay on the contextual particulars and how
         they might play out in a social setting, rather than the analytic setting we proposed to them. This is consistent
         with findings from other studies, which suggest that extremely context-rich problems create new challenges for
         curricula, and therefore must be used only if the contexts support equally complex kinds of problem solutions,
         which our design did not (Boaler, 2002; Silver, Smith, & Nelson, 1995).                   We suggest that the shift of five
         students who explained their justification in the 2nd Quest to those that failed to even mention a justification of
         their method   in  the 3rd  is  correlated  to   the  overwhelming      emotional  attachment    to the context.    This was
         evidenced   by   students'  use    of  personal    examples     in their  justifications, which   was   not  seen   in earlier
         submissions.
                  This  study   also set  out   to address     whether   there might   be  forms   of engagement    that are easier to
         support than others.   We conjectured that it would be most challenging to support students to engage critically
         with  content, and  students'    responses  on    the  Quests   bore  this out.   Interestingly,  although  students   seemed
         connected   to the real-world      implications    of their decisions,   they  did not  use   analytic tools as  a  means  of
         intentionally affecting those situations. There are a few possible explanations that we will consider ways of
         drawing  out   in our  next design     iteration.    The  first is that  students  do  in fact know    how  to  state  testable
         hypotheses that expose their understanding of the meaning of methods such as calculating the mean versus the
         mode, and where, when, and why each calculation might be desirable, but our design did not make that request
         visible enough. The second is that the students may never have been placed in the position of having agency to
         select and determine the utility of a particular method from among others. The third is that schools are teaching
         a variant methodology that does not clarify the need of accounting for a methodology. This suggests a lack
         understanding that hypothesis generation and testing, or the methodological need to externalize pre-conceptions
         of experimental results is part of an analytic process.          In personal communications with the class teacher she
         suggested   that  students  are  both  implicitly--by     the  design  of  high-stakes  exam   questions--and    explicitly--
         through the training and educational environment that has emerged--being taught that to justify is to provide an
         explanation of what was done to arrive at the final decision. This explanation need not include the description of
         what was tried unsuccessfully, or any notion of a negative result.

       Implications for future iterations
                  The   results of   this   first round   of   implementation     have   raised new    questions and    supported  the
         development of different conjectures.       The next design iteration will focus more centrally on students' critical
         engagement by designing activities that more strongly afford opportunities for students to interrogate the role of
         particular analyses on different conclusions. This could be accomplished, for example, by positioning students
         as "critical consumers," who need to evaluate the data-driven claims of different advertisers.

1-0
          We are also mindful that two centrally important aspects of the development of dispositions have not
yet been adequately addressed. First involves the notion of what evidence of adopting a disposition might look
like. If someone has developed a disposition, how would you know? Can it be seen in one performance, or can
it be seen only by looking across multiple activities?     For our current purposes, we looked at styles of engaging
over  the course    of a unit,  examined  whether   evidence   of change    could  be seen. The    follow up  question is
whether observed changes are persistent, and under what conditions the continuities emerge. Second, we found
the difference in students' performance on the final activity to be a particularly telling event, challenging our
ideas  about    how  dispositions   develop.   One   might  argue  that students'   performance    on  the  final activity
suggested that a disposition did not develop, as the emergent pattern did not continue.         This leads to a different
question of how long it takes for a new disposition to develop--can it be fostered through one or two influential
experiences, or is it a change that is more gradual, requiring systematic opportunities to engage over time?
          Finally,  once   we  feel confident  that we  can   successfully  foster robust  productive,  conceptual,  and
critical dispositions, we will address whether dispositions towards engaging are related to different relationships
towards knowledge.       Specifically, we will investigate whether dispositions are related to other knowledgeable
performances, seen both in related activities, and more conventional measures of understanding.

References
Barab,  S.   A.  (2007). Relating   narrative, inquiry, and   inscriptions: A framework     for socio-scientific  inquiry.
          Journal of Science Education and Technology, 16(1), 59.
Barab,  S.   A., Jackson,  C.,  &   Piekarsky, E.  (2006). Embedded     professional   development:    Leanring   through
          enacting innovation. In C. Dede (Ed.), Online professional development for teachers: Emerging models
          and methods (pp. 155-174). Cambridge: Harvard Education Press.
Barab, S. A., & Squire, K. (2004). Design-based research: Putting a stake in the ground. Journal of the Learning
          Sciences(13), 1-14.
Barab, S. A., Thomas, M., Dodge, T., Carteaux, R., & Tuzun, H. (2005). Making learning fun: Quest Atlantis, a
          game without guns. Educational Technology Research and Development, 53(1), 86-107.
Boaler, J. (2000). Exploring situated insights into research and learning. Journal for Research in Mathematics
          Education, 31, 113-119.
Boaler, J. (2002). Learning from teaching: Exploring the relationship between reform curriculum and equity.
          Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 33, 239-258.
Brown,    A. L.  (1992).   Design   experiments:   Theoretical and   methodological    challenges   in creating   complex
          interventions in classroom settings. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 2, 141-178.
Brown,  J.   S., Collins,  A., &  Duguid,  P.  (1989).  Situated  cognition  and  the culture   of learning. Educational
          Researcher, 18, 32-42.
Cobb,  P.,   Confrey,  J., diSessa, A. A.,   Lehrer, R., &    Schauble, L.  (2003).   Design   experiments   in education
          research. Educational Researcher, 32(1), 9-13.
Cobb,  P.,   Stephan,  M.,  McClain,   K.,   &  Gravemeijer,   K.  (2001).   Participating  in  classroom  mathematical
          practices. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 10, 113-164.
Gadamer, H.-G. (1975). Truth and method. New York: Seabury Press.
Gee, J. P. (2003). What video games have to teach us about learning literacy. New York: Palgrave/Macmillan.
Greeno,   J. G.  (1991).   Number   sense as   situated knowing   in a  conceptual    domain.   Journal for  Research  in
          Mathematics Education, 22, 170-218.
Gresalfi,  M.    S. (submitted).    Positoning  in  practice: Constructing    trajectories of   participation in  algebra
          classrooms.
Gresalfi,  M.   S., Boaler, J., &   Cobb, P.   (2004).  Exploring an  elusive  link between    knowledge   and  practice:
          Students' disciplinary orientations. Paper presented at the North American Chapter of the International
          group for the Psychology of Mathematics Toronto.
Gresalfi, M. S., & Cobb, P. (2006). Cultivating students' discipline-specific dispositions as a critical goal for
          pedagogy and equity. Pedagogies: An International Journal, 1, 49-58.
Hutchins, E. (1995). How a cockpit remembers its speed. Cognitive Science, 19, 265-288.
Kilpatrick, J., Swafford, J., & Findell, B. (Eds.). (2001). Adding it up: Helping children learn mathematics.
          Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
Lampert, M. (1990). When the problem is not the question and the solution is not the answer: Mathematical
          knowing and teaching. American Educational Research Journal, 27, 29-63.
Lave, J. (1988). Cognition in practice: Mind, mathematics and culture in everyday life. New York: Cambridge
          University Press.
Lave, J. (1997). The culture of acquisition and the practice of understanding. In D. Kirshner & J. A. Whitson
          (Eds.), Situated cognition: Social, semiotic, and psychological perspectives (pp. 17-35). Mahwah, NJ:
          Erlbaum.

                                                                                                                             1-0
        Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. New York: Cambridge
                University Press.
        Lee, J. J., & Hoadley, C. M. (2007). Leveraging identity to make learning fun: Possible selves and experienetial
                learning in massively multiplayer online games. Journal of Online education, 3(6).
        Lemke, J. L. (2000). Across the scales of time: Artifacts, activities, and meanings in ecosocial systems. Mind,
                Culture, and Activity, 7(4), 273-290.
        National Council of Teachers of Mathematics. (2000). Principles and standards for school mathematics. Reston,
                VA: Author.
        Schoenfeld, A. H. (1988). When good teaching leads to bad results: The disasters of "well-taught" mathematics
                courses. Educational Psychologist, 23(2), 145-166.
        Shaffer, D. W. (2006). Epistemic Frames for Epistemic Games. Computers & education, 46(3), 223.
        Silver, E. A., Smith, M. S., & Nelson, B. S. (1995). The QUASAR Project: Equity concerns meet mathematics
                education  reform  in middle  school.  In E. Fennema,  et al. (Eds.), New   directions  for equity     in
                mathematics education (pp. 9-56). New    York: Cambridge University Press.
        Strauss, A. L., & Corbin, J. (1990). Basics of qualitative research: Techniques and procedures for developing
                grounded theory: Sage Publications.
        Thomas, D., & Brown, J. S. (2007). The play of imagination: Extending the literary mind. Games and Culture,
                2(2), 149-172.
        United States Department of Education: National Center for Education Statistics. (2003). Teaching Mathematics
                in seven countries: Results from the TIMSS 1999 Video Study. Washington, DC: US Department of
                Education.
        Vygotsky, L. S. (1967). Play and its role in the mental development of the child. Soviet Psychology, 5, 6-18.
        Wenger,  E. (1998). Communities    of practice:   Learning, meaning,  and identity. Cambridge:    Cambridge
                University Press.
        Wortham, S. (2004). The interdependence of social identification and learning. American Educational Research
                Journal, 41(3), 715-750.

1-0
