                  Student behavior and epistemological framing:
 Examples from collaborative active-learning activities in physics

            Rachel E. Scherr, David Hammer, University of Maryland, College Park, Maryland, 20742
                                    Email: rescherr@umd.edu, davidham@umd.edu

         Abstract:      Questions   of participant  understanding    of the  nature  of   an  activity have been
         addressed in anthropology and sociolinguistics with the concepts of frames and framing.               For
         example, a student may frame a learning activity as an opportunity for sensemaking or as an
         assignment to fill out a worksheet.       The student's understanding of the nature of the activity
         affects what she notices, what knowledge she accesses, and how she thinks to act.                Previous
         analyses    have   found  evidence   of framing    primarily in  linguistic   markers  associated   with
         speech acts.    In this paper, we show that there is useful evidence of framing in easily observed
         features   of  students'  behavior.     More  broadly,   we  describe    a dynamic     among   behavior,
         framing,    and   the conceptual   substance  of student   reasoning  in the  context  of collaborative
         active-learning activities in an introductory university physics course.

Introduction
         Large college physics courses are especially challenging settings for physics instruction.            Among the
challenges is the difficulty of providing opportunities for student discussion of physics concepts.               For about
twenty  years,  reform-minded      physics   professors   have been   using  "tutorials"   (McDermott,     Shaffer,  &  the
Physics Education Group at the University of Washington, 1998), worksheets that guide collaborative active
learning in  small   groups    around  core  conceptual   issues  identified by   research   as essential  for students  to
address. Tutorials   can   be  implemented    as a  relatively small  modification     of the conventional    lecture-based
course,  and  there  is now    a substantial body   of evidence   they  lead   to substantial  improvement     in students'
conceptual understanding (Redish & McDermott, 1999).
         That evidence, however, is almost exclusively in the form of pre- and post-testing with qualitative and
quantitative examinations.       While   gains  in student   scores support    researchers'   conjectures  regarding   what
contributes to student learning, there has been little direct investigation of what happens during the instructional
activities.  Meanwhile, these curricula have not led to corresponding gains in scores on measures of student
expectations   and   epistemologies    --  how   students understand    what   knowledge,     reasoning,  and  learning  in
physics entail.   In fact, students in most introductory courses, including those that use tutorials, tend to come
away with evidently less sophisticated views of knowledge and learning in physics courses (Redish, Saul, &
Steinberg, 1998).    This seems discrepant:      Shouldn't students who are apparently more successful at learning
also become more aware of what successful learning entails?          Why would experiences that improve conceptual
understanding lead to "deterioration" (Redish et al., 1998) of expectations?
         There are several possibilities, some of which give cause for concern.           One is that students come to see
introductory physics as detached from everyday experience:            surveys at the end of every course in Redish et
al.'s (1998) study indicated students saw physics as less connected to their experience than they did at the start.
Another  possibility    is that  student   epistemologies  as  measured   by   an   explicit  survey   do not  reflect their
epistemologies in contexts of reasoning within the course; responding to a survey is a very different context
from reasoning    about    physical  phenomena     (Hammer,    1994).   Perhaps     students' "practical  epistemologies"
(Sandoval, 2005) come to be more sophisticated than the survey detects.
         The   possibly    problematic   relationship  between    students'  conceptual    and  epistemological    learning
motivates   us to study    students' work    during tutorials  in detail.   In particular,   we hope   to  learn  how  they
understand   the  activity  of   tutorials with  respect  to knowledge,    reasoning,     and learning.    What   are  their
perceptions  of  its goals,    and what    methods do  they  believe  will  serve   them  best?  In other words, as we
elaborate below, we are interested to study students' epistemological framing of the activity.             To address the
possibility of contextual dependence, we study their work in situ, rather than interrupting it with a survey or
specialized interview.
         At the start of this study, the first author set out to formulate a systematic observational protocol: what
could we look for in the video data as evidence of how students understand the activity?             Initial exploration of
video data led to the discovery of four distinct patterns of the students' physical behavior.        In some segments of
video,  for example,    the students  are  bent  over their  worksheets,  talking   in subdued   voices   with their hands
relatively still; in other segments, they are sitting up straight, looking at each other, speaking in loud voices, and
gesturing prolifically.    These clusters of co-occurring behaviors stand out clearly; having had them described,
and with very little training, independent coders achieve 95% agreement in classifying 5-second video segments
into one of four clusters.

                                                                                                                                2-0
                     Our purpose in this paper is to argue that these different behavioral clusters are evidence of -- and in
          dynamic interaction with -- student epistemologies.         Roughly, we will show, the behavioral cluster of sitting
          up, speaking clearly and gesturing supports and is supported by a framing of the activity as discussing each
          others' conceptual ideas.     In this way, we hope to contribute to research methodology for the study of student
          learning,  and   specifically students' epistemological    framing.  As well, we discuss how this work furthers a
          resource-based account of knowledge, reasoning, and learning.

        Theoretical framework
         Epistemological framing
                     Framing is a construct developed in anthropology and linguistics (1) to describe how an individual or
          group forms a sense of "What is it that's going on here?" (Bateson, 1972; Goffman, 1986; MacLachlan & Reid,
          1994; Tannen, 1993)     To frame an event, utterance, or situation in a particular way is to interpret it based on
          previous experience: to bring to bear a structure of expectations about a situation regarding what could happen,
          what portions of the information available to the senses require attention, and what might be appropriate action.
          For example, monkeys engaged in biting each other are skilled at quickly and tacitly "deciding" whether the
          biting  is aggression  or play  (Bateson,   1972).    An   employee may   frame  a gift from   her supervisor as kind
          attention or as unwelcome charity.      A student may frame a physics problem as an opportunity for sensemaking
          or as an occasion for rote use of formulas.
                     In school settings, epistemological framing is of particular importance: students form a sense of what is
          taking place with respect to knowledge, including, for example, what portions of information and experience are
          relevant for completing assignments.      Other aspects of framing are   important as well, including social framing,
          in which students form a sense of what to expect of each other, of their instructor, and of themselves. For groups
          of students working together collaboratively, different aspects of framing interact.
                     Previous  analyses  have  found  evidence    of  framing primarily in linguistic markers   associated with
          speech   acts  (2).  Nonetheless,    because   frames   "emerge  in  and  are constituted   by verbal and  nonverbal
          interaction" (Tannen, 1993, p. 60), evidence of framing can come in a variety of forms. In our work we have
          found a wealth of paraverbal and nonverbal cues of framing, and so have focused on those cues in addition to
          linguistic markers.   In  any   social  interaction, framing presents a   communicative   task  in which  participants
          collaboratively establish the nature of their shared activity.   Conversational partners both indicate the nature of
          the activity they're engaged in by means of verbal and nonverbal interactions, and observe others' behavior in
          order to learn what kind of activity is taking place. If a speaker makes eye contact, gestures while speaking, and
          uses an animated voice, she is both experiencing an engaged discussion herself and displaying to others that
          they are mutually engaged in a discussion (3).       Participants interpret one another's signals regarding the nature
          of the activity by means of contextualizing cues that include body language (e.g., facial expression, gesture, and
          posture), prosodic features of utterances (e.g., pitch variation, loudness, pausing, pacing), and linguistic signals
          (choice of vocabulary, levels of formality, choice of pronouns) (Goodwin, 2000; Tannen, 1993, p. 62).       The task
          of this paper is to articulate a dynamic between readily observable behavior and epistemological framing, which
          we suggest     has  methodological     and theoretical  implications  for research.   In  the  following  section we
          summarize the general view of cognitive structure and intuitive epistemologies that underlies this work. We
          then turn to examples of behavioral analysis of students' work in tutorials.

         A resource model of epistemologies
                     This  work takes   place  within  a  larger program  of  research  to develop  resource-based   models  of
          knowledge and reasoning in physics (Hammer, 2000; Redish, 2004; Scherr, 2007), in line with diSessa's (1993)
          model of intuitive physics as made up of fine-grained, context sensitive "phenomenological primitives" and,
          more generally, with Minsky's (1986) model of mind as consisting of manifold cognitive "agents."            Hammer
          and Elby (2002) proposed modeling intuitive epistemologies in terms of epistemological resources, rather than
          using   beliefs, theories or  stages   of development    as the units of  cognitive structure.   That is, rather than
          attributing unitary epistemologies to students, such as that knowledge is received from authority, certain, or
          simple (see review in Hofer & Pintrich (Eds.), 2002), this view attributes a variety of resources for thinking
          about knowledge in different ways at different times.       From early ages, students have resources for thinking of
          knowledge as received, as inferred from other knowledge, as invented or as perceived.          They have resources as
          well for understanding a wide variety of kinds of knowledge, epistemic activities, and stances--facts, stories,
          lists, rules, suppositions,   doubt, certainty, and  so on--resources  they   may  activate or not  depending  on the
          particular situation.  Thus a resource-based view of epistemologies accounts for the variability and multiple
          coherences in student reasoning, as evident in studies focused on individual students across different contexts
          (Knight & Sweeney, under review; Leach, Millar, Ryder, & Sere, 2000; Lising & Elby, 2005) and on groups or
          classes (Louca, Elby, Hammer, & Kagey, 2004; Rosenberg, Hammer, & Phelan, 2006; Roth & Roychoudhury,
          1994; Sandoval, 2003).
2-0
         Redish (2004) proposed the idea of epistemological frames to connect this work to the construct of
framing in linguistics and anthropology.        At the level of resources, we take a frame to be a locally coherent
pattern of activations ­ "coherent" in that the pattern holds together for some length of time and "local" in that
the coherence may be particular to the moment or context (Hammer, Elby, Scherr & Redish, 2005).               This is a
dynamic   systems   account   of  framing;  coherences    emerge   from   the  activations and interactions   of many
cognitive elements.    They may involve resources within an individual's mind or across multiple individuals or a
group.   Framing   is  defined in the literature  in terms    of individual reasoning (Tannen,   1993)   and  of social
dynamics (Goffman, 1986); a resource-based model of framing allows theoretical continuity between the two,
that is, between cognitive and discourse dynamics (Brown & Hammer, in press).
         The analyses that follow expose portions of the dynamics of resources and framing as they operate
among groups of four students working in tutorials.       They show, in particular, how physical behavior may play
a role in those dynamics, such that observations of physical behavior can provide evidence of epistemological
framing.

Context for Research
         The tutorials took place as part of a two-semester algebra-based introductory physics course at the
University of Maryland, with 160 students in each lecture section, most of whom are junior and senior health
and life science majors.     More than half are female and there is wide ethnic diversity reflecting the student
population of the University of Maryland. In this course, the traditional TA-led recitation was replaced with
worksheet-based    group-learning    activities ("tutorials") based  on the   model  developed   at the  University  of
Washington (McDermott et al., 1998; McDermott, Shaffer, & Somers, 1994).             In the tutorial sessions, students
worked in small groups on worksheets that led them to make predictions and compare various lines of reasoning
in order to build an understanding of basic concepts.     Teaching assistants (TAs) served as facilitators rather than
as lecturers: instead of demonstrating problem solutions to students, they engaged the students in discussions of
difficult concepts. Each class section consisted of five groups of four students each, supervised by two TAs.
For the study reported in this paper, we selected a group that was videotaped working through a tutorial on
Newton's third law.

Identifying and Interpreting Behavioral Clusters
         As mentioned in the introduction, we have found four distinct patterns of students' physical behavior in
the data for this study.  In what follows we present the method we used to identify these behavioral clusters and
the content of each of the four clusters that we identified.

Methodology
         In order to identify clusters of behaviors that appear in our data set, coders independently watch video
of small groups of students and note the exact time of changes in the students' vocal register, affect, grammar,
gesture production, and body language.      Having noted changes in behavioral clusters, we then systematically
identify the features of the behavioral cluster:   hand motions including gestures (Goldin-Meadow, 2003), facial
aspect, body position and/or movement, vocal register, gaze, and so on.         We label the behavioral clusters with
meaning-neutral labels (colors). Identifying the behaviors within each cluster permits coders to reliably observe
when students participate again in a behavioral cluster the coder had previously identified (e.g., shift back into a
certain cluster after engaging in other behaviors).
         Coding   is   performed  in real time   without  transcript.   At  least two researchers   code  the changes
independently. Tannen's (1993) research led us to expect that clusters of behaviors typically change all at once
for an entire group of participants, and that is generally the case in our data.   Coders are able to code the whole
group reliably (peers typically share the same behavioral cluster (4)).       The behavioral clusters are distinct and
easy to identify, with 95% inter-rater reliability before discussion, to five seconds' accuracy.

Behavioral clusters defined
         In the behavioral cluster that we have labeled "blue," students' eyes are primarily on their papers with
brief glances up at their peers.  Their bodies lean forward at an angle of about 30° to the vertical, their hands are
mainly at   rest (few  gestures), and their faces   are relatively neutral.   Their tone of voice is low, quiet, and
indistinct, and  their speech  consists largely  of  phrases  read from  their  worksheets;  when   they speak   to one
another, they    briefly and quietly speak  with   rising intonation,  and  answer  briefly  and quietly  with   falling
intonation.  The initiator often utters an incomplete sentence that is completed by a peer.
         In  the "green"   behavioral cluster,   students sit straight up   and make  frequent eye  contact   with  one
another.    Their faces and voices are animated; they gesture relatively prolifically and engage in clear, loud,
original speech.

                                                                                                                            2-0
                    The "red" and "yellow" behavioral clusters do not appear in the excerpt we analyze in detail below, but
         we describe them briefly here for completeness.       The "red" behavioral cluster involves the students' interaction
         with a teaching assistant, although students need not exhibit the red behavioral cluster all the time that a TA is
         present (5).  The students speak little and make eye contact with the TA.       They sit straight with their bodies still,
         and their hands are relatively quiet except for habitual movements.
                    In the "yellow" behavioral cluster, students giggle or smile, and have hedging or joking tones of voice.
         They shift their bodies around in their seats and touch their own faces and hair.      Their gaze is unsettled, moving
         among peers, papers, and other points in the room. The yellow behavioral cluster appears to be somewhat less
         stable than other three clusters identified in our examples:       although it recurs regularly, it rarely lasts even as
         much as thirty seconds, whereas the other three clusters often persist for minutes at a time.

        Behavioral clusters interpreted
                    We coded the behavioral clusters by colors, in an attempt to suspend our inclinations to interpret them
         while we defined the specific physical behaviors involved.       Having arrived at these definitions and shown inter-
         rater reliability, we shifted to interpretation; what do these different behavioral clusters suggest with respect to
         epistemological    framing?      For us,   as  we  expect   for the   students, this interpretation  is automatic     and
         unconscious--it is difficult not to do it.    That is reason for attending to it systematically in analyzing student
         thinking.
                    The behaviors associated with the blue and green behavioral clusters indicate very different framings
         of the tutorial activity, in spite of the fact that both might loosely be called "working collaboratively on the
         tutorial." In the blue behavioral cluster, the fact that students' eyes are on their papers and their bodies lean
         over the desks sends the message that their main interaction is with the worksheet.          Students' neutral facial
         expressions   and   lack of gestures further   suggest   that they  expect minimal   interaction with   their  peers; the
         tutorial activity is, apparently, primarily expected to be individual at this point.   They do glance occasionally at
         one another,    indicating  an  expectation  of  "check-ins"   with peers  from  time  to time,  and  they   read aloud,
         indicating that they expect their partners to coordinate with them.        The reading aloud, however, is indistinct,
         indicating that they expect their peers are already reading the same thing on their own.        The students evidently
         frame the activity as primarily completing the tutorial worksheet.
                    The  green  behavioral   cluster, on  the other  hand,  is characterized  by original  speech    delivered  in
         relatively loud, animated voices, indicating intellectual and/or emotional engagement. Sitting up straight and
         making eye contact with one another, students display an expectation that their attention belongs on their peers.
         Their clear speech and prolific gestures indicate further that they expect their peers to pay attention not only to
         the fact that they're talking, but to the details of what they're trying to express.    Watching students behave in
         this way, we understand them and they understand each other to be engaged in a discussion.
                    In the  red cluster, similarly, students  display   expectations that their attention belongs     on the   TA,
         suggesting    that they  frame  the activity  as listening  to the  TA.   The   behaviors associated  with    the yellow
         behavioral cluster are less straightforward to interpret than those of the other clusters:       on the one hand, they
         seem to indicate social discomfort or perceived vulnerability (students avoid direct eye contact, fidget in their
         seats, and fiddle with objects), while on the other hand, they laugh, smile, and appear to joke with one another,
         behavior   that   indicates play.   These    characterizations  are   not mutually   exclusive;  play   is a  "nonliteral
         orientation" (Tannen, 1993, p. 114) that may be initiated as a cover for actions involving some personal risk.
         We refer to the frame indicated by the yellow behavioral cluster as the joking frame to include the sense that
         students are signaling that the content of their speech should not be taken literally (even though they may also
         intend, on some level, to explore the ideas that they express).

       Analysis of student behavior and epistemological framing
                    In what follows we describe in detail some of the shifts in behavioral clusters that we observed in our
         analysis of the selected group and tutorial, and we show that those shifts correspond to shifts in the substance of
         students' reasoning as evident in their speech and gestures.       Taken together, the students' behavior, speech and
         gestures support interpretations of the students' epistemological framing.
                    In the first three minutes of working actively on the tutorial worksheet on Newton's third law, the
         students in group A consider the first several questions that the worksheet poses.      The tutorial begins by stating
         Newton's third law and admitting that in some cases it seems not to make sense (an admission that is well
         supported by research into student understanding of Newtonian mechanics (Boyle & Maloney, 1991; Hestenes,
         Wells, &    Swackhamer,     1992;   Maloney,   1984)).    The  worksheet   asks  students to consider   a   heavy  truck
         ramming into a parked, unoccupied car: "According to common sense, which force (if either) is larger during
         the collision:    the force exerted by the truck on the car, or the force exerted by the car on the truck?"           The
         instructional activity is described in detail in (Elby, 2001).
                    In the  episode  below,  "Kendra"   (K)   (6) expresses  a common    concern   about whether    the third  law
2-0      applies to the situation described; "Alan" (A) and "Jasmin" (J) try to reconcile the third law with the common-
sense intuition that the force by the truck would be larger.     "Sheryl" (S) is present but does not speak in this
episode. Italics denote quotations from the tutorial worksheet.

         A:  According to common...
         K:  Yeah, I think I don't understand this.
         A:  According to common sense, which force, if either is larger during the collision:     the force
               exerted by the truck on the car, the force exerted by the car on the truck?  Oh...
         K:  I mean, the truck.
         A:  The truck, yeah.
         A:  OK, so...
         J: According to common sense, which force is larger in the collision?      Tuh...
         A:  What?
         J: Why are they asking that?
         A:  Oh, OK, the car...
         J: question...
         A:  Is your group's explanation in Part A similar or different?   It's similar.
         J: Intuitively, the car reacts more, you'd rather be riding in the truck, so the car feels... is your
               group's explanation similar or different?
         A:  It's the same.    Right. OK, so, according to Newton's Third Law, which of the... which of
               those forces...
         K: It says they're equal, right?
         A:  Yeah.   Should be equal.
         K:  I kinda, I could never understand that, but.
         K (cont.):  Does this go against the law then, or is it that they are equal but we just think it's
               the truck? You understand what my question...
         A:  We think it's the truck because the truck doesn't move backwards, I think.      Right?   Cause
               if there's equal and opposite forces, the truck... we would, if we actually saw it, we'd
               think the truck would hit the car and go backwards because of the force, but since...
         J:    Maybe they do exert the same force, but the truck doesn't move.
         A:  The truck doesn't move cause I think it's got the momentum going, and... you know.
         K:  So they, they are doing the same force, it just doesn't... it's just not common sense.
         A:  Yeah, it just doesn't register because we see the truck (K: It looks as being bigger) still
               moving forward, right, right.

Behavioral coding
         In the first part of the episode (until the horizontal line), students lean over their papers and only briefly
glance up at their peers.   They rarely gesture, and their faces and voices are relatively neutral.     Their speech
consists largely of phrases read from their worksheets.      Overall, their behavior is well-characterized by the blue
behavioral cluster.  At the moment indicated by the horizontal line in the transcript, however, the students'
behavior changes abruptly to that of the green behavioral cluster: They sit up and make eye contact with one
another, make original statements in clear, loud voices, and gesture relatively prolifically.  The green behavioral
cluster continues to the end of the episode.
         There are exceptions to the above characterization of student behavior in the episode.         Right at the
beginning   of the episode,    Kendra's  statement,   "Yeah, I think I don't  understand   this," is unusually   clear,
original speech compared to the other utterances that take place shortly before and after it; she is not reading
from the worksheet,    and  her  voice  is relatively loud and   animated.  Other aspects of her behavior, though,
remain  consistent   with the   blue  behavioral cluster   ­ for example,  she remains    bent over   her worksheet.
Kendra's statement appearing immediately before the shift from blue to green, "I could never understand that,"
is similar in both content and tone to the slightly anomalous statement at the start of the episode.    We interpret
the momentary contrast between her behavior and the group's in the next section.

Substance of student thinking
         The contrast between the blue and green behavioral clusters is reflected in the substance of students'
speech.  While students are exhibiting the "blue" behaviors, their speech consists mostly of reading worksheet
questions aloud.   They offer only brief answers to or comments about the questions, and they ask only two
questions of their own: one to verify an answer ("It says they're equal, right?") and the other focused on the
worksheet's intention ("Why are they asking that?").
         The   green mode   begins    with Kendra's   question about the   physics ideas: does this  situation  violate
Newton's third law, or is there some misunderstanding?       Alan responds with a perceptual reason why we might
think the truck's force was larger (it "doesn't move backwards"), implicitly asserting that the forces are equal;          2-0
         his explanation is incomplete, perhaps indicating that he's constructing it as he speaks.       Jasmin adds to Alan's
         reasoning by suggesting that perhaps Newton's law holds in this situation ("they do exert the same force") but
         it's hard to tell because "the truck doesn't move" (by which she might mean that the truck's motion is relatively
         unaffected).  Alan gesturally "waves off" the collision's lack of effect on the truck with reference to what he
         seems to identify as a different phenomenon ("momentum").          Kendra tries to affirm that the vehicles exert equal
         forces on one another in spite of common-sense convictions to the contrary.          Alan agrees, and asserts that one
         may be misled by perceiving little change in the motion of the truck ("it just doesn't register because we see the
         truck still moving forward").

        Epistemological framing
                  The changes in behavioral cluster from blue to green correspond with changes in the substance of the
         conversation.  These two types of evidence together support our identification of the students' epistemological
         framing:   They shift from framing their activity as completing the worksheet to framing it as discussing the
         ideas.  This is a local shift; we expect these two frames are part of a larger framing of what is taking place in
         this tutorial session as a whole. Studying student behavior at this grain-size, we believe, provides insight into
         that larger framing as well as into its dynamics, including the coordination of the worksheet and discussion
         frames.
                  This identification of a shift in epistemological framing provides a basis for understanding Kendra's
         locally anomalous behavior.    Kendra's initial statement may have been a bid for the group to change its activity;
         the group accepted her bid the second time she made it.        We identify her bid for a frame change based entirely
         on her behaviors (e.g., she is briefly more animated).     The content of her speech, however, is also similar in the
         two cases:   she denies understanding the situation.       Her peers are likely to interpret such a statement as an
         implicit request for understanding.    Such a request is more consistent with framing the activity as a discussion
         than with framing it as filling out a worksheet.

       Summary and questions for future research
                  The  behavioral  clusters    identified in the  above   analysis  are evidence of students'    epistemological
         framing.  The behavioral cluster labeled "green," for    example, which includes animated speech, eye contact, and
         gesturing, indicates a framing of the activity as discussing one another's conceptual ideas.      Those behaviors do
         not only display that type of discussion ­ they also promote it.     The association between framing and behavior
         advances  the possibilities   for identifying students'    framing  of  collaborative active-learning   activities.  The
         methodology presented is powerful, reliable, and efficient, and adds substantially to previous analysis methods
         based on student speech acts.
                  Resource-based views of epistemological framing encourage theoretical continuity between individual
         and group (i.e., cognitive and discourse) dynamics.        A frame is a locally coherent pattern of activations that
         emerges from the interactions of many cognitive elements; these elements may be within an individual's mind
         or across multiple individuals, and the coherences may be within an individual's reasoning or among members
         of a group.  Our approach illustrates an analyzable, codable dynamic between the way people behave in groups
         and the substance of their thinking.   For example, a student who makes a kinesthetically evocative gesture may
         be at once using an intuitive sense of mechanism and, at the same time, communicating that the metamessage
         (Tannen, 1993) about what sort of conversation is taking place.        Another student may move from blue to green
         behaviors,  stimulating  others   to follow his  lead (or  not).  To the extent that our account connects students'
         behavior,  conceptual   reasoning,   and epistemological    framing,   it integrates individual cognition    with   group
         dynamics, and makes visible the interplay between conceptual reasoning and views of knowledge and learning
         at the level of both the individual and the group.
                  This analysis methodology makes a range of research questions empirically accessible.           The examples
         above suggest many such questions:       What frames occur in various classroom activities?       In which frames do
         certain desirable  activities (including  cognitive   activities) occur?   What   precipitates shifts   into (or out  of)
         desirable frames? Do particular learning activities have characteristic frames associated with them?         Do student
         groups have characteristic framings of particular activities that they undertake together? Does a group's framing
         of particular activities change    over  the course   of   an hour,  or a  term?   How  might   we    best   promote the
         substantive student discussion that we believe is essential to high-quality physics instruction?           How can we
         account for the observed deterioration in student expectations and epistemologies?
                  These questions call for a variety of studies both within and across tutorial sessions.        Within sessions,
         we are developing case studies of the particular dynamics by which a group moves into or out of framing the
         immediate activity as a discussion.    These case studies may shed light on how students' framing of tutorials as a
         whole   influences their moment-to-moment        activity, and   how patterns  of behavioral   clusters may   vary  for a
         particular group over the course of a term, or vary by tutorial.

2-0
Endnotes
(1)  Frames, scripts, and schemata are related and overlapping terms in the fields of linguistics, artificial intelligence,
     cognitive psychology, social psychology, sociology, anthropology, and other disciplines. An overview and history of
     the uses of these related terms appears in Chapter 1 of Tannen (1993).
(2)  Linguistic markers include omissions, repetitions, negatives, modals, etc. and are described in Ch. 1 of Tannen (1993).
(3)  There is the possibility of the speaker   acting as  though she is engaged  in a lively  discussion while   in fact not
     experiencing genuine engagement.  For frame analysis in the context of acting, see Goffman (1986).
(4)  This result is partially to be expected:  since peers' activity together is mutually constructed, it is natural that they
     should share their framing of a given situation and therefore participate in the same behavioral cluster. On the other
     hand, it seems possible that individuals could "opt out" of the framing mutually constructed by the others in the group.
     This paper reports brief occurrences of such opting-out or mismatch of framings.  However, the great majority of the
     time, peers share the same behavioral cluster.
(5)  Sometimes, for example, they exhibit "green" behaviors with a TA nearby or even joining the discussion.
(6)  Students' names are pseudonyms.

References
Bateson, G. (1972).   A theory of play and fantasy.      In Bateson, G. (Ed.), Steps to an ecology of mind: Collected
        essays in anthropology, psychiatry, evolution, and epistemology.         San Francisco: Chandler Pub. Co.
Boyle, R. K. & Maloney, D. P. (1991).          Effect of written text on usage of Newton's third law.           Journal of
        Research in Science Teaching, 28, 123.
Brown, D. E., & Hammer, D. (in press).         Conceptual change in physics. In Vosniadou, S. (Ed.), Handbook of
        research on conceptual change.
diSessa, A. (1993).   Towards an epistemology of physics. Cognition and Instruction, 10(2-3), 105-225.
Elby,  A.  (2001).    Helping  physics   students    learn  about learning.    American  Journal   of    Physics,   Physics
        Education Research Supplement 69, S54.
Goffmann, E. (1986).     Frame    analysis:    an   essay  on the organization   of experience.  Boston:       Northeastern
        University Press.
Goldin-Meadow, S. (2003).        Hearing gesture:     How our hands help us think.      Cambridge, MA: The Belknap
        Press of Harvard University Press.
Goodwin, C. (2000).     Action and embodiment within situated human interaction.             Journal of Pragmatics 32,
        1489-1522.
Hammer, D. (1994).     Epistemological beliefs in introductory physics. Cognition and Instruction 12(2), 151-183.
Hammer, D. (2000).     Student resources for learning introductory physics.      American Journal of Physics, Physics
        Education Research Supplement 68, S52-S59.
Hammer, D. & Elby, A. (2002) On the form of a personal epistemology. In Hofer, B. K. and Pintrich, P. R.
        (Eds.), Personal epistemology: The psychology of beliefs about knowledge and knowing (pp. 169-190).
        Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Hammer, D., Elby, A., Scherr, R. E., & Redish, E. F. (2005).          Resources, framing, and transfer.        In J. Mestre
        (Ed.), Transfer of learning from a modern multidisciplinary perspective (pp. 89-120).            Greenwich, CT:
        Information Age Publishing.
Hestenes, D., Wells, M., & Swackhamer, G. (1992).           Force Concept Inventory.   The Physics Teacher 30, 141.
Hofer, B.   K. &    Pintrich, P.  R.  (Eds.)   (2002).    Personal   epistemology:  The  psychology      of beliefs  about
        knowledge and knowing.       Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Knight, L. V. & Sweeney, K. (under review).           Identity and interaction: an understanding of medical students'
        (in)coherence in epistemological talk.
Leach, J., Millar, R., Ryder, J., & Sere, M. G. (2000).       Epistemological understanding in science learning: The
        consistency of representations across contexts. Learning and Instruction 34(6), 497-527.
Lising, L. & Elby, A. (2005).    The impact of epistemology on learning: A case study from introductory physics.
        American Journal of Physics 73(4), 372-382.
Louca,  L.,   Elby, A.,  Hammer,     D., &     Kagey,    T. (2004).     Epistemological resources:    Applying      a new
        epistemological framework to science instruction. Educational Psychologist 39(1), 57-68.
MacLachlan, G. L. & Reid, I. (1994).     Framing and interpretation. Victoria: Carlton.
Maloney, D. P. (1984).   Rule-governed approaches to physics:        Newton's third law.     Physics Education 19, 37.
McDermott,    L.  C., Shaffer, P. S., &  the   Physics   Education   Group   at the University  of Washington       (1998).
        Tutorials in Introductory Physics. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
McDermott, L. C., Shaffer, P. S., & Somers, M. (1994).           Research as a guide for curriculum development: An
        illustration in the context of the Atwood's machine. American Journal of Physics 62(46)
Minsky, M. L. (1986).   Society of mind. New York: Simon & Schuster.

                                                                                                                                  2-0
         Redish, E. F. (2004).  A theoretical framework for physics education research: Modeling student thinking.    In
                  Redish, E. F. & Vicentini, M. (Eds.), Proceedings of the Enrico Fermi Summer School, Course CLVI.
                  Bologna:  Italian Physical Society.
         Redish, E. F. & McDermott, L.C. (1999).          Resource letter PER-1:    Physics education research. American
                  Journal of Physics 67(ISS), 755.
         Redish, E. F., Saul, J., & Steinberg, R. (1998). Student expectations in introductory physics. American Journal
                  of Physics 66(3), 212-224.
         Rosenberg, S. A., Hammer, D., & Phelan, J. (2006).      Multiple epistemological coherences in an eighth-grade
                  discussion of the rock cycle. Journal of the Learning Sciences 15(2), 261-292.
         Roth, W.-M. & Roychoudhury, A. (1994).         Physics students' epistemologies and views about knowing and
                  learning. Journal of Research in Science Teaching 31, 5-30.
         Russ, R. S. & Hutchison, P. (2006).    It's okay to be wrong: Recognizing mechanistic reasoning during student
                  inquiry.   Proceedings    of  the  7th   International   Conference  on  Learning   Sciences,  641-647.
                  Bloomington:   International Conference on Learning Sciences.
         Russ, R.  S., Scherr, R. E.,  Hammer,   D.,  &   Mikeska, J.  (in press).  Recognizing mechanistic reasoning in
                  scientific inquiry. Science Education.
         Sandoval, W. A. (2003). Conceptual and epistemic aspects of students' scientific explanations. Journal of the
                  Learning Sciences 12(1), 5-51.
         Sandoval, W.   A.  (2005).   Understanding  students' practical   epistemologies and their influence on learning
                  through inquiry. Science Education 89(4), 634-656.
         Scherr, R. E. (2007).  Modeling student thinking: An example from special relativity.       American Journal of
                  Physics 70(3), 272-280.
         Scherr, R. E. (2008).  Gesture analysis for physics education researchers.    Physical Review ­ Special Topics:
                  Physics Education Research 4(010101), 1-9.
         Tannen, D. (1993).  Framing in discourse.    New York: Oxford University Press.

       Acknowledgements
         We are grateful to Andrew Elby, E. F. Redish, and the other members of the Physics Education Research Group
         at the University of Maryland for substantive discussions of this research.  Raymond Hodges, Ayush Gupta, and
         Luke Conlin served as additional coders for inter-rater reliability.   This work was supported in part by the
         National Science Foundation (REC 0440113).

2-0
