   Leadership in Small Online Collaborative Learning Groups: A
                                        Distributed Perspective
             Julia Gressick, Sharon Derry, University of Wisconsin - Madison, 1025 W. Johnson St.
                                                   Madison WI 53706
                               Email: gressick@wisc.edu, sjderry@education.wisc.edu

         Abstract: We examined emergent leadership in small online collaborative learning groups of
         pre-service   math  and    science teachers.   Groups   worked   online to  design interdisciplinary
         instructional  units. We   employed    a  distributed leadership  framework    (Spillane, 2007)    and
         adapted a coding system previously developed by Li, et al. (2007) to determine that group
         leadership was highly distributed among participants and to illustrate that leadership emerged
         through  different  forms   of participation  described  in this paper. Findings   help  validate  the
         theoretical  concept    of distributed small-group    cognition  and   lead to   interesting research
         questions regarding the design and scaffolding of small-group learning online.

Introduction
                  The nature and quality of leadership in small groups and its effects on group outcomes has
been studied for many years by researchers in different disciplines and across many varied contexts and age
levels (e.g. Chemers, 2000; Eby 2003; Hare 2000; Kozlowski & Ilgen 2006; Li et. al, 2007; Mumford 2000,
Scribner 2007). But the role of leadership within small collaborative learning groups in authentic instructional
settings has explicitly been examined very infrequently (Kim et. al, 2007; Hmelo-Silver et al., 2007). That there
is little leadership research in small group instruction, despite an enormous literature on peer learning in small
groups (O'Donnell,     Reeve,  &    Smith,  2007),  is not surprising,  because  small  group   instruction is  typically
scaffolded or scripted (O'Donnell et al., 2007), designed so that students achieve goals without relying on the
emergent leadership skills of group members. Yet as emphasis on group cognition increases in the larger world
(Stahl, 2006), it becomes increasingly important to understand and develop students' small-group leadership
skills as preparation for later life. Moreover, as the need for web-based collaboration accelerates, it becomes
increasingly  important   to understand  small  group   leadership in  online environments.   Accordingly,   this  study
examined the emergence of leadership within five small math-science interdisciplinary teams who collaborated
for two months to complete an instructional design assignment made in a learning-science course for advanced
pre-service  secondary    teachers.  The    teams  conducted   a  large percentage    of  their  work  online   using  a
collaborative whiteboard     not unlike many    commercial   whiteboard   tools  available today.  These    groups were
randomly constituted, received the same general design assignment, used identical technological tools, and were
minimally scaffolded as needed by instructors. This setup provided an excellent "natural experiment" enabling
us to observe emergence of leadership in small learning groups that experienced varying degrees of success.
         Theories of leadership in corporate (Northouse, 2007) and school­administrative contexts (Spillane,
2007) provide useful frameworks for understanding leadership's essential role in small collaborative learning
groups. Leadership can be emergent or assigned (Northouse, 2007). It can also be thought of as trait-based (Eby,
2003) or as a set of skills that can be learned (Northouse, 2007). Some perspectives emphasize its situatedness
and that some people are more effective leaders in certain contexts (Northouse, 2007). Spillane (2007) proposed
a framework    of distributed  leadership   which   places  leadership, not in   discrete actions  of and   reactions to
particular leaders,   but in the  spread   of interactions across  group  members    and   tools  over time.   Adapting
Spillane's definition to the small group, we define leadership as distributed activities tied to the core work of
groups that are designed by group members to influence the motivation, knowledge, affect, or practice of other
members and that are likely understood by group members as intended to influence their motivation, knowledge,
affect, or practices. A distributed perspective on leadership links to distributed cognition (Hutchins, 1995; Pea,
1993)  and   activity theory   (Engeström,    1999; Leont'ev,  1981)   through   an  emphasis   on interactions  among
community members and artifacts.
         Where leadership has often been conceptualized as residing in one or two people and as being assigned,
in this study we hypothesized that leadership would emerge as a distributed and self-organizing entity across
group members. We further postulated that patterns in the distribution of leadership behavior would differ for
successful versus less successful teams. In addition, based on previous findings from research on collaborative
learning that show    the influence  of status  and    secondary characteristics such  as  gender  and  minority   group
membership (Chemers, 2000), and roles among participants such as bystanding (Hudson & Bruckman, 2004) or
social loafing (e.g., O'Donnell et al.,    2007), we speculated that leadership functions would not be distributed
equally for all group members, but that different individuals would contribute different amounts and forms of
leadership. We also were interested in defining the leadership roles of the instructors:     in what ways might they

                                                                                                                            1-0
         afford or constrain emergence of student leadership and how did they compensate for leadership weaknesses in
         groups that struggled?

       Methodology
        Data Source
                  Data analyzed in this study were collected with the STELLAR online course development system (e.g.,
         Derry et al., 2005). We examined five interdisciplinary math and science collaborative groups from a learning-
         science course taught in Fall of 2004 for pre-service teachers at a large Midwestern university.        There were a
         total of 25 students in the class, 8 males and 17 females. Of the male students 3 were science majors and 5 were
         math, while 11 of the female students were science majors, 5 were math and one was a math and science major.
         All groups included both majors and both male and female members. The groups interacted primarily through
         an asynchronous      whiteboard   where  they  collaborated  for much   of  one  academic   semester  to  design  an
         instructional unit for a topic and grade level chosen by their group. This whiteboard allowed any member of a
         group to post a proposal for their project. Only the poster could edit his or her proposal, but all group members
         could comment and suggest edits and rate all proposals. The groups also met face-to-face several times during
         the activity, but the whiteboard supported much of their work, which occurred largely online between meetings.
         The whiteboard posts varied widely in length, but a significant percentage of proposals and comments were
         lengthy  and thoughtful.  The  online  course  environment   provided  deadlines, and  the setup  of the whiteboard
         interface reminded students to justify their instructional designs with learning-sciences concepts, the main topics
         of the   course. No   other  interventions were   implemented    to scaffold leadership in  groups   other than   the
         instructors' (primarily   one teaching   assistant) interacting  with groups  to  guide  them   as needed.    Groups
         completed a problem-based learning (PBL) activity that comprised three iterations, each lasting 2-3 weeks and
         focusing  on   a  different  step of the   backward   design approach   (Wiggins   &   McTighe,    2005):  1. define
         instructional goals; 2. develop assessments; and 3. design instructional activities.

       Descriptive Data for Groups
                  While all groups were successful in meeting the collaborative goals of the PBL activity, some groups
         demonstrated a higher degree of success than others. In table 1 below we approximately organize groups from
         high (Group 1) to low (Group 5) based on instructors' nomination, average (across iterations) score given for
         their instructional design projects (PBL score), and average of the group members' satisfaction with the PBL
         assignment on a scale of 1 ­ 5, with a rating of 1 indicating high satisfaction.     For informational purposes we
         also include data on individual achievement in the course, although this particular paper focuses only on the
         product of group cognition.   We also supply the total number of valid posts, including comments and proposals,
         made within each group. "Valid posts" eliminate entries that were made only as result of a student's repeatedly
         "saving" work being composed online.

         Table 1: Group ranked by grades and satisfaction ratings.

                                                    Group 1    Group 2     Group 3     Group 4       Group 5
                      Average satisfaction          1.4        2.0         1.5         1.8           2.5
                      rating
                      Average PBL score             97         97          92          90            88
                      Average Individual score      93         97          90          95            92
                      Total number of group         71         105         65          40            40
                      whiteboard posts

        Coding
                   All posts to the whiteboard were coded with a set of leadership moves based on a well-explicated
         framework developed and vetted by Li, et. al (2007) to study the emergence of leadership in children's face-to-
         face discussion   groups. Building   on  this framework,  we adapted  our  coding  categories to  better capture  the
         distinct patterns that emerged    in our online  data and  context. Table  2 describes each  code  and   provides an
         example   of a coded   post. Entire  posts by  individual group  members   were  coded; a  single  post may   receive
         multiple codes. One successful group and one weaker group were first coded and codes were found to have 94%
         reliability between coders (the authors). The refined framework was then applied by the first author to all posts
         for all five groups.

         Table 2: Coding framework adapted from Li, et. al (2007)

            Code                Description                                  Example

1-0
  Acknowledge-         Positive: Using language in a way         -I liked your expanded explanation - it was
  ment/Affective       likely to motivate or inspire             considerably clearer than mine! Thanks.
  (A/A)                Negative: Using language in a
                       negative or critical way                  -That sounds whimpy . . .
  Argument             Soliciting reasons, evidence, and         Are these final reports done completely
  Development          clarification from others; extending      individually? What kind of guidelines will the
  (AD)                 others' arguments through elaborating     students be receiving-a list of questions that they
                       on them or making comments about          will answer in essay form? Or something else?
                       them.   Holding group accountable for     And once again, there needs to be better
                       justifying their reasons.                 learning science connections.
  Seeking Input        Looking for general input from other      I've tried to clarify the graphic organizer part. If
  (SI)                 members of the group; seeking help,       anyone has any other ideas about how to do it,
                       advice, ideas on the work                 let me know.
  Knowledge            Contributing academic knowledge -         Graphic organizers are a type of assessment
  contribution         working toward the academic goal of       that evoke and require student initiative and
  (KC)                 the project by contributing new ideas     explicit reasoning...The graphic organizers are
                       and extending meaning (ie., from          also beneficial in having students demonstrating
                       personal reading or research)             self-knowledge... Wiggins and McTighe point
                                                                 out that "A student who really understands
                                                                 reveals self-knowledge. . . "
  Organizational       Planning, organizing, monitoring -        We also might want to split the goals
  Moves                both whiteboard space and ideas;          up...assessment and enduring understanding. So
  (OM)                 statements and other moves that           specific and general type of shit.
                       provide structure to the situation
  Topic Control        Statements that influence the topic of    My only comment is regarding what we have
  (TC)                 discussion or direction of the work       seen in the class of teaching to diverse learners.
                       (looking at another side of an issue,     . . How could we expand the assessment to
                       getting back to the original topic,       include a larger diversity of students?
                       taking up a new topic)

Results/Discussion
Distribution of Leadership
        Leadership was highly distributed, with all members of every group participating in multiple leadership
roles. Even in a group (group 1) where a particular leader (A) was essentially elected and remained in that
position throughout, leadership was shared among group members. However, group members participated in
leadership in very   different ways, with some   group  members   avoiding some  roles  entirely while   embracing
others. This pattern is illustrated in tables 3 and 4 below, which show the distribution of leadership among group
members, including the instructor, for the highest and lowest performing groups.

Table 3: Distribution of leadership moves in group 1(* indicates a female participant)

                                  A/A            AD           SI       KC         OM             TC
              A*                  28%         20%           72%       24%        66%            17%
              M                      --       27%             --      33%           --          17%
              B                   39%             --          --      12%        14%                --
              S                    6%         20%             --      15%         3%            17%
              E*                     --           --        27%       12%        14%                --
              Instr.              28%         33%             --       3%         3%            50%
              Total
              Group
              Moves                  18          15          15         33         29               6

Table 4: Distribution of leadership moves in group 5 (* indicates a female participant)
                                  A/A            AD           SI       KC         OM             TC
              K*                     --          6%           --      18%           --              --
              A*                     --          6%         75%       14%        12%                --
              J*                  22%         29%             --      23%        35%            11%

                                                                                                                        1-0
                                           Percent of overall group posts
                       AH                                                          11%             6%                    --        9%                  6%              --
                       C*                                                          11%            12%             25%              27%            12%               11%
                       Instr.                                                      56%            41%                    --        9%             35%               78%
                       Total
                       Group
                       Moves                                                           9           17                    4              22             17              9

                 Different aspects of leadership had different characteristic patterns of distribution, with some functions
         (most notably knowledge contribution) being shared fairly evenly across all group members in all groups, but
         with other  functions    (most                                         notably    seeking input      and   topic    control,    but   also    argument       development   and
         organizational management) being dominated by fewer members. These differences are seen in tables 3 and 4.
                 As illustrated in tables 3 and 4, the instructor shared in specific leadership roles but avoided others, and
         participated to different degrees with different groups. In the highest and lowest groups, the instructor was a key
         contributor to  topic control,                                         argument     development,        and     acknowledgement/affective         moves.       In the  weaker
         group, the instructor also played a primary role in organizational management and was responsible for more
         than half of the group's acknowledgement/affective moves. These trends were also seen in groups 2, 3 and 4.
                 When the groups were viewed as the unit of cognition without regard to individuals, the distribution of
         leadership behaviors represented as a percentage of the total number of posts was not obviously different for
         successful  and  versus                                          less successful    teams (see     figure   1).    There  was     a   tendency   for     all teams  to devote
         relatively less time  to                                         seeking input    from others     and   to topic    control    and    relatively more      time  to providing
         affective statements, contributing knowledge, developing arguments, and organizational management. We did
         not find evidence that differences in distributional leadership patterns were associated with differences in quality
         of group product. However, we noted that the gender distribution of participants was highly imbalanced only in
         the lowest performing group. Higher performing groups demonstrated a higher overall use of the whiteboard.

                                                                                            Comparing Overall Group Distributions

                                                                          60%

                                                                          50%

                                                                          40%                                                                                 A/A
                                                                                                                                                              AD
                                                                                                                                                              SI
                                                                          30%
                                                                                                                                                              KC
                                                                                                                                                              OM
                                                                          20%                                                                                 TC

                                                                          10%

                                                                           0%
                                                                                   Group 1        Group 2        Group 3        Group 4        Group 5

                              Figure 1. Comparing Within-group Distributions of Forms of Leadership

        Different Forms of Leadership are Differently Distributed
                 Under the distributed definition of leadership we have adopted, the concept of leadership is illustrated
         by the overall distribution of leadership moves within groups. While we will discuss moves individually, it is
         important to note that our conception of "leadership" is not characterized in any one move but is distributed
         among moves between group members. Had we adopted a different definition of leadership, our study may have
         had a different conclusion about the leadership model we observed.

        Acknowledgement/Affective
                 Acknowledgement                                               and  affective   forms      of  leadership     were      fairly evenly     distributed    among   group
         members in all groups, with the instructor playing a part in each group. Figure 2 shows a typical within-group
         distribution for acknowledgement/affective moves that was very characteristic of the middle three groups. All
         but four students in the class (in groups 1 and 5) assumed this leadership role at some point in their group. With
         the exception   of Group                                          5   (lowest performing),       all of the     affective moves       by individuals       were   positive and
         encouraging.  In   Group                                         5,  where there    were  statements       of   a  negative    nature,  there    was     a stronger instructor
         presence in this area, indicating a possible effort to compensate for the students' negative affect.

1-0
Seeking Input
         "Seeking input" was the least prominent form of leadership. The role of seeking input was primarily
assumed by two or sometimes three members of a group. Figure 3 illustrates a typical distribution. While there
is some overlap between "seeking input" and "argument development," seeking help from other group members
was a student move that the instructor did not make. Females more actively sought input than males; this was
the only obvious gender difference and was statistically significant (Mann-Whitney U = 98.5, p<0.05).

          Group 4 Acknow ledgem ent/Affective                                                                       Group 2 Seeking Input
                                                                                                                                JB
                                                                                                                                0%

                                                                                                                               Inst r .
                         Inst r .              CB*                                                                              0%            TB*
                          21%                   16%                                                                                           25%
                                                                                CB*                                                                                        TB*
                                                                                J F*                                                                                       MC
                                                      J F*                      ML*                            KM2*                               MC                       TJ
                                                      16%                       LS*                             50%                               0%                       KM2*
                       MF                                                       MF                                                                                         JB
                      20%                                                       Inst r .                                                                                   Inst r .
                                                 ML*                                                                                           TJ
                                    LS*           16%                                                                                         25%
                                     11%

             Figure 2. Typical distribution of                                                       Figure 3. Typical distribution of
           Acknowledgement/Affective moves                                                                          Seeking Input moves
Argument Development
         Argument development was typically demonstrated by the instructor and a few (1-3) members of each
team, so not all students actively participated in argument development. The instructor's role ranged from 11 ­
50% of a group's overall moves, with fewer moves being made in more successful groups. Examples of how
argument  development                    was distributed       among    group              members   are illustrated                    in characteristic    distributions
shown in tables 3 and 4.

Knowledge Contribution
         As group members worked toward their goal, knowledge contribution was an essential component of
whiteboard activity in all groups with all members making some contributions (tables 3 & 4 are characteristic
distributions). There              was     one       exception   in Group                 4. In this group,           one  female             member,     JF,  made                 no
contributions of knowledge despite making other contributions to her group's project. This case is discussed in
more detail below.

Organizational Moves
         In each team one primary organizational manager emerged. A typical distribution was shown in table 3.
This manager organized both the physical whiteboard space and the intellectual ideas of the team. The role of
primary organizational manager is assumed by a student in all groups but Group 5, the weakest group, where the
instructor took over as the main organizer.

Topic Control
         Topic control was primarily exhibited by the instructor (see tables 3 and 4); however, there were two
special cases,  M         in       Group     1      and    JB in Group   2,              where  an individual          male             student      assumes this role               in
conjunction with argument development as a means to influence the direction of the group's final product. In
M's case this was to ensure that his content area (mathematics) was adequately represented in the group product,
and in  JB's case         this      was    to  ensure       that other  group              members   were           making pedagogical                 choices that            were
strongly rooted  in           the   learning         sciences  theory   that             was  the main  course         topic,           and   were     being sensitive               to
student diversity. These cases will be discussed in more detail next.

Illustrative Cases
         Individuals exhibited different leadership styles, which will be illustrated by two pairs of contrasting
cases. The first two are male students, M and JB. Their stories relate to how each similarly used topic control
and argument development to influence their group's product. The second set of cases are A and JF, two female
students who    demonstrate                strongly         contrasting roles             within  their groups;         A          is      a strong    contributor  in              all

                                                                                                                                                                                          1-0
         categories  of leadership   while   JF    exhibits  some   leadership   behaviors   without  actually contributing     any
         knowledge to her group's final product.

        Using Topic Control and Argument Development to "Advocate"
                  In the two groups that we characterized as more successful, a similar pattern of leadership behavior was
         noticed in one member of each group. In Group 1, M uses argument development and topic control to guide the
         assignment  in   the direction  of  his area  of expertise,  math.   Through   making   26%  of the   group's  argument
         development    moves   and  30%     of  their topic  control moves,     M extended   the  group's  initial proposal    and
         contributed new   topics    to the  group's   plan  that integrated  more  mathematical     content. The   initial project
         proposed by the group, to develop a middle-school unit to teach understanding the seasons, included primarily
         learning goals   related to    science. By    using topic  control   and argument   development    to advocate     for his
         discipline, M insured that a math-rich lesson evolved.      Relevant examples of M's discourse are in table 5 below:

         Table 5: Examples of M's use of argument development

               I also think that we should teach topics like orbit and other properties of the earth and sun to help
               the students better understand. We can then combine some more math activities in. Here is a
               standard that might help...
               I do agree with B-- that we may have too many goals for enduring understanding for only a two
               week lesson. But I feel the math goals are very important and should be included in enduring
               understanding not just assessment. Especially number 9 and 10!!!

                  Similarly, JB extensively used topic control in Group 2 to influence the direction of the group's final
         product. Taking on 40% of the topic control (shared with the instructor), JB repeatedly pushed the group to draw
         links between    the design    of the   project and  the   concepts  being taught   in  the course   (such  as cognitive
         apprenticeship, scaffolding, transfer), while also advocating for equity issues that the group members had taken
         up in another course on inclusive schooling. Table 6 provides examples of topic control as employed by JB. In
         the first example, JB influences the direction of the group's project by questioning whether it is instruction that
         is appropriate to all learners since the group is considering an assignment and assessment which assumes that all
         students take vacations over spring break. JB is a minority student, so this is an interesting contribution and the
         group  does reframe   their    problem  based   on  his  leadership. Both  examples   are typical of  JB's  constant   re-
         directing of the group's thinking toward the learning-science ideas.

         Table 6: Examples of JB's use of topic control

            My only comment is regarding what we have seen in the class of teaching to diverse learners. We want
            to tap on students' prior knowledge and connect the assignment with their life, is it good to assume all
            of our students take spring-break vacations? How could we expand the assessment to include a larger
            diversity of students?

            I do not think this assessment falls under [the topic of] cognitive apprenticeship.
            For all of us, this activity is meant to provide support to students (scaffold) for their final assessment,
            but I believe they should be less similar. I think of the final assessment as a problem solving activity in
            which students need to transfer what they have learned. I would like the activity to be something new,
            not just an assessment in which students repeat a previously seen activity. Am I missing something
            here?

        Social Loafing or Legitimate Peripheral Participation?
                  In contrasting the leadership of A in Group 1 with JF in Group 4, we illustrate the nature of strong
         leadership in a distributed environment (illustrated by A), while observing that even a social loafer can make
         leadership  contribution  (JF).   A is  a strong,   active leader  who   structures the whiteboard    space to  establish
         individual accountability for contributions. In addition to organizing information (66% of total group moves), A
         plays an   active role   in seeking     input (73%),    acknowledgement    and   affective  moves    (28%),  knowledge
         contribution (24%), and topic control (17%). Examples of A's communication are in Table 7. The first example
         demonstrates how A, a science major, takes up an idea from another group member, expands on it, linking it to
         other facets of the project, and directs it back to the group. In the second example A communicates with group
         members initial ideas about assessment and involves them in improving the ideas. A's moves demonstrate her
         horizontal  role  in her  group's   leadership    as she   worked    to  guide the  group   toward   their goal    without
         overpowering other members of her group.

1-10
A striking contrast to A's style is is JF's role in Group 4. JF makes a total of four posts out of her group's 40
total posts (see table 8). Within her limited contributions, however, JF plays some role in the group's leadership,
taking up acknowledgment and affective behavior (17% of her group's moves), argument development (17%)
and seeking input (13%). In contrast to the contributions made by A in group 1, JF's contributions reference
surface features of posts previously made by group members. While A both takes up and seeks input on her
contributions, JF offers suggestions on others' work. While we have found that certain members in each group
have distinct styles of leadership, specializing in certain moves, what makes JF's case interesting is that she
makes no knowledge contributions toward her group's final product. Contributing knowledge is a move that all
other members     of the  class  and the  instructor make.  A  similar   pattern of behavior  was  found    in a male
participant, B, in Group 1. Are these students legitimate peripheral participators (Lave, 1991) or social loafers
(O'Donnell et al., 2007)?    However they are viewed, they contribute to group leadership in some ways. What
legitimate individual learning might be accomplished by such participants is an interesting question.

Table 7: Examples of A's communicative contributions.

  B has a good suggestion regarding splitting the goals into more manageable groups...This makes me
  wonder if we're being too specific in our enduring understanding? Or, in other words, are we going into
  another section of the PBL? I don't know. What do you guys think?"
  * Ok - Please let me know how you guys would like to modify these assessments. I've tried to explain the
  activity and how it's done. I may have delved into the justifications or been insufficient in describing
  them so let me know what you think can be done to improve them. [lists names with specific assignments
  on whiteboard]

Table 8: Summary of    JF's Whiteboard contributions.

  I think this looks great. I am not sure we had to include much in that box???
  Looks great guys!
  Facet 2 - Instead of saying there is no one way... perhaps say the students are free to present their
  genetic knowledge in any approved way they choose? Otherwise this looks great.

  Formative assessment - I like C's idea about the questions at the end of class. This is a great way to
  track the students' progress as well as use formative assessment...
  Great job so far though!!!

Conclusion
         In five online groups, a distributed model was confirmed, with members of every group participating
significantly in multiple leadership roles. Even in a group where a particular leader was "elected" and remained
throughout, leadership was intricately shared. However, group members participated in leadership in different
ways, with some members avoiding certain roles entirely while embracing others. These differences may exhibit
gender-related patterns, although this must be further investigated. Different aspects of leadership had different
patterns of distribution, with some functions being shared more evenly across group members (e.g., knowledge
contribution), but other functions (e.g., seeking input) being dominated by fewer members. Moreover, different
specific functions   were  more  or  less prominent  as  emergent aspects   of leadership.  The  instructor shared in
specific leadership roles (e.g., topic control) but avoided others (e.g., seeking input), and participated to different
degrees with different groups, focusing primarily on the strongest and the weakest groups. Yet when groups
were viewed as the unit of cognition without regard to individuals, the distributions of leadership behaviors
represented as a percentage of total posts did not obviously differ for more versus less successful teams. While
there are limitations to the model we've adopted in this study, it has provided a baseline understanding of how
leadership can be characterized as distributed in interdisciplinary online learning groups. Future research design
will  take  into account   Social Networking     Theory  (Scott,  2000)  in  an   effort to develop   a  more   robust
understanding of group interactions and leadership functions in small virtual groups.
         These findings support aspects of Stahl's (2006) theory of group cognition in which he argues for more
analytical and instructional approaches that treat the small group as a cognitive unit. Leadership, like problem
solving in Stahl's online virtual math teams, was an emergent and distributed phenomenon in our groups. It
would  be   impossible  to develop   a theory of leadership by   looking  at individuals  separately. These    findings
suggest  the importance    of investigating  models   of small group   collaborative  learning   based   on emergent,
distributed leadership,  and  of exploring  peripheral  participation in such  leadership  as it relates to individual
learning and group cognition. They also raise a number of research questions: What are the potential learning

                                                                                                                          1-11
         benefits to students of encouraging emergent distributed leadership in collaborative learning groups? How can
         such models   of  leadership be  scaffolded?   Can   manipulating   the  components   and   patterns  of distributed
         leadership affect individual  learning and  quality  of group    outcomes?   What    are the benefits  of emergent
         leadership models compared to typical scripted models in which leadership roles are assigned and rotated?

       References
         Chemers, M.M. (2000). Leadership research and theory: A functional integration. Group Dynamics: Theory,
                  Research, and Practice, 4, 27-43.
         Derry, S. J., Hmelo-Silver, C. E., Feltovich, J., Nagarajan, A., Chernobilsky, E., & Halfpap, B. (2005). Making a
                  mesh of  it: A  STELLAR     approach  to teacher   professional development.    In  T. Koschmann,   D. D.
                  Suthers & T.-W. Chan (Eds.), Proceedings of Computer Support for Collaborative Learning (CSCL)
                  2005, Taipei, Taiwan (pp. 105-114). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
         Engeström, Y. (1999). Activity theory and individual and social transformation. In Y. Engeström, Miettinen, R.,
                  Punamaki,    R. (Ed.), Perspectives   on  activity  theory (pp.  19-38).   Cambridge,    MA:    Cambridge
                  University Press.
         Eby, L.T., Cader, K., Noble, C.L. (2003), Why do high self-monitors emerge as leaders in small groups? A
                  comparative  analysis  of the behaviors  of high   versus low  self-monitors,   Journal  of Applied Social
                  Psychology, Vol. 33 No.4, pp.1457-70.
         Hmelo-Silver, C.E., Katic, E., Nagarajan, A., & Chernobilsky, E. Soft Leaders, hard artifacts and the groups we
                  rarely see: using video to understand peer learning processes. In Goldman, S., Pea, R., Barron, B., &
                  Derry, S. (Eds.). (2007). Video Research in the Learning Sciences. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
         Hudson, J. M., & Bruckman, A. (2004). The Bystander Effect: A Lens for Understanding Patterns of Participation.
                  Journal of the Learning Sciences, 13(2), 169--199.
         Hutchins, E. (1995) Cognition in the Wild. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
         Kim, I., Anderson,   R.C., Nguyen-Jahiel,  K., &  Archodidou,    A. (2007).  Discourse   patterns during  children's
                  collaborative online discussions. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 16(3), 333-370.
         Kozlowski,  S.W.J.    &  Ilgen, D.R.   (2006)  Enhancing     the Effectiveness   of  Work    Groups    and   Teams.
                  Psychological Science in the Public Interest 7 (3), 77­124.
         Lave, J. and Wenger, E. (1991). Situated Learning: Legitimate Peripheral Participation. Cambridge University
                  Press: Cambridge, UK
         Leont'ev, A. Problems of the development of mind. English translation, Progress Press, 1981, Moscow.
         Li, Y., Anderson, R. C., Nguyen-Jahiel, K., Dong, T., Archodidou, A., Kim, I., Kuo, L.-J., Clark, A.-M., Wu,
                  X., Jadallah, M., & Miller, B. (2007). Emergent leadership in children's discussion groups. Cognition
                  and Instruction, 25(1), 75-111.
         Mumford, M.D., Zaccaro, S.J., Harding, F.D., Jacobs, T.O., &Fleishman, E.A. (2000). Leadership skills for a
                  changing world: solving complex social problems. Leadership Quarterly, 11(1), 11-35.
         Northouse, P.G. Leadership: Theory and Practice. Fourth Edition. Sage Publications. Thousand Oaks, Ca. 2007.
         Pea, R. (1993). Practices of distributed intelligence and designs for education. In G. Salomon (Ed.), Distributed
                  cognitions:  Psychological and  educational  considerations    (pp. 47-87). Cambridge,    UK:   Cambridge
                  University Press.
         O'Donnell, A.M., Reeve, J. & Smith, J.K. (2007). Learning from Peers. In Educational Psychology: Reflection
                  for Action, (pp. 386 ­ 421). John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
         Scott, J. (2000). Social Network Analysis: A Handbook. 2nd Ed. Newberry Park, CA: Sage.
         Scribner, J.P., Sawyer, R.K., Watson, S.T., Myers, V.L. (2007). Teacher Teams and Distributed Leadership: A
                  Study of Group Discourse and Collaboration. Educational Administration Quarterly, 43, 1, 67-100.
         Spillane, J.P. (2006). Distributed Leadership. Jossey-Bass.
         Stahl, G. (2006). Group Cognition: Computer Support for Building Collaborative Knowledge. MIT Press.
         Wiggins, G. & McTighe, J. (2005). Understanding by design: Expanded Second Edition. Pearson Education:
                  Upper Saddle River, NJ.

       Acknowledgments
         This material was partly supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant No. 0107032 (ROLE). Any
         conclusions expressed are those of the author(s) and do not reflect views of the National Science Foundation.

1-1
