  Culturally Relevant Mathematics: Students' Cultural Engagement
                                                 with Statistics
                     Deborah A. Fields, Noel Enyedy, University of California, Los Angeles
                                 2323 Moore Hall 95121, Los Angeles, CA 90095
                                Email: stareyes@gmail.com, enyedy@gseis.ucla.edu

         Abstract:   This  poster  reports on    the results of  a  culturally relevant   mathematics   unit, the
         Community Mapping Project (CMP), where urban students learned statistics by producing and
         analyzing maps of their own community using Geographic Information Systems (GIS). In this
         poster we show how three aspects of culturally relevant pedagogy, familiarity of context and
         authentic   purpose,  and  informal   linguistic competencies     succeeded  in   engaging   youth   at a
         crucial point of their statistics research project, choosing a research question.

Background
         The mathematics education community has begun to place an increased emphasis on the ways in which
we can improve the achievement of students who have been underserved by our educational system due to class-
and  race-based   geospatial   polarization.   One   proposal   has  been  to  teach  with  a  more   culturally   relevant
pedagogy, which aims at fostering students' sense of community membership and pride, engaging students to
use their academic skills to critique social inequities, and providing ways to succeed academically that preserve
students' cultural integrity   (Ladson-Billings,     1995).  To  this  end we   designed   a  mathematical    intervention
intended  to  engage   students  in  statistical analysis   of  data  layered  onto  maps   of  their local   geographical
community. Following Cobb and Moses (2001), familiarity with the mathematized spaces was expected to both
engage them in research projects and provide resources for the construction of meaning by allowing students to
draw  on  their  cultural experiences   and    knowledge    to  interpret the  statistics and  displays their    classmates
produced. In designing the unit, we theorized that three aspects of culturally relevant pedagogy would facilitate
students' engagement     with  the statistical research   projects  in which   they  engaged:   1) the familiarity   of  the
context of   the mathematical    problem,    which   was   borrowed    from   the students'   own  communities,      2)  the
emotional charge and authentic purpose from attempting to solve real social justice problems facing their own
community, and 3) building on informal, linguistic competencies that these students already possess. The main
questions  of this poster  concern   what    aspects  of  culturally  relevant pedagogy     embodied   in   the  CMP    unit
succeeded in engaging students in mathematical analysis of data.

Study Design and Methods
         The  Community      Mapping    Project    (CMP)    was  a  curricular intervention   where   two   seventh-grade
mathematics   classrooms   of  urban students    learned  statistics  by  producing  and   analyzing  maps    of their  own
community    using Geographic    Information     Systems  (GIS)  and   Tinker  Plots, to  examine   social  justice  issues.
After an introduction to the GIS software (MyWorld), students worked in small groups of 2-3 students to create
a research question, choose and analyze relevant data, and present their findings to their peers in class. The
study was  carried   out  in a  Los  Angeles     middle  school  with  a  diverse  student  body   (46%   Hispanic,    35%
Caucasian, 12% African American, and 5% Asian and/or Pacific Islander), and 41% of the students received
free or reduced price lunches. Two seventh grade classrooms, with a total of 47 students engaged in the CMP
unit for six weeks. For the larger project we collected interview, pre-/post-test, and video data, the latter of
which is the focus of this poster. All whole class activities and four small groups selected by the teacher to be
case studies were videotaped during their work on the project. All videos were logged and from these logs we
looked for moments when students were engaged with the data and making meaning from the project. These
`moments   of   engagement'    were  transcribed     and  analyzed   using  grounded   theory   video  analysis    methods
described by Erickson and Shultz, 1997.

Findings
         While   the findings   presented  in  the full  poster will  encompass   all four  case study  groups,    here  we
illustrate our findings with a description of one small group at a crucial stage of their research project, choosing
a research   question, and   illustrate how    familiarity   of context,   authentic  purpose,  and   informal   linguistic
competencies    each played   a role in  engaging    the  students  in meaning-making      with statistics. The   group  of
African-American     and  Latina ethnicities,  included   Mark,    Jasmine, and   Lorena   (pseudonyms    are    use for all
names). They had two class periods to construct a research question that was answerable with the data available
to them. They began with a question about "why are there so many whites in Santa Monica" (one of their local
communities that is a relatively wealthy suburb of Los Angeles) and over the course of two days transitioned to

                                                                                                                               3-3
       whether there are more `rapes where there are more females'. While at first this dramatic transition between
       questions surprised us, analysis of the video shows the students' struggle to find a question that was relevant to
       their lives and positioned them in a non-threatening way.
                On the first day the group began with their question about "why are there so many whites in Santa
       Monica" and talked with several adults in the class (researchers and their teacher) who tried to help them create
       an answerable question and choose relevant data. In particular the teacher suggested high API scores (a relative
       measure of school quality) and distance to the beach as data relevant to their question. After this the group
       began to  voice  and finally articulate a  discomfort  with  the question because  of the way    it privileged white
       people. As Mark said, "I don't want to make it about why do white people blah blah blah [sic]." On the second
       day, the group left the question about white people behind and explored questions about parks and violence
       around Los Angeles County. They took turns clicking on different areas of the GIS map based on their ideas
       about which areas had more violence. Finally, they decided that studying the number of rapes in different areas
       would be interesting, and when a researcher said they needed to compare the number of rapes to something else,
       the group decided that number of females was a variable that might be related to the number of rapes.
                Throughout the two-day long search for a research question familiarity of context, authentic purpose,
       and informal linguistic competencies all played a role in the group's engagement. Familiarity of context came
       up frequently as students used their cultural and local knowledge to explore the data and suggest questions.
       First, the students drew on their own knowledge of a racial divide ­ that there are more whites in Santa Monica
       as opposed to other areas of Los Angeles ­ to suggest a `why' question for why this could be. Perhaps because
       they already thought that there was a divide, the why question was more relevant than asking whether there were
       more whites in Santa Monica. Second, the students used local knowledge about which areas of the county might
       have more violence to explore the GIS map, trying to figure out where various cities they knew of were on the
       map and whether there was indeed more violence there.
                Authentic purpose and emotional charge also played a role in the questions they generated and in the
       transition from their initial question of race to their final question about rapes and females. The group's initial
       question regarded a racial and economic divide in the local community that privileged white people. Once they
       decided not to pursue that question, they considered a range of questions that had personal implications for their
       lives. Mark suggested "what races go to parks" would be good because "you know some of my people don't
       want to go to the hood park because they're gonna get shot up." Not long after, Jasmine, the quietest member of
       the group interjected a rare suggestion, gangs, saying, "I'm a little gangbanger." Concern about violence was of
       daily relevance because of where parents would allow them to go and because of family members involved with
       gangs. Their final research question about rapes and females seems to have come about in part due to a concern
       about violence and as a way to produce shock value in the classroom, "We need something that's really good."
                Finally, the process of building a research question built on students' informal, linguistic competencies,
       allowing them to use everyday language in phrasing their questions. One linguistic area of struggle was figuring
       out how to make a question that could be answered with the data available. Informal patterns of argumentation
       do not necessarily limit one to considering only `provable' claims or questions.    However, this is an important
       aspect of mathematical arguments.       In this case, we argue that the negotiation and interplay between short,
       informal arguments that students brought to the table and the more formal, research questions introduced by the
       teacher and the researchers, both shaped the students final choice and contributed to the students' engagement
       with the project. Notably, after one researcher queried the group regarding this (" Is that a question you think
       you can   answer  with  the  data? Cause   it's a why  question.")  the group  took up  this  challenge  and   when
       evaluating various  questions  started  asking  each  other  and other adults, "But how   can  we   prove it   on the
       computer?"

      References
       Erickson,  F., &  Shultz J., (1997). "When   is   a context? Some  issues  and  methods   in the analysis of   social
                competence." In M. Cole, Y. Engestrom, & O. Vasquez (eds.), Mind, culture, and activity: Seminal
                papers   from the   laboratory of comparative   human    cognition, (pp. 22-31). Cambridge:    Cambridge
                University Press.
       Ladson-Billings, G. (1995). Toward a theory of culturally relevant pedagogy. American Education Research
                Journal, 35(465-491).
       Moses, R. P. & Cobb, C.E. (2001). Radical equations: Civil rights from Mississippi to the Algebra Project.
                Boston, MA: Beacon Press.

3-3
