      The Modality Effect in Multimedia Learning: Theoretical and
                                      Empirical Limitations
           Anne Schueler, Katharina Scheiter, University of Tuebingen, Konrad-Adenauer-Str. 40,
                                           72072 Tuebingen, Germany,
                         Email: a.schueler@iwm-kmrc.de, k.scheiter@iwm-kmrc.de,
                Peter Gerjets, Knowledge Media Research Center, Konrad-Adenauer-Str. 40,
                            72072 Tuebingen, Germany, p.gerjets@iwm-kmrc.de
                            Ralf Rummer, Saarland University, Postfach 151150,
                       66041 Saarbruecken, Germany, r.rummer@mx.uni-saarland.de

        Abstract: Numerous studies in the field of multimedia learning have confirmed the modality
        principle, which claims  that the   presentation of  pictures with   auditory texts leads to better
        learning outcomes than the presentation of pictures with visual text. However, there are still
        some   doubts concerning   the theoretical   explanation    and  the boundary   conditions   of  the
        modality principle. An overview is given with regard to these two points. Furthermore, two
        experiments are reported, which aimed at clarifying the theoretical explanation (Experiment 1)
        and the   boundary  conditions     of the modality   effect (Experiment   2).  Experiment    1  was
        conducted to test whether the modality effect occurs irrespective of the temporal contiguity of
        text and pictures. In Experiment 2, it was investigated, if the modality principle also holds for
        longer, complex texts and if the time available for information processing acts as a moderating
        variable.

Introduction
        In the research on multimedia learning, there have been several recommendations on how to present
text and pictures to learners to support a deeper understanding of the presented topic (Mayer, 2001; Sweller, van
Merriënboer, & Paas, 1999). According to one of these recommendations, the so called modality principle, text
should be presented spoken (auditory) instead of written (visual) to learners (Mayer, 2001). The superiority of
pictures with auditory text over pictures with visual text has been confirmed in numerous empirical studies,
which used different measurements and different topics. An overview of the various studies is given by Ginns
(2005) in his meta-analysis. He concludes that "across a broad range of instructional materials, age groups and
outcomes, students who learned from instructional materials using graphics with spoken text outperformed those
who learned from a graphics with printed text" (Ginns, 2005, p. 326). The overall weighted mean effect size of
effects was moderate to large, which also confirms the significance of the modality principle for the design of
multimedia material.  Thus, it seems  as   if the modality  principle is one  of the  best  confirmed   principles in
multimedia learning. However, there are at least two aspects, which lead to criticism. The first concerns the
theoretical explanation of the principle; the second concerns its boundary conditions, because ­ as will be shown
later ­ under certain conditions the modality effect could not be found. Therefore, in the current paper we want
to consider these two points of criticism.

Theoretical Explanations of the Modality Effect
        The modality effect is often explained against the background of the Cognitive Theory of Multimedia
Learning (Mayer, 2001). According to this theory, the cognitive system consists of two channels, which are both
limited in capacity. In the initial stage of processing in working memory, one of these channels is assumed to
handle all auditory material, that is, auditory text, whereas the other channel is assumed to deal with all visual
material, that is, visual text and pictures. Because of the limited capacity of the channels, the use of only one
channel when processing visual text and pictures can lead to an overload of this channel. On the other hand,
using two channels when processing auditory text and pictures is assumed to augment the working memory
capacity available and therefore, yields performance. In the following, this explanation for the modality effect
will be called the modality-specific  explanation.   In  the current  paper,  we will  not  discuss  the conceptual
problems associated with the use of Baddeley's model of working memory (Baddeley, 1992) as a theoretical
foundation for the aforementioned explanation. These problems have been elaborated elsewhere (see Rummer,
Schweppe, Scheiter, & Gerjets, in press).
        An alternative explanation for the modality effect might be the fact that auditory text and picture can be
perceived simultaneously, whereas in the case of visual text and picture learners can only process one source of
information at a given point in time. Thus, learners have to look at the picture and then to read the text or vice
versa. Sweller et al. (1999) call such a situation a split attention situation, because the learners have to split their
attention at least between two sources of information. Mayer (2001) distinguishes two types of split attention: a

                                                                                                                           2-
         spatial  split attention    and a  temporal     split attention. The   corresponding     principles    are the   spatial  contiguity
         principle and the temporal contiguity principle. The spatial contiguity principle refers to visual text and states
         that students learn better, when corresponding visual text and pictures are presented spatially integrated instead
         of spatially separated. This is the case, because when presenting text and picture close to each other the learners
         do not to have to search for the corresponding pictorial and verbal information, which leads to more cognitive
         capacity being available for other cognitive processes. The temporal contiguity principle refers to auditory text
         only and states that students learn better, when corresponding auditory text and pictures are presented near in
         time (simultaneously) than far away in time (successively). This is the case, because according to Mayer (2001)
         the probability of making mental connections between the verbal and the pictorial information is enhanced, if
         both  are represented       in the cognitive    system    at the same    time.  With   a successive    presentation,      words  and
         pictures are not necessarily hold active in parallel in working memory; thus, the learners have to reconstruct the
         respective   information.      These   reconstruction    processes   can  impose     cognitive   load.  Furthermore,      important
         aspects  of  one     source of  information     may   be  forgotten   when   perceiving    the  other  source    of  information   ­
         thereby, resulting in lower learning outcomes.
                   In the case of presenting visual text and picture, full spatial contiguity and full temporal contiguity are
         never given. Spatial contiguity is absent, because the learners have to switch between visual text and picture,
         even  if the   text  is integrated  in  the   picture.   For the same    reason   temporal   contiguity    is absent,  because   the
         learners can never perceive both sources of information simultaneously. Thus, it may be this lack of spatial and
         temporal contiguity that causes the modality effect. Accordingly, the modality effect might be explained solely
         by the fact that auditory text establishes contiguity rather than by assuming that it makes available cognitive
         processing resources. However, Mayer rejected this alternative explanation for the modality effect due to the
         results of an experiment, which will be described below.

        Empirical Evidence: Modality or Lack of Contiguity?
                   A    first study   that  aimed    at  differentiating  between     modality    and   lack  of contiguity      as  possible
         explanations    for   the   modality    effect   is reported    by  Moreno    and    Mayer     (1999).  In    Experiment    1,   they
         investigated whether the modality effect can be traced back to the fact that auditory text provides access to an
         additional cognitive resource (i.e., modality-specific explanation) or that learners need to split visual attention in
         the case  of   written    test  (i.e., spatial  contiguity    explanation).   If  the  first explanation      was   true, a   general
         superiority of auditory text over visual text, regardless of the proximity of the visual text to the picture, should
         be  observable.  If   the   second  explanation     was   true, the  modality    effect  should  diminish     if the   visual text is
         integrated rather than spatially separated from the picture, because with integrated visual text less visual search
         is necessary. Moreno and Mayer found a general superiority of auditory text, thereby apparently confirming the
         modality-specific     explanation,     but, unfortunately,    do   not report    the comparison     between      auditory   text and
         integrated   visual   text. Thus,  it  is still possible  that  there  is a  smaller  modality   effect    or even   no   significant
         difference   between     these   two   conditions,    which    would   indicate   that  the    modality effect    does    not  occur
         irrespective of spatial contiguity (see Rummer et al., in press). In Experiment 2, Moreno and Mayer (1999)
         investigated   whether    the   modality    effect  can  be   traced back    to the  modality-specific     explanation     or to the
         temporal contiguity explanation, that is, to the fact that only with auditory text a simultaneous processing of
         verbal and pictorial information is possible. If the modality-specific explanation was true, a general superiority
         of auditory text is expected, irrespective of the temporal contiguity of auditory text and picture. If the temporal
         contiguity explanation was true, a superiority of auditory text is expected only if temporal contiguity is given
         with  the presentation      of  auditory  text   and  picture,  but  not  if no   temporal   contiguity    is given.   The    authors
         presented   text (auditory      or visual)    sequentially   before   or  subsequent    to   a corresponding      picture,  or   they
         presented text simultaneously with the picture. In case of a simultaneous presentation, only auditory text should
         yield a  temporal     contiguous   presentation.      In case of a   sequential   presentation,  there  should      be no  temporal
         contiguity, neither in the condition with auditory nor in the condition with visual text. Thus, "if the advantage of
         narration over on-screen text resides in a modality principle, then the advantage for auditory-visual presentations
         should   not   disappear    when   they   are made    sequential"  (Moreno      & Mayer,     1999,  p. 360).   In   other words:   A
         modality effect for the sequential groups would indicate that there is something beyond temporal contiguity,
         namely, enhanced resources made available by using auditory text. The results seem to support the modality-
         specific explanation: Learners with auditory text and picture showed superior performance than learners with
         visual text and picture, both with simultaneous and sequential presentation. However, a closer look at the results
         shows that there is one problem with the data: The authors found no temporal contiguity effect for the two
         auditory  groups,     which    means    that    learners  with  sequential   presentation      were as  good     as  learners    with
         simultaneous presentation. One explanation might be the chosen material: The authors presented only a short
         text segment to the learners, then presented the corresponding part of the animation, then presented the next text
         segment   and   so   on.  With   this  kind   of presentation    usually  no    temporal   contiguity  effect    is found   (see  for
         example Mayer, Moreno, Boire & Vagge, 1999). Mayer (2001) explains the absence of a temporal contiguity
         effect with short auditory text segments as follows: The mental integration of text and picture is not affected,

2-2
because  related   information   is presented    with a very  short  time-lag.   This  means  that   the information   is   still
available in working memory, when the related information enters. Therefore, in the case of short text segments,
temporal  contiguity   might   be   given  for   learners with  auditory  text,  even   if text and    picture  are presented
sequentially. Thus,    the chosen     material   was  inappropriate   to  distinguish   between   the   temporal    contiguity
explanation  and   the modality-specific    explanation,   because    in both  auditory  groups   temporal    contiguity    was
established,  which  leads    in turn  to better  performance     of  the auditory   groups.  However,     with  longer     text
segments also the auditory group with sequential presentation should suffer from a lack of temporal contiguity,
because like learners with visual text they will then have to reconstruct the respective information. If both the
auditory as well as the visual condition suffer from a lack of temporal contiguity in similar ways, according to
the temporal contiguity explanation no difference is expected between the two sequential groups with auditory
and  visual  text. There   are   two  studies, which    seem   to confirm    the assumption     that with longer    texts   and
sequential  presentation   the   modality effect    disappears: Tiene    (2000)  compared   simultaneous     with   sequential
presentation  and   varied  the  modality     of text presentation.   He   found  a    modality  effect  with   simultaneous
presentation, but not with sequential presentation. Unfortunately, the data for temporal contiguity between the
two auditory groups are not reported. Baggett and Ehrenfeucht (1983) showed that in the case of sequential
presentation no modality effect occurred, that is, learners who read the text after or before they saw a movie,
scored even better in a post test than learners who heard the text. Additionally, they found a temporal contiguity
effect for auditory text, which confirms the assumption that temporal contiguity is the crucial aspect.

Experiment 1
         The purpose of this experiment was to confirm the assumption that the modality effect is a result of
absent  temporal   contiguity    with  visual  text and   not the result  of enhanced      capacity  with auditory   text.  By
varying on the one hand the contiguity of presentation and on the other hand the text modality, it is possible to
distinguish  between   the  temporal    contiguity   and  modality-specific    explanation:  According     to   the modality-
specific explanation, the modality effect should occur irrespective of whether the presentation is simultaneous or
sequential.  According     to  the   temporal    contiguity   explanation  a   modality    effect   is expected     only  with
simultaneous presentation, but not with sequential presentation. To test these assumptions, an experiment was
conducted, where students learned about the development of tornados.

Method
Participants and Design
         Sixty-eight participants with different educational backgrounds participated in the study. Four of them
had to be excluded from the analysis because of extreme values in prior knowledge. The participants could
receive credit points for attendance. The remaining sixty-four participants (M = 24.06 years, SD = 6.43 years; 44
female vs. 20 male) were assigned randomly to one of four conditions, which resulted from a 2 x 2 Design, with
text modality   (auditory   vs.    visual text)  and   contiguity   of   presentation   (simultaneous    vs.   sequential)   as
independent variables.

Materials
         The material consisted of paper-pencil material and a computerized learning environment. The paper-
pencil  material   comprised     a  personal   questionnaire,   a  questionnaire   measuring     prior   knowledge,    and   a
questionnaire which measured learning outcomes by recall (verbal and pictorial) and transfer items.
         The personal questionnaire required the participants to state data about their age, gender, profession,
their last grade in geography and physics and their interest in weather phenomena. The prior knowledge test
consisted of six multiple choice items, where the correct answer had to be chosen from four alternatives. For
every correct answer they got one point. The recall and transfer tests contained multiple choice items, open
questions, and pictorial items. Verbal recall was measured by 13 multiple choice questions, where the learners
had  to choose  the  correct   answer   from   four  possible  answers,   and  three   open questions    (e.g., "What    is the
difference between a funnel cloud and a tornado?"). For each correct answer the learners were assigned one
point. Pictorial recall was measured by four pictorial items: The learners were given a picture, in which they had
to draw  specific   aspects   concerning   the   development    of  a  tornado.  Two    independent    raters   evaluated   the
drawings with regard to several aspects; three points were the maximal score per picture. Disagreements were
resolved by consensus. Transfer was measured by two multiple choice items and two open questions. For each
correct answer the learners received one point. The time for responding to the tests was unlimited.
         The  computerized       learning environment     consisted  of  eight  static pictures and    related  German    texts
explaining  the development      of  a tornado.  Each   text  passage  consisted  of   approximately     three  sentences   per
picture. In the simultaneous conditions with auditory text, the learners heard the text when seeing the picture. In
the simultaneous condition with visual text, the text was presented below the picture (see Figure 1, part B). In
the sequential condition with auditory text, the learners first heard the auditory text while the screen remained
blank. Then the picture was presented. In the sequential condition with visual text, first the text was presented

                                                                                                                                    2-
         on a screen, than the picture was presented on a new screen (see Figure 1, part C). The presentation was system-
         paced and the available time was determined by the length of the narration. In the simultaneous groups the
         presentation lasted three minutes whereas in the sequential groups it lasted six minutes.

                                    A                                B

                                    C

              Figure 1. Frames selected from the presentation. A: Simultaneous presentation with auditory text. B:
                     Simultanous presentation with visual text. C: Sequential presentation with visual text.

        Procedure
                 Participants were tested individually. First, participants were given a short written instruction about the
         experiment. Second, they completed the personal questionnaire. Third, they completed the multiple choice test
         which assessed prior knowledge. Fourth, they learned about tornados in one of the four experimental conditions.
         Sixth, they answered the questionnaire, which measured recall and transfer performance. The experiment lasted
         about thirty minutes.

        Results
                 Two-factor    analysis   of variances were  conducted   for the independent   variables  with  modality  and
         temporal contiguity as the between subject factors. Table 1 shows the means and standard deviations for each
         group. Because    the control   variables did not affect learning outcome, no  analyses   of  covariance had   to be
         conducted.

         Table 1: Means and standard deviations (in parentheses) for the percentage performance in verbal recall,
         pictorial recall, and transfer as a function of contiguity of presentation and text modality.
                                  Simultaneous presentation                      Sequential presentation
                                  Auditory text            Visual Text           Auditory Text           Visual Text
          Verbal Recall           71.88 (15.31)            72.27 (10.94)         70.83 (16.14)           77.73 (17.53)
          Pictorial Recall        70.10 (20.16)            54.17 (21.94)         61.39 (17.07)           71.35 (11.06)
          Transfer                45.59 (29.63)            45.31 (26.17)         45.59 (29.63)           48.44 (17.00)

                 For recall    of verbal information,  neither the difference  between the visual  groups   and the  auditory
         groups (F < 1) nor the difference between the simultaneous groups and the sequential groups was significant (F
         < 1). Also the interaction between the two factors was not significant (F < 1). For recall of pictorial information
         no differences were      found, neither between   the visual  and the auditory groups  (F     < 1) nor between    the
         simultaneous and the sequential groups (F < 1). However the interaction between the two factors was significant
        (F(1,60) = 8.18, p = .01, partial K2 = 0.12). A Bonferroni posthoc analysis yielded a significant modality effect
        in the simultaneous condition (F(1,60) = 6.39, p = .01, partial K2 = 0.10), whereas in the sequential condition no
        modality effect appeared (F(1,60) = 2.35, p = .13, partial K2 = 0.04). Interestingly, within the visual group
         learners with sequential presentation outperformed those with simultaneous presentation (F(1,60) = 7.22, p =
        .01, partial K2 = 0.11), that is, an inverted temporal contiguity effect was found, whereas between the auditory
        groups no difference was found (F(1,60) = 1.85, p = .18, partial K2 = 0.03) For transfer, the ANOVAs showed
         no difference between the visual and the auditory groups (F < 1) or between the simultaneous and the sequential
         groups (F < 1), and also the interaction between the two factors was not significant (F < 1).

        Discussion

2-
         To   summarize,     there    was  no   main   effect   of  modality.    This  contradicts   the  modality-specific
explanation, according to which a general modality effect should have occurred for a simultaneous as well as for
a  sequential presentation.    Thus,   the results indicate  that  there is no   general advantage    of  using  an auditory
modality. Results from major interest are the interactions. According to the temporal contiguity explanation, a
modality effect in the simultaneous condition and no modality effect in the sequential condition were expected.
This  prediction  could  be  confirmed     for pictorial recall,  that is, with  simultaneous   presentation    learners with
auditory text scored higher than learners with visual text, whereas with sequential presentation there was no
difference between the two groups. At first view, it seems as if the temporal contiguity explanation could be
confirmed. However, there was no effect of temporal contiguity within the auditory groups, despite the fact that
the text segments had been rather long. This indicates that temporal contiguity did not influence the performance
within the auditory simultaneous group. Accordingly, the superiority of the auditory simultaneous group over
the   visual simultaneous    group    cannot   be  explained    with   temporal    contiguity.  Therefore,   it seems    more
reasonable   to refer to  the  spatial  contiguity    principle for explaining   the  result:  Whereas   with   simultaneous
presentation the learners with auditory text did not need to split their attention, learners with visual text had to
read the text and to look at the picture and to relate them. As this requires visual search processes, which the
group with auditory text did not have to undertake, the modality effect occurred. Within the sequential groups
no spatial split was given, which resulted in the same performance for learners with visual and auditory text.
Due   to the fact that with    verbal  recall  and transfer  no  interaction could   be  found,  it seems   as  if within   the
simultaneous groups, learners with visual text allocated more attention to the text than to the picture. This leads
to the following explanation of the found results: Although processing mainly the text, learners with visual text
and simultaneous presentation tried to refer to the picture. This led to worse processing of the picture, because
less  time was   allocated  to   it, and furthermore,    it led to  enhanced    cognitive  load because     of  visual search
processes. This assumption might explain, why with regard to pictorial items a modality effect appeared, but not
with regard to verbal items. It could also explain the found inverted temporal contiguity effect for visual text
with  regard  to  pictorial recall,   because  with   sequential  presentation   enough   time  could    be allocated   to  the
picture, resulting in better performance. That is, despite the potential drawbacks associated with a sequential
processing of text and pictures, learners with written text actually benefited from a sequential presentation and
the additional processing time, because it allowed for a more thorough processing of the picture and potentially
the text as well. On the other hand, learners with auditory text did not show any better learning outcomes, when
more time was available. Thus, one boundary condition for the modality effect might be the available time for
processing the material. Why this might be the case will be discussed in the next section.

Time as a Boundary Condition of the Modality Effect
         Besides the theoretical problems of the explanation of the modality effect, it remains the question under
what conditions the modality effect appears. Although the modality principle has been replicated in a number of
laboratory   studies  there are   some     doubts, if  the  recommendation      to use  auditory    text with   picture  is as
universally valid as has been suggested. In fact, there are studies which showed that the modality effect did not
arise under certain conditions. For example, with increasing expertise of the learner, with very complex pictorial
material or with self pacing (for an overview see Ginns, 2005) the auditory text was shown to be no longer
superior to visual text.
         Further doubts concerning the validity of modality principle come from text comprehension research,
where visual and auditory texts without pictures are compared. From this research area, it is even known that
visual text may lead to better recall of the presented information than auditory text (e.g., Furnham, 2001). This
superiority of visual over auditory text is explained by the permanence of visual text. Whereas auditory text is
transient and the information is only available at one point in time, with visual text several processing strategies
can be implemented. First, the reader can slow down the reading rate (Byrne & Curtis, 2000), second, s/he can
read through sections of the text several times (e.g., Furnham, de Siena, & Gunter, 2002) and third, s/he can skip
text passages which are easy or not relevant to the topic (Bazerman, 1985). Thus, with visual text there are
several processing strategies which are not given with auditory text. These strategies can explain the superiority
of visual text as it was found in text comprehension research. Especially with more complex texts this strategies
should be helpful, because the learners can adapt the processing of the text to their own cognitive prerequisites.
However, under some conditions the superiority of visual text over auditory text was not found. First, when
presenting   very easy   texts there   was  no difference    between   auditory  and  visual   text (Müsseler,   Rickheit,  &
Strohner, 1985). Second, when presenting the visual text in single sentences instead of longer text passages there
was also no difference between auditory and visual text (Kintsch, Kozminsky, Streby, McKoon, & Keenan,
1975). Third, with high speed of presentation even a superiority of auditory text was found (Sannomiya, 1981).
It is important   to note   that obviously    all of  these  moderating    variables  have an   influence   on  whether    text
processing strategies can and need to be applied.
         Regarding    the   studies   conducted    in multimedia    research  it appears   that often    short  and not  very
complex texts have been used and that the time for presentation was constrained by the duration of the auditory

                                                                                                                                  2-
         condition. For example, Moreno and Mayer (1999) presented one or two visual sentences together with the
         corresponding  parts of  the animation   and   the available time was  determined by  the length of  the auditory
         condition.  Only  a  few  studies presented    longer text materials,  for example, the studies  of  Baggett   and
         Ehrenfeucht (1983) and Tiene (2000). As just mentioned, in these studies no modality effect was found under
         sequential presentation (Tiene, 2000) or the modality effect was even inverted (Baggett & Ehrenfeucht, 1983).
         Beside the fact that temporal contiguity was missing, it might be that time plays a crucial role: Because the
         learners had only to perceive the text and not to process the picture simultaneously, with visual text they had
         more time to apply text processing strategies which in turn leads to better performance when reading the text
         than when listening to the text. Similar results were found by Tabbers (2002): When the learners had control
         over the pace  of instruction, learners with   visual text and picture showed  higher transfer  performance    than
         learners with auditory text and picture. Thus there is some evidence that with more time available and longer
         texts the modality effect cannot be confirmed.
                  Because of the empirical findings concerning text comprehension research and studies, in which longer
         texts were used, it is assumed that the modality principle is not as valid as numerous studies seem to suggest.
         Instead, no modality effect is expected, when presenting the learners with longer, complex texts, if they have the
         possibility to control  the  pace of presentation.    On the  other hand,  a modality effect is  expected,  if the
         presentation is system-paced, that is, restricted in time. This is the case, because there is a smaller change that
         text processing strategies can be applied to visual text. Furthermore, spatial split attention may be more harmful,
         since pictorial and verbal information cannot be reviewed.

        Experiment 2
                  The purpose of this experiment was to examine, how with longer, complex texts, text modality and
         pacing affect learning outcome. The material consisted of animations and texts that conveyed information about
         the reproduction of cells, namely mitosis.

        Participants and Design
                  Eighty-one  students  from  the University   of   Tuebingen, Germany,  participated in  the study. They
         received ten euros as compensation. Seven participants had to be excluded, because they studied a biological
         major. The remaining seventy-four participants (M = 24.09 years, SD = 4.33 years; 42 female, 29 male (with
         regard to gender, data for three persons are missing)) were assigned randomly to one of four conditions within a
         2 x  2 Design,  with text modality   (auditory  vs. visual text) and  pacing (system-paced vs.  learner-paced)  as
         independent variables.

        Material
                  The material consisted of paper-pencil material and a computerized learning environment, in which the
         independent variables were varied. The paper-pencil material consisted of a demographics questionnaire, a prior
         knowledge test and a recall and transfer test.
                  The questionnaire required the participants to state data about their major, the age, the gender, the
         number of semesters, the last school grade in German and the last school grade in mathematics. It also contained
         two questions which measured experience with biology and one question which measured time spend at the
         computer per week. Verbal recall was measured by one open question and 12 multiple choice questions. The
         open question asked the learners to write down all they could remember about the process of mitosis. The time
         was limited to ten minutes. Two independent scorers determined the recall score. Disagreements were resolved
         by consensus. To answer the multiple choice recall questions the learners had to choose the right answer from
         four alternatives. There was no time limitation. For each correct answer learners got one point. Transfer was
         measured by nine open questions. Each item was typed on a separate sheet. The transfer items asked the learners
         for example: "Suppose that when the nuclear envelope fragments, the pieces of the nuclear envelope are ejected
         from the cell. Would that affect the process of mitosis?". As with recall, two independent scorers determined the
         transfer score, disagreements were resolved by consensus. The time for responding to the transfer items was
         three minutes per item.
                  The computerized learning environment consisted of six animations and related German texts, which
         explained the process of mitosis. Each text passage consisted of approximately six sentences per picture. In the
         conditions with auditory text the learners heard the text while the animation was presented on the screen. In the
         conditions with visual text the text was presented on the computer screen below the animation. Self pacing was
         operationalized by providing a "back" and a "forward" button for each of the six animations. When clicking the
         "back" button, the animation and the corresponding texts were displayed again. When clicking the "forward"
         button the next animation together with text was presented. In the system-paced condition the next animation
         started automatically after some seconds, thus the learners had no opportunity to interact with the environment.
         Examples of the material are given in Figure 2.

2-
 Figure 2. Frames selected from the learning environment. Left: animation with visual text. Middle: animation
                   with auditory text. Right: navigation buttons in the learner-paced condition.

Procedure
         Participants were tested individually. First, participants were given a short written instruction about the
experiment. Second, they completed the personal questionnaire. Third, the learning environment was presented.
Fourth, participants had to answer the recall items and seven transfer items. Fifth, they answered the multiple
choice questions. Sixth, they were given the final two transfer questions. The experiment lasted approximately
one hour.

Results
         Two-factor analysis of variances were conducted, with modality and pacing as the between subject
factors. Table 2 shows the means and standard deviations for each group. Because the control variables did not
affect learning outcome, no analyses of covariance had to be conducted.

Table 2: Means and standard deviations (in parentheses) for the percentage performance in recall and transfer as
a function of text modality and pacing.
                         System-paced                                       Learner-paced
                         Auditory text                Visual Text           Auditory Text           Visual Text
Recall                   53.51 (17.42)                47.06 (19.53)         43.23 (12.63)           47.69 (22.65)
(multiple choice)
Recall                   28.03 (13.26)                21.93 (12.41)         29.39 (14.08)           25.73 (13.56)
(open question)
Transfer                 41.88 (19.23)                34.72 (15.52)         38.83 (17.69)           36.69 (17.99)

         For the multiple choice recall items, the ANOVA showed neither a significant difference between the
visual and the auditory groups (F < 1), nor a significant difference between the system-paced and the learner-
paced groups (F(1,66) = 1.18, p = .28, partial K2 = 0.02). Furthermore, the interaction between the two factors
was  not  significant  (F(1,66) = 1.51,   p = .22,    partial K2 =   0.02). For   recall measured   by  the open item   no
significant main effects appeared, neither between the visual and the auditory groups (F(1,70) = 2.47, p = .12,
partial K2 = 0.03) nor between the system-paced and the learner-paced groups (F < 1). The interaction between
the two factors was also not significant (F < 1) Also for transfer the ANOVA showed no significant difference
between the visual and the auditory groups (F(1,70) = 1.27, p = .26, partial K2 = 0.02) or between the system-
paced and the learner-paced groups (F < 1), nor the interaction was significant (F < 1).

Discussion
         The results of the study confirm the assumption that the modality principle is not as valid as it seems to
be,  because neither   a main   effect for  modality   nor    an interaction  between    modality   and pacing   could  be
observed. This indicates that also with system-paced presentation no modality effect occurred. These results are
somewhat disappointing, as we expected that with a system-paced presentation learners with visual text and
picture had no opportunity to apply sophisticated reading strategies and also suffer from split attention, which
should lead  to  worse   performance    in  comparison    with   auditory   text. The    absent interaction between   text
modality and pacing and the absent main effect for pacing indicate that neither for learners with auditory text
nor learners with visual text pacing had a significant influence. Thus, there are different explanations for these
findings: First, with longer and complex texts the modality principle even with a system-paced presentation does
not  hold, because the   auditory text  is  difficult to process   due to   its transientness   and therefore  leads to an
reduction in performance similar to the spatial split attention with visual text. Second, even if learners with
visual text and self pacing have the opportunity to apply text processing strategies, it does not necessarily mean
that they  will really use it. Third,  it might also   be that   the material   does not  fit the criteria for multimedia
material; rather, text and picture may have been redundant, so that one source of information is sufficient to

                                                                                                                             2-
         answer the test items (see Sweller et al., 1998). Currently, we are investigating the last aspect by comparing two
         groups with pictures with two groups without pictures.

       General Discussion
                 To summarize, two questions arise with regard to the modality effect: What causes the modality effect
         and under what conditions does the modality effect appear? The first question is still difficult to answer. We
         reported a study in which we tried to differentiate between the temporal contiguity and the modality-specific
         explanation. The results do not confirm any of the two explanations. An alternative explanation might be absent
         spatial contiguity with visual text and picture. More research is needed with regard to this aspect. The second
         question asked under what conditions a modality effect arises. We argued that with longer and complex texts
         and more time on task available the modality effect should disappear, because the opportunity to apply text
         processing strategies may counteract other potential drawbacks of visual text. This assumption currently could
         not be confirmed. Moreover, also with restricted time on task (i.e., system paced condition) no modality effect
         was found. It remains unclear, if the modality effect really does not appear with longer and complex texts or if
         the material has been inappropriate to find a modality effect.
                 The   results are somewhat    disappointing,  because   they give     no clear   response to  our   questions.
         However, they demonstrate that a simple principle like "always present pictures with auditory text" is not valid.
         Therefore, more research is needed, if we want to shed light on the theoretical explanation and the boundary
         conditions of the modality effect.

       References
         Baddeley, A. D. (1992). Working memory. Science, 255, 556-559.
         Baggett, P., & Ehrenfeucht, A. (1983). Encoding and retaining information in the visuals and verbals of an
                 educational movie. Educational Communications and Technology Journal, 31, 23-32.
         Bazerman, C. (1985). Physicists reading physics: Schema laden purposes and purpose laden schema. Written
                 Communication, 2, 3-24.
         Byrne, M., & Curtis, R. (2000). Designing health communication: Testing the explanations for the impact of
                 communication medium on effectiveness. British Journal of Health Psychology, 5, 189- 199.
         Furnham, A. (2001). Remembering stories as a function of the medium of presentation. Psychological Reports,
                 89, 483-486.
         Furnham, A., de Siena, S., & Gunter, B. (2002). Children's and adults recall of children's news stories in both
                 print and audio-visual presentation modalities. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 16, 191-210.
         Ginns, P. (2005). Meta-analysis of the modality effect. Learning & Instruction, 15, 313-331.
         Kintsch, W., Kozminsky, E., Streby, J. W., McKoon, G., & Keenan, J. (1975). Comprehension and recall of text
                 as a function of content variables. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 14, 196-214.
         Mayer, R. E. (2001). Multimedia learning. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
         Mayer, R. E., Moreno, R., Boire, M., & Vagge, S. (1999). Maximizing constructivist learning from multimedia
                 communications by minimizing cognitive load. Journal of Educational Psychology, 91, 638-643.
         Moreno,  R.,  & Mayer,  R. E.  (1999).  Cognitive principles   of multimedia    learning: The role   of modality   and
                 contiguity. Journal of Educational Psychology, 91, 358-368.
         Müsseler, J., Rickheit, G., & Strohner, H. (1985). Influences of modality, text difficulty and processing control
                 on inferences in text processing. In G. Rickheit & H. Strohner (Eds.), Inferences in text processing (S.
                 247-265). Amsterdam: North-Holland.
         Rummer,   R., Schweppe,   J., Scheiter, K., &  Gerjets, P.  (in   press). Lernen  mit    Multimedia:  Die  kognitiven
                 Grundlagen des Modalitätseffekts. Psychologische Rundschau.
         Sannomiya,   M. (1981).  The  modality  effect on text  processing  as    a function of  presentation rate. Japanese
                 Journal of Psychonomic Science, 3, 17-20.
         Tabbers, H. K. (2002). The modality of text in multimedia instructions - refining the design guidelines. Doctoral
                 Dissertation, Open University of the Netherlands, Heerlen.
         Tiene, D. (2000).  Sensory    mode  and  information  load:  Examining      the  effects of timing on   multisensory
                 processing. International Journal of Instructional Media, 27, 183- 197.
         Sweller, J., van Merriënboer, J. J. G., & Paas, F. G. W. C. (1998). Cognitive architecture and instructional
                 design. Educational Psychology Review, 10, 251-296.

       Acknowledgments
         The research  reported in this paper  was   supported  by the  Deutsche     Forschungsgemeinschaft      as part of the
         research group "Orchestrating Computer-supported Processes of Learning and Instruction".

2-
