        Using Construct-Centered Design to Align Curriculum, Instruction,
                       and Assessment Development in Emerging Science
                 Members of the National Center for Learning and Teaching in Nanoscale Science and Engineering
              Northwestern University, Evanston, IL 60208 USA, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109 USA,
           Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, 47907 USA, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL, 60607 USA,
                                        University of Texas at El Paso, El Paso, TX 79934 USA
                                                      Email: nclt@northwestern.edu

                   Abstract:    The  National   Center  for Learning     and Teaching   in Nanoscale  Science   and
                   Engineering was established to conduct research on how to effectively introduce emergent
                   sciences into K-16 classrooms, using nanoscale science and engineering (NSE) as an example.
                   One of the NCLT's main goals is to develop an approach to map out the knowledge domains
                   (constructs) associated with NSE and use these domains to guide learning research and the
                   development of instructional materials, assessment, and teacher education. These efforts have
                   been aligned through the development and institution of Construct-Centered Design (CCD), a
                   principled   process that is based  largely  on evidence-centered  assessment  design   (Mislevy,
                   Steinberg,   Almond,    Haertel, &  Penuel,  2003)    and learning goal-driven   design (Krajcik,
                   McNeill & Reiser, 2007). This poster session provides an overview of the CCD process and
                   illustrates how the use of this process has afforded alignment of learning research with the
                   development of instructional materials and assessments.

         Introduction
                    Research is rapidly developing strategies for creating new products and technologies by controlling
          matter at the nanoscale. The new information and technologies resulting from this research will have broad
          societal implications, and will be realized in the fields of health care, the sustainability of agriculture, food,
          water, energy, environment, and beyond. The U.S. federal government has prioritized nanoscale science and
          engineering (NSE) education in an effort to meet the predicted demand for skilled workers in this emerging
          field. The National    Center for  Learning  and  Teaching in  Nanoscale    Science and Engineering   (NCLT)   was
          established in 2004 by the National Science Foundation in order to conduct research and development on how to
          effectively introduce emergent sciences into K-16 classrooms, using NSE as an example.
                   One    of the primary   goals of   the NCLT   is to   develop a  Center-wide   approach  for defining the
          knowledge domains (constructs) associated with NSE. Having a set of NSE constructs that are clearly defined
          and developed helps ensure that all research and development efforts are aligned. The well-defined constructs
          drive the development of assessments embodying the desired student learning outcomes that, in turn, drive the
          development  of    instructional materials, resources and teacher   education aimed  at achieving  these outcomes
          (Wiggins & McTighe, 1998). If rationally connected and coherent within and across grades, materials that are
          developed using these constructs can help students build a thorough understanding of the relevant scientific
          concepts and to see the importance of NSE in their lives (Stevens, Sutherland, Schank & Krajcik, 2007).
                   To guide learning research, and the development of associated instructional materials, assessment, and
          teacher education in a consistent, principled way, NCLT researchers developed a process consistent with the
          contemporary literature on designing and constructing valid assessments (Pellegrino, Chudowsky, & Glaser,
          2001; Mislevy, et al., 2003) and instructional materials (Wiggins & McTighe, 1998; Gagné, Wager, Golas, &
          Keller, 2005). This process combines aspects of learning-goal-driven design (Krajcik et al., 2007) and evidence-
          centered assessment design (Mislevy et al., 2003). Because the foundation of the process lies in the definition
          and explicit specification of content that lies within NSE constructs, the process is termed construct-centered
          design (CCD).

         Session Format
                   In this poster session, we will present the NSE constructs, the CCD process, and examples of how these
          are guiding work throughout the NCLT. The first poster describes the constructs for NSE that guide the work of
          the NCLT   and   how   they were   defined. The  second  poster provides  a detailed description  of the construct-
          centered design process itself. The remaining posters illustrate the application of CCD to learning research or
          the design of assessment or instructional materials in areas of NSE defined by the constructs.
                   The definition and elaboration of the constructs is crucial for organizing and aligning the efforts of a
          large and diverse group of researchers working at multiple institutions to study and improve student learning,
          instruction, and assessment of concepts important to NSE. This is illustrated by the three posters on size and
          scale  (Posters 3,  4  and  5).  The  NSE   construct of  size and  scale includes  ideas related to  defining and

3-3
representing size through the use of measurement units, scales or "worlds" (e.g., microscale or microworld),
relative size, and proportionality. Poster 3 examines undergraduates' understanding of scale, in particular how
they represent the size of objects (10-10 ­ 102 m in size) and the relationships between those sizes. Poster 4
focuses on the development of a learning progression that describes how students' knowledge of size and scale
grows richer and more connected over time. Findings from this study led researchers to develop a technology
tool that employs both audio and visual representations to support student learning about relative size (Poster 5),
The researchers used the thorough definition of size and scale in order to explore complementary aspects of this
construct, allowing effective collaboration Likewise, having well-defined constructs can help researchers focus
on science content accessible to a certain grade level. For example, Posters 6 and 7 focus on aspects of the NSE
constructs that are accessible for middle school students. Poster 6 explores how the manner in which domain-
specific language is introduced affects the development of conceptual understanding of a complex idea such as
self-assembly. The study described in Poster 7 provides a characterization of student understanding of the effect
of changes in the surface area-to-volume ratio on the properties of matter. The final Poster (#8) directly applies
the CCD process to the full set of NSE constructs. This work elaborates a protocol for developing assessment
items for concept inventories for the NSE constructs.

Poster      1:  Defining      the     Construct:     The    Big    Ideas     of   Nanoscale         Science    and
Engineering

                         Shawn Y. Stevens and Joseph S. Krajcik, University of Michigan

         Every scientific domain is built upon a set of core principles or "big ideas", the understanding of which
is essential to the domain. Alone or in combination, these core concepts help shape the development of a field,
explain phenomena relevant to a field, and contribute to broader conceptual understanding by connecting the
field to prior   foundational   ideas   and  establishing new   foundations.  They     are critical  because  deeper
understanding depends on these basic ideas as the building blocks for future science understanding. Due to the
novelty of the field, core principles for NSE education had not been previously formulated.
         In response to this need, a series of national workshops was held to address the challenges of bringing
emerging science into the classroom. In June, 2006, the National Science Foundation (NSF) funded a national
workshop held jointly by the NCLT and SRI that was dedicated to identifying and reaching consensus on the
Big   Ideas for nanoscience   that   would be appropriate  for grade   7-12 learners.  Participants included  leading
scientists and science educators, chosen to represent those scientific disciplines that are involved in nanoscale
science  and   engineering  research,  learning sciences, and  science  education.  In August   2006,  at the NCLT
Faculty Nanoscale Science and Engineering Education (NSEE) Workshop, participants considered the big ideas
that would be appropriate for grade 13-16 students. The resulting set of nine big ideas involve content relating
to: Size and Scale, Structure of Matter, Size-Dependent Properties, Forces & Interactions, Self-Assembly, Tools
& Instrumentation, Models & Simulations, Quantum Effects, and Science, Technology & Society (Stevens, et
al., 2007). These big ideas are the constructs that guide the development of instructional materials, assessment,
teacher education, and associated learning research within NCLT. This poster explicates the big ideas and their
primary science content, and presents some illustrative phenomena.

Poster 2: Construct-Centered Design

                             Namsoo Shin, Shawn Y. Stevens, University of Michigan
                              James W. Pellegrino, University of Illinois at Chicago
                                      Joseph S. Krajcik, University of Michigan
                                           Susan Geier, Purdue University

         This   poster provides an    overview  of the  components   of the NCLT-developed      "Construct-Centered
Design" (CCD) process and discusses their application to concepts contained in the big ideas in NSE. The goal
has been    to develop   an  initial framework  that can  provide  a principled   approach  for describing   learning
progressions for components of the big ideas. This approach is an adaptation of learning-goal-driven design
(LGD)   (Krajcik, McNeill,    & Reiser,  2007),  which  builds upon    and  extends the backward    design approach
presented by Wiggins and McTighe (1998) and current instructional design frameworks (Gagné, et al., 2005).
The LGD design model includes three stages: (a) identifying learning goals and specifying the science content
they contain, (b) designing and developing materials, and (c) gathering feedback to develop, test, and revise
instructional  materials that support   students  in learning  science  concepts. Aspects   of  Mislevy's  evidence-
centered design (ECD) model (Mislevy, et al., 2003) were adapted and added to the design process. The ECD
approach centers around three facets: (a) stating a claim that describes what knowledge, skills, or other attributes
students should   have;  (b) providing   evidence  that describes what  behaviors   or performances   are  needed to

                                                                                                                       3-3
          support the claim; and (c) developing tasks or situations that will elicit those behaviors in order to assess student
          knowledge. The evidence also guides the design and development of instructional materials.
                   Another modification made to LGD is the use of a big idea to define the construct instead of a learning
          goal. Big ideas are comprehensive, and as such, to completely define the construct, the selected big idea must be
          broken apart to explicitly describe the content contained within it, a process called unpacking. The unpacking
          also includes identifying and describing what prior knowledge students will need and potential difficulties or
          alternative ideas that they may have related to the content. Based upon the unpacking, a set of claims and the
          evidence and   tasks   that support   them  is  developed.  The   components   in  the  process  and their  linkages are
          described and illustrated in a way that complements the subsequent posters in the session, each of which then
          illustrates applications to the design of assessment, research, or instructional materials in key areas of NSE.

         Poster 3: Exploring Undergraduate Students' Conceptions of Size and Scale

                                   Su Swarat, Greg Light, Eun Jung Park, Northwestern University
                                                 Cesar Delgado, University of Michigan
                                                 Denise Drane, Northwestern University
                                              Affiliations: [1] Northwestern University, [2]

                   Size and scale are fundamental concepts of NSE, because changes in size and scale lead to changes in
          how  objects   behave  and   interact with  the  environment,    particularly  at the nanoscale. While   undergraduate
          students are often assumed to have gained the ability to conceptualize the size differences of objects along the
          entire size  spectrum   (i.e., very small   to  very  big), and  to apply   appropriate scales  to  represent  such  size
          differences, recent   research  suggests   that  this assumption    is inaccurate  (Drane,  Swarat,  Light,  Hersam,  &
          Mason, in press). In this poster, we present a preliminary effort to gain an understanding of size and scale, in the
          undergraduate context, and develop a set of assessment tools to evaluate student understanding.
                   As little is known about student conceptions of size and scale at the undergraduate level, we began
          exploring students' ideas of size and scale by engaging twelve undergraduate engineering students of diverse
          demographic and academic background in a semi-structured think-aloud interview. The interview protocol was
          composed of two related tasks. The first asked the participants to order seven objects of widely varying sizes
          along a line, so that the order represented their relative sizes. The second required the participants to assign a
          numerical scale to their ordering. Participants were asked to explain their responses as they completed the tasks.
          These  tasks and  probing   questions    were   open-ended,  which  we   believe  allowed   students abundant  space  to
          express their ideas and/or beliefs regarding size differences and scale applications. Interview responses were
          coded  independently    by  two   researchers,   and  discrepancies    were resolved   through  conversations.  Overall
          response patterns and between-individual differences were examined to identify the variations between student
          conceptions of size and scale (Light, Swarat, Park, Drane, Tevaarwerk, & Mason, 2007).
                   The results suggested that while most participants were able to order the objects correctly and place
          them in the appropriate "worlds" (e.g. macro-, micro-, and nanoworlds), their conceptions differed primarily
          along two dimensions (summarized in Table 1): (a) beliefs regarding the nature of continuum for the different
          "worlds"  ­  that is,  whether  objects  belonging    to different "worlds"   are on  a size continuum,    and could  be
          represented  by one    continuous   scale; (b)  ability to apply  appropriate  numerical  scales to  represent the  wide
          range of objects ­ the variations here include the application of a logarithmic scale (most appropriate), a linear
          scale (least appropriate), and a "hybrid" between the two. Detailed descriptions regarding these dimensions can
          be found in Light et al., 2007.

          Table 1: Dimensions of variation for undergraduate students' conceptions of size and scale

           Dimension                                                                  Variations
           Nature of continuum for the "worlds"                          Continuous                            Fragmented
           Categories of scale applied                 Logarithmic A       Logarithmic B       Hybrid     Linear A     Linear B
           Number     of students  exhibiting    thevariation   4                  1              2            2          3

                   These identified variations underlying undergraduate students' conceptions of size and scale were then
          used to design assessment items following the CCD process. Table 2 describes an example item following the
          "Claim-Evidence-Task(s)"       structure   that corresponds   to  one  of  the two    conception variation   dimensions
          discovered through the interview study, namely students' abilities to apply the appropriate numerical scale ­ in
          this case, the logarithmic scale ­ to represent objects of widely varying size.
                   In a follow-up study, we have recently administered items including the one shown here to a larger
          engineering    student population   in   order   to (a)  evaluate  the  efficacy  of  these items,  and  (b)  refine our

3-3
understanding of  students'  conceptions.   Preliminary  data  analysis  (Light,  Swarat,   Drane,   &  Park, 2008)
suggested that these items are effective in identifying variations regarding how students understand the concept
of size and scale, and useful in confirming and expanding the conceptual variation dimensions reported in this
poster. It is our hope that analysis of student responses on these items can be used to inform instructional design
that can help students develop sophisticated understanding of this critical NSE concept.

Table 2: An example item to assess undergraduate students' conceptions of size and scale

 Claim      The student is able to apply a coherent logarithmic scale to represent objects of widely varying size.
            Given the sizes of objects varying widely in size, the student's work includes constructing an
 Evidence   appropriately labeled logarithmic number line, on which the objects' positions and the spacingbetween the objects correspond respectively to their sizes and size differences in terms of orders
            of magnitude.
            Given the sizes of various objects (e.g. football field, elephant, hair, virus, and atom) in decimal
 Task       notation, label their appropriate positions on a logarithmic scale, and explain the size differences,intermsofordersofmagnitude,ofthefollowingpairsofobjects:Footballfield,Atom;
            Elephant, Hair; Hair, Virus; Virus, Atom.

Poster 4: Development of a Learning Progression for Size and Scale

       César Delgado, Shawn Y. Stevens, Namsoo Shin, and Joseph S. Krajcik, University of Michigan

      The concepts of size and scale are important in science learning but are poorly comprehended by students
(American  Association  for the Advancement      of Science, 1993;   Tretter, Jones,   Andre,  Negishi, & Minogue,
2006). This study describes the development of an empirical learning progression for size and scale. Learning
progressions describe learners' successively more sophisticated ways of thinking about a scientific topic over an
extended  period of time   and  can guide   improvements   in curriculum,     instruction, and assessment   (Duschl,
Schweingruber, & Shouse, 2007).
      Following a construct-centered design process, we identified four critical concepts within the "big idea"
of size and scale. These deal with: what size is; how we conceptualize and symbolically represent size; the
effects of changes in size; and the effects of changes in shape. When unpacked, the first critical concept includes
ideas such as the one-, two-, and three -dimensional measures of size (length, area, volume). It also identifies
four facets of size and scale, which involve comparing one object to another object or to a conventional unit
(e.g., a meter). Two qualitative facets are ordering and grouping by size. Two quantitative facets are relative size
(the number of times bigger or smaller one object is than a reference object) and absolute size (e.g., 14 nm).
These unpacked   ideas  were then   used in  generating claims,  evidence,    and tasks suitable for measuring  the
knowledge of students over a range of grades (See representative example, Table 3.)

Table 3: Construct-centered design - representative example of claim, evidence, and task

   Claim            The student is able to estimate the size of a range of objects in terms of a convenientand familiar reference object.
   Evidence         Given a series of objects and a reference object of known size, the student's workincludes estimates of sizes that are accurate to within one order of magnitude.
   Task             How many times bigger or smaller than the head of a pin (1 mm in diameter) do you
   (grades 7-12)    think the following objects are, in length/diameter: human, earth, red blood cell, atom?

      Current  conceptions   of learning  stress the importance  of    connections   between   concepts  (Bransford,
Brown, & Cocking, 1996), so we developed tasks designed to detect not only content knowledge of the size of
objects, but also whether students are making connections across facets of size. For example, we developed an
item parallel to the task above, asking students to estimate the absolute size of the same four objects. This pair
of linked items  allows us  to see  if students connect relative and   absolute   size by  examining   whether their
answers are consistent.
      We   then  used  some  of these  tasks to  investigate student knowledge.    We   conducted  interviews  with
approximately 90 middle and high school students from seven different public and private schools, as well as
six undergraduates at a research university, in the Midwestern USA. We are using our findings to generate a
learning progression for size and scale for grades 6-undergraduate.
      In general, while students in more advanced science courses have more sophisticated conceptions, there
is wide variation between students in a given class. Most students cannot use the number of times bigger/smaller
an unfamiliar object is compared to an object of known size to find the size of the unfamiliar object, and two-

                                                                                                                      3-3
          thirds do not   believe that   the  actual    sizes and   relative sizes   are necessarily   and  logically related. Other
          connections, such as between ordering and grouping, are much more widespread. We have detected the order in
          which   students tend   to establish   connections     across facets   of  size and  scale,  and   are studying how    this
          progression is related to the accumulation of accurate content knowledge about the size of objects.

         Poster     5:  Design       and     assessment          of  a  computer         simulation      for   helping   learners
         develop submacroscopic size conceptions.

                                     Minyoung Song and Chris Quintana, University of Michigan

                   This study   describes    the development     of a  learning  technology    tool to help  develop  middle   school
          students' conceptions of the submacroscopic scale (i.e., where objects are too small to see with the naked eye).
          By unpacking concepts in the NSE construct of size and scale, we were able to identify and generate claims and
          evidence for each concept (See Table 4 for the construct, corresponding claim, and evidence used in this study).
          However, prior research reveals the challenges that middle school students face in understanding the absolute
          and relative sizes of submacroscopic objects (e.g., Tretter et al., 2006). Because students are not able to directly
          see and  experience   submacroscopic     objects,   we  are  exploring   a new  tool  that uses  multiple   modalities in a
          supportive capacity to address the challenges of dealing with the submacroscopic scale.

          Table 4: The construct, claim, evidence, and challenges used in the development of a learning technology

                                ... large changes in magnitude can conceptually be divided into `worlds' (e.g.,macro-,
           Construct            micro-, nano-, and sub-nanoworlds), with their corresponding landmark objects, tools,
                                dominant force, unit, models that best explain phenomena, etc...
           Target learners      Middle school students
           Claim                The student is able to identify, describe, and distinguish between different size regimes,including the macro-, micro-, nano-, and sub-nano scales, or worlds.
           Evidence             Given key scientific objects, or other objects and their size, the students should correctlyclassify these objects as belonging to the macro-, micro-, nano- or sub-nanoworld.
           Task                 Students classify the key scientific objects into groups of similar sizes
           RepresentativemisconceptionStudents tend to think that all objects that are too small to be seen with the naked eye areroughly the same size, whereas in fact their relative sizes may be vastly different.Therefore they categorize them into one group (Tretter et al., 2006).
           Representative       The objects in the unseen world cannot be experienced and manipulated directly.
           challenge

                   We have designed a simulation that incorporates aural-visual representations to illustrate the sizes of
          submacroscopic objects. Sound is used to represent size since objects at this scale are too small to see, and
          visual representations are added when the phenomenon enters the macroscopic scale. We are exploring the use
          of sound because of the limitations people face in trying to process complex visual information. For example,
          Pavio (1990) and Mayer (2001) each describe a "dual-coding theory" of how people process sound and images
          in parallel. These theories illustrate how solely relying on the visual channel to convey information about size
          can be  problematic    for  students.   First,   since  students   cannot  see  submacroscopic     objects  without    other
          instruments, it  is difficult to compare      the sizes of  these  and other   objects. Second,   while other  approaches
          compare and link visual representations of different objects and their sizes (e.g., the popular "Powers of Ten"
          movie  [Eames    &  Eames,    1977]),  these  representations  may    actually  overload   the visual  channel by  forcing
          students to maintain certain representations in working memory while looking at new representations to make
          size comparisons. By introducing sound as a modality to convey size, we are exploring whether students can
          simultaneously   use  both    aural and  visual     representations to   distinguish  the  sizes  of different objects  by
          processing this information in the parallel manner described by the dual-coding theories. This use of sound
          mirrors similar  research     where  sound    is  incorporated   in tools   to  help people    process  large  amounts    of
          information more effectively (e.g., Kramer, 1994).
                   The learning activity paired with our simulation strictly addresses our specified goal (Table 4), and the
          students' final product involves the classification of the submacroscopic objects of similar size after having used
          the simulation.  Through      this  activity,  we   want  to  explore  whether    the   simulation   helps  learners better
          conceptualize   submacroscopic      scales. In this  poster,  we   describe the  iterative development     process and  we
          demonstrate and explain the final product.

         Poster 6: Using construct-centered design to revise instruction and assessment in a
         nanoscale self-assembly design activity: A case study

3-3
                Emily Shipley, Brenda Lopez Silva, Shanna Daly, University of Illinois at Chicago
                                         Emily Wischow, Purdue University,
                        Tom Moher, James W. Pellegrino, University of Illinois at Chicago

          One of the "big ideas" of nanoscale science and engineering is the concept of self-assembly (Stevens et
al., 2007).  With   nanoscale   components,  it  is difficult and inefficient to   assemble   larger   structures  by  the
traditional means of "picking and placing" pieces into desired configurations. An alternative approach to the
assembly problem is to design the components and the fluid environment in which they are contained so that the
disordered   components    autonomously   organize   themselves,   without   explicit  manipulation,    into the  desired
formation through the use of attractive and repulsive forces such as van der Waals interactions (Whitesides &
Grzybowski, 2002). Examples of molecular self-assembly include the folding of proteins to form quaternary
structures and the construction of nanoscale filters.
          In a one-week pilot study, we investigated the effects of the sequencing of the introduction of domain-
specific  terminology   on  students' conceptual    understandings   and  ability  to perform   simple   nanoscale   self-
assembly design tasks. A sequence of instruction, in which the design task is introduced using morphological
descriptors and is subsequently bridged to the domain terminology only after the design experience, allows
students to "practice" in the domain through the completion of design tasks. This instructional method may
mitigate  issues  that often arise  with traditional didactic  instruction, such   as evoking   alternative  conceptions
(Dykstra, Boyle & Monarch, 1992). In addition, providing students with an experiential frame of reference prior
to direct instruction   may  allow  them  to acquire  an  overall deeper    understanding    of domain    concepts  (e.g.,
Schwartz & Bransford, 1998).
          We employed a quasi-experimental design, assigning two intact urban sixth-grade classrooms with a
combined total of 41 students to one of two treatments. In a "domain-framed" treatment, the phenomena were
described   in domain   terms   from  the outset  and    followed the typical  order   of   science instruction:   formal
instruction  followed   by  more hands-on    activities. In our "practice-framed"     treatment,   the phenomena    were
described   using  morphological   nouns  (e.g., "blobs"  instead of  "molecules")     and   verbs common    to  younger
learners (e.g., "sticking" rather than "bonding"); the design sessions were then followed by a "bridging lesson"
that related the objects and verbs of the design activity to their domain-specific vocabulary and concepts. The
design activities were scripted using the Concord Consortium's Molecular Workbench (Concord Consortium,
2004),   and allowed   students  to choose   component    molecular   shapes  and   select  the position,  strength,  and
quantity of dipole charges to realize a sequence of target aggregate nanoscale structures.
          Paper-and-pencil   assessments  of self-assembly    content knowledge     were   administered   to each  group
following the first instructional phase and again at the study's completion. Eight multiple-choice questions tested
student  understanding   of  NSE-related  concepts,  including  attraction, repulsion,  stickiness  between   molecules,
dipole charges, bond strength, reversibility, movement of molecules, and the role of heat in self-assembly. Students
were also given two design tasks, one generative and one predictive, to examine their design proficiency.
          While the outcomes of the pilot study favored the practice-framed treatment, item response differences
related to more fundamental nanoscale concepts (forces and environments) prompted a reconsideration of the
activity  sequencing   and   assessment  strategies  for both  treatments.  Employing      a construct-centered    design
methodology, we have identified a number of critical concepts, developed claims, and articulated evidentiary
rubrics that we are using as the basis for modifications in both assessments and instruction. The poster focuses
on the unpacking of one such critical concept--the interaction of forces--and the assessment and instructional
designs that arose from the construct-centered analysis.

Poster 7: Exploring student mental models of size-dependent properties

                              Clara Cahill, Joseph S. Krajcik, University of Michigan

          Helping   students understand   nanoscale  science  big ideas  (Stevens   et al.,  2007)  requires a  thorough
understanding of how these important concepts fit into student models of the way phenomena work . In this
poster, we detail a study that uses construct-centered design to create a series of assessments to elaborate student
models   of  properties and  the relationship   between   properties  and   size. Our  work   has  several   aims: (a) to
illuminate common student misconceptions and emergent conceptions encountered in these areas; (b) to create a
conceptual inventory to directly assess student models and common misconceptions, and (c) to suggest some
implications for practice and curriculum design towards addressing these emergent conceptions. To reach these
aims, we employ two general phases of study.
          The  first phase   of this  study  followed    twenty-two   diverse  public   middle     school students    who
participated   in a  two-week   summer   Nanoscience     camp.  The   emergent    conceptions   of these  students  were
explored through videotaped activities and summary interviews focusing on the big ideas and students' overall

                                                                                                                            3-3
          understanding    of nanoscale concepts.    We   transcribed student     utterances, and  categorized     each utterance  by
          topic. The utterances were further phenomenologically subcategorized into emergent themes. By investigating
          these themes within students' mental models of properties and the relationship between size and properties, we
          were able to evaluate how students attempt to make sense of complex nanoscale concepts.
                   Among the emergent themes were particular mental images and experiences that a number of students
          referred  to  in explaining   and   describing   their understandings      of material   interactions     and dimensional
          characteristics. These themes were instrumental in helping the student form their mental models of the concepts
          of interest. For example, students who were able to explain the size of bacteria compared to nanoparticles in a
          qualitative  manner   often  connected   their  explanations to   their    experience seeing     bacteria through  a   light
          microscope   and  the inability to  view   nanoparticles using   the same   tool.   Students who     did not  connect  their
          explanations to this direct experience typically equated the size of bacteria and nanoparticles. Thus, emphasizing
          this connection during the direct experience would seem to be important in helping shape students' conceptions
          of  relative sizes. Additionally,   some   students  tended to   consider   surface  and surface     area separately  from
          volume, and were unable to link overall volume to overall surface in different sized objects. This confounded
          their attempts   to compare   and   explain  the difference  in  reactivity   between  small     and large  objects. Some
          students failed to consider the importance of surface overall, considering volume to be the important factor in an
          overall interaction. These findings have implications for curricular design and instruction, and can help inform
          the design of assessment to distinguish among different student models.
                   In  the second  phase,   we   are using   a construct-centered    design   process, informed     by  our previous
          findings and by expert models of our focal big ideas, to create a set of open-ended interview questions. These
          questions    aim  to  elaborate  student    mental   models,     detect misconceptions,      and   investigate    levels of
          understanding in students. These questions will be tested iteratively, and will be used to inform instruction and
          to design short-answer assessments to access student conceptions deemed important to the understanding of
          size-dependent   properties.  This  overall  process,   which    incorporates    CCD    and    a principled   approach    to
          evaluating and designing test items, is elaborated and exemplified fully in the poster.

         Poster 8: Development of NSE Concept Inventories

                                                     Alan K. Szeto, Purdue University
                                                 Clara S. Cahill, University of Michigan
                                          Nathan A. Unterman, Glenbrook North High School
                    Lincoln J. Lauhon, Gregory Light, Denise L. Drane, Eun Jung Park, Northwestern University
                                                 George M. Bodner, Purdue University
                                               Joseph S. Krajcik, University of Michigan
                                           Eric A. Hagedorn, University of Texas at El Paso

                   Concept    inventory (CI)   has   been  defined in  the  literature  as  an  instrument     for investigating   and
          illuminating  students'  mental models     and  understandings   of  a  small number    of specific   concepts  (Pavelich,
          Jenkins, Birk, Bauer, & Krause, 2004). CI's are used for a variety of purposes: they help assess the effectiveness
          of different styles and methods of instruction, enable the comparison and evaluation of curriculum based on
          common learning goals, enable the categorization and clarification of student thinking for the instructor, and
          provide researchers with evidence of student thinking at different stages of their education (Lindell, Peak, &
          Foster, 2007). NCLT aims to develop principled, informative CI's organized around the NSE big ideas (see
          Stevens et al., 2007). This process is particularly confounded by the interdisciplinary nature of the big ideas,
          which requires the establishment of consensus upon what constitutes key concepts for students to learn across
          the conventional    boundaries  that   distinguish   traditional subject   domains   such   as   physics,  chemistry,    and
          biology. Additionally, NSE is a broad topic; that is, it entails a large number of concepts that likely fall within a
          hierarchical structure. Here, we elaborate on our progress in identifying the interdisciplinary key concepts in
          NSE so that the CCD principles (described in Poster 2) can then be utilized to streamline the creation of valid
          and reliable assessment items (please see Poster 3 for an illustration of item development).
                   Our various efforts to identify key NSE concepts have yielded a significant amount of qualitative data
          that were collected primarily through observations of and conducting exploratory semi-structured interviews
          with secondary school and university students. Specifically, Posters 3 and 7 detailed our preliminary findings in
          students' understanding of size and scale and properties of matter concepts. We have data also on the concepts
          of  particulate  nature of  matter, structure   of matter,  surface-area-to-volume      ratio,   and dominant   forces.  In
          particular, we determined that, for our first-year undergraduate students, those who had already developed a
          solid understanding of the particulate nature of matter concepts through their studies of basic chemistry tended
          to  organize  their understanding   of size, scale,  and properties     of matter   around  the  atom.    For example,   by
          knowing what an atom was, students had demonstrated their abilities to justify the size of a carbon buckyball
          and its size relative to other microscopic and macroscopic objects. At the same time, they had also predicted that

3-30
a group  of  ten to a  hundred   gold   atoms   (i.e., the nanoscale   size  of  gold) would    have the  gold color  (a
misconception) since students had assumed that each gold atom, which makes up large, macroscopic pieces of
gold, was  also  gold-colored (another   misconception).      Overall, our  findings have   been consistent   with those
reported previously in the limited literature, and in addition, we were able to better understand student-generated
relationships between cross-disciplinary concepts and the implications of these relationships for our next phase
of work ­ the development of CI-based assessment items.

References
American Association for the Advancement of Science. (1993). Benchmarks for science literacy. New York:
         Oxford University Press.
Bransford, J., Brown, A., & Cocking R. (Eds.). (2000). How people learn: Brain, mind, experience, and school.
         Washington: National Academy Press.
Concord Consortium. (2004). Molecular Workbench. Retrieved 10/21/2007 from http://mw.concord.org/ modeler/.
Drane, D.,  Swarat, S.,  Light,  G.,  Hersam,   M.,    &  Mason,  T.   (in press). An  evaluation  of the  efficacy and
         transferability of a nanoscience module. Journal of Nano Education.
Duschl, R. A., Schweingruber, H. A., & Shouse, A. W. (Eds.) (2007). Taking science to school: Learning and
         teaching science in grades K-8. Washington, DC: National Academies Press.
Dykstra, D. I., Boyle, C. F., & Monarch, I. A. (1992). Studying conceptual change in learning physics. Science
         Education, 76, 615-652.
Eames, C. & Eames, R. (1977). Powers of ten [Motion picture]. United States: IBM.
Gagné, R. M., Wager, W. W., Golas, K. C., & Keller, J. M. (2005). Principles of instructional design. Belmont,
         CA: Wadsworth.
Krajcik, J.S.,  McNeill,  K.  L., &     Reiser,  B.J.   (2007).  Learning-goals-driven    design   model:    Developing
         curriculum   materials  that align   with  national    standards  and   incorporate   project-based  pedagogy.
         Science Education, 92(1), 1-32.
Kramer, G. (Ed.). (1994). Auditory display: Sonification, audification, and auditory interfaces. Reading, MA:
         Addison-Wesley.
Light, G., Swarat, S., Park, E. J., Drane, D., Tevaarwerk, E., & Mason, T. (2007). Understanding undergraduate
         students'  conceptions   of  a  core nanoscience      concept:    Size and  scale.  Proceedings   of  the First
         International Conference on Research in Engineering Education. June, 2007, Honolulu, HI.
Light, G., Swarat, S., Drane, D., & Park, E. J. (2008). Exploring undergraduate students' understanding of size
         and scale  in  the context   of nanoscience,     The  Cognitive   Underpinnings    of  Engineering   Education
         Conference, February, 2008, Lubbock, Texas.
Lindell, R.S., Peak, E., & Foster, TM. (2007). Are they all created equal? A comparison of different concept
         inventory  development   methodologies.       In  L. McCullough,    L.  Hsu,  &  P.   Heron  (Eds.), American
         Institute of Physics Conference Proceedings, 883: 14-17. Melville, NY: American Institute of Physics.
Mayer, R. E. (2001). Multimedia learning. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Mislevy R. J., Steinberg, L. S., Almond R. G., Haertel, G. D., & Penuel, W. R. (2003).             Leverage points for
         improving educational assessment (PADI Technical Report. No. 2). Menlo Park, CA: SRI International
         [viewed electronically].
Pavelich, M., Jenkins, B. Birk, J., Bauer, R. & Krause, S. (2004, June). Development of a chemistry concept
         inventory  for use in  chemistry,  materials,    and  other   engineering  courses.   Proceedings of  the 2004
         American Society for Engineering Education Annual Conference & Exposition, Salt Lake City, UT.
Pavio, A. (1990). Dual coding theory. In A. Pavio (Ed.), Mental representations: A dual coding approach (pp.
         50-83). New York: Oxford University Press.
Pellegrino, J.W., Chudowsky, N., & Glaser, R. (Eds.). (2001). Knowing what students know: The science and
         design of educational assessment. Washington, DC: National Academies Press.
Schwartz, D. & Bransford, J. D. (1998). A time for telling. Cognition and Instruction, 16(4), 475-522.
Stevens, S. Y., Sutherland, L., Schank, P., & Krajcik, J. (draft, 2007). The big ideas of nanoscience. Retrieved
         June 2, 2007 from http://hi-ce.org/PDFs/Big_Ideas_of_Nanoscience-20feb07.pdf
Tretter, T.R., Jones, M.G., Andre, T., Negishi, A., & Minogue, J. (2006). Conceptual boundaries and distances:
         Students' and experts' concepts of the scale of scientific phenomena. Journal of Research in Science
         Teaching 43(3), 282-319.
Whitesides, G. M. & Grzybowski, B. (2002). Self-assembly at all scales, Science, 295, 2418-2421.
Wiggins, G. P., & McTighe, J. (1998). Understanding by design. Alexandria, VA: Association for Supervision
         and Curriculum Development.

Acknowledgements
This  work  was   supported   by  the   National Center     for Learning    &   Teaching    in Nanoscale   Science  and
Engineering under the National Science Foundation Grant # 0426328.

                                                                                                                          3-3
