           Examining the Effectiveness of a Multimedia Case-based
       Environment for Teaching Technology Integration to Korean
                                             Preservice Teachers
                                             In Sook Han, Charles K. Kinzer
              Teachers College, Columbia University, 525 West 120th St. New York, NY 10027, USA
                          Email: ish2104@columbia.edu, kinzer@exchange.tc.columbia.edu

           Abstract: The study described in this paper examined the effectiveness of a multimedia case-
           based learning  environment     to teach   technology   integration  to Korean    preservice     teachers.
           The structure  and   philosophy   behind   the use  of  embedded    video   in an   online,   multimedia
           system and the data collected from 103 preservice teachers are presented and discussed. The
           overall finding shows that there was no significant difference from pre- to posttest among the
           lecture, the case-based, and the mixed environment groups. However, low prior knowledge
           students  improved   more   when     they learned  about   technology   integration      with  the mixed
           method    than with    the  case-based    method   alone.   Discussion    about     this result  and   its
           educational implications conclude the paper.

Introduction
           Fostering preservice teachers' competency to integrate technology into their instructional practice has
become an essential component of preservice teacher education. However, in Korea there is a strong belief that
computers in classrooms are not being effectively used by teachers to enhance education. This is attributed to
preservice teachers not being adequately prepared to use technology when they begin teaching in classrooms
after  graduation.  Many   researchers    point  out that preservice   teachers lack   an  ability  to use  their knowledge
learned in methods courses in classroom teaching, but there is not much research about how to effectively teach
technology integration.
           Preservice teachers   need  opportunities   to   learn with the  technology    by   being  exposed    to authentic,
learner-centered    activities  that allow   them to  construct   contextual   understanding     of   learning   outcomes.  A
multimedia, case-based system can provide a way for preservice teachers to see effective technology integration
in practice, within a contextualized instructional system.
           To offer preservice teachers this opportunity, we developed a multimedia Case-based Environment for
Technology Integration (CETI). In this environment, preservice teachers can learn how to integrate technology
by observing other teachers' technology uses in anchored video cases and reflecting on them based on their
knowledge from methods courses. The purpose of this study was to examine the effectiveness of this learning
environment     compared     to two   others:    the  CETI    environment    and   a   lecture,  and   a  lecture   alone.WE
hypothesized    that the  combinatino     of the lecture  and CETI    environment    would     result  in the most     learning,
followed by the CETI environment alone and then the lecture alone.

The Need to Teach Subject-Matter Technology Integration in Korea
           From 1996 to 2000, Korea implemented a nationwide plan called "Adapting ICT into Education Master
Plan   I." As  part  of this   Plan,  computer   labs were    equipped   in schools    and   a computer     with  an   Internet
connection    became    available to  every   teacher (KERIS,     2005). Thus,    there was    a dramatic     increase  in the
infrastructure for Information and Communication Technology (ICT), which then led to the implementation of
"The   Adapting  ICT    into Education    Master  Plan   II (2001-2005),"    with  the specific     mission of   adapting  and
integrating ICT into subject-matter education. Teachers were asked to use ICT throughout all of their subjects
for up to ten percent of their instructional time.
           At  about  the same   time  (2002),   the  Korea   Education  and   Research      Information    Service    (KERIS)
developed ICT Skill Standards for Teachers (ISST) to ensure that teacher's ICT skill would improve to levels
specified   in the  Standards,   so  that teachers   could  use   technology  to   enhance   the    quality of   education  by
integrating technology into their subjects. However, efforts have not been made to expand preservice teachers'
abilities to utilize ICT in university teacher preparation programs. According to Lee and his colleagues (2000),
most of the emphasis during university teacher education courses was placed on mastery of basic computer
skills rather  than  on teaching  the  preservice    teachers to  integrate technology    into  classroom     teaching.  Thus,
researchers    have  acknowledged      shortcomings   in    teachers'  preparation  to  use    technology     as an    effective
instructional  tool  and  emphasized    that  Korean  preservice   teachers  who   graduated     since   2000,   after the two
Master Plans have been implemented, must still receive rich opportunities to learn to use technology.
           We  feel  that multimedia   case-based    instruction  has  great potential    to enhance     preservice teachers'
understanding about a real classroom environment, and to address the call for continued teacher education in the

                                                                                                                                    1-1
         use of technology in teaching. Because learning how to teach is an ill-structured domain (Shulman, 1992), it is
         difficult to learn contextualized applications from a lecture and textbooks. Kwak (2002) emphasized that Korean
         preservice  teachers hardly have    opportunities to see  inservice teachers'    teaching practice,  and   notes that the
         needs  of preservice  teacher   education  requires  bridging  the  gap between    school  practice  and   curriculum  in
         universities. To meet this need, we developed learning experiences embedded in multimedia cases that enable
         preservice  teachers to   learn principles based  on  various   classroom    contexts, and  to reflect  on   how to   link
         principles from textbooks to real practices. Additionally, to learn how to use technology as embedded in subject-
         matter curriculum,   viewing    and analyzing   the experiences  that   other teachers   have  as  they  try to  integrate
         technology into curriculum is critical. Multimedia case-based methods can effectively embed such analysis.

        Multimedia Case-based Instruction for Teacher Education
                   Case-based instruction is an instructional method that has been used for professional development in
         areas such  as  law, medical    and   business education,  and  is  closely   related to  situated cognition,   anchored
         instruction and   cognitive flexibility   (Shulman,  1992;    Williams, 1992).    According    to  a theory  of  situated
         cognition, learning can be meaningful and effective when instruction is based on specific situations rather than
         presented   in decontextualized   activities. Therefore, anchored   instruction   offers  video   clips to contextualize
         learning  and  to give  learners a  common     reference  point for discussion    (CTGV,    2000).   Because    cases are
         examples of specific situations and have narrations situated in those contexts, learners may find it far easier to
         remember    and  use ideas  that are  located  in video  cases  than   facts  or principles presented    out of  context.
         Especially  for   complex   and   ill-structured  domains,    case-based     instruction  may   be   effective   because
         contextualized   problem  solving   requires   cognitive flexibility--the  necessity   to see  problems    from  various
         perspectives. Spiro and his colleagues (1987) also argued that the best way for attaining cognitive flexibility was
         by a method of case-based presentation, which treats a content domain as a landscape to be explored by "criss-
         crossing" it in many directions.
                   Others  have  argued   that case-based  instruction   can overcome     instructional  deficiencies  in teacher
         education because teaching is also an ill-structured and complex domain that requires analysis of content and
         process, thought and feeling.   Teaching and learning should not be addressed theoretically as distinct constructs,
         but occur simultaneously (Shulman, 1992). Because classrooms are dynamic and changing environments, the
         importance  of  understanding   the   context within which    teachers make   their instructional  decisions  cannot  be
         overemphasized (Kinzer et al., 2006a). However, traditional lecture-based preservice education experiences do
         not adequately    prepare future teachers   because  these intertwined   aspects   are usually  dealt   with as  separate
         factors, not as a whole. Kawk (2002) also stated that, in Korea, preservice teachers hardly have opportunities to
         see inservice teachers' teaching practice. He emphasized that Korean preservice teacher education should bridge
         the gap between school practice and curriculum in universities. Case-based instruction in education provides
         preservice teachers with a contextual understanding of how complex teaching and learning can be (Bowers et al.,
         2000) and when and how to apply instructional principles at critical decision points.
                   Multimedia cases appear to better capture a classroom's complexity compared to print-based cases that
         often present a single viewpoint and lay out events in a linear format (Kinzer et al., 2006a). In fact, there has
         been research showing advantages of multimedia case-based instruction in preservice teacher education. For
         example, Baker (2005) examined teachers' perceptions of their growth as literacy teachers, and multimedia case-
         based  instruction was    perceived   as a useful tool to  advance   their  pedagogical   development.     The   common
         experience  offered  by   cases made   preservice   teachers' divergent  field   experience more     meaningful  (Baker,
         2005). Also, Case Technologies to Enhance Literacy Learning (CTELL) proved a potential vehicle to broaden
         preservice teachers' understanding. This project showed that teachers became more aware of the centrality of
         concepts related to the principles of effective reading instruction (Kinzer et al., 2006b) than did a control group
         taught using traditional methods. When using videos in inservice and preservice teacher education, teachers not
         only began to notice more significant aspects of teaching and learning, but they also began to focus more on
         interpreting what occurred based on evidence (Sherin & van Es, 2005). Even more, teachers used what they
         learned from multimedia cases when they designed their own activities (Van den Berg, Jansen, & Blijleven,
         2004).

        Multimedia Case-based Instruction for Technology Integration in Korea
                   In Korea, even though computers have entered every high school classroom, there is a strong belief that
         those computers are not being effectively used by teachers to enhance education (Kim et al., 2002). This is
         attributed to preservice teachers not being adequately prepared to use technology when they go into the real
         classroom after graduation. Kim et al. (2002) found that 33.1% of Korean third-year preservice teachers have
         insufficient understanding of ICT education, even though most of them (69.3%) acknowledge that ICT ability
         will be used in the future at school (Kim et al., 2002). Also, according to Lee et al. (2000), an average of two to
         six required credit points for ICT education (normal for Korean preservice teacher education programs) were
         not enough for preservice teachers to acquire all the necessary skills needed to integrate and manage technology

1-0
effectively. Thus, Lee et al. (2000) insist that more courses for ICT education are required with clear, specific,
and organized guidelines. However, simply to offer more courses may not the best solution. Preservice teachers
need opportunities to learn with the technology by being exposed to authentic, learner-centered activities that
allow them to construct contextual understanding of learning outcomes (Doering, Hughes, & Huffman, 2003;
Wang, 2002;Wang, Ertmer, & Newby, 2004).
         Multimedia      case-based   instruction can   fulfill   both requirements:   to    give preservice   teachers  an
opportunity to learn with the technology, and to observe and analyze other teachers' technology use in the real
classroom.    Pope, Hare,  and    Howard   (2005)   summarized     general  findings   of  previous  research   on  student
teaching and stated that preservice teachers need to see good technology practices modeled not only by the
university faculty who teach them, but also by their supervising classroom teachers when in their field-based
preservice    experiences. However,      few   inservice  teachers     have    sufficient knowledge     about   technology
integration   to model   effectively. A  multimedia,  case-based    system     may  help  to solve this  problem    as  well,
providing a way for preservice (and inservice) teachers to see effective technology integration in practice, within
a contextualized instructional system.

A Case-based Environment for Technology Integration (CETI)
         We created a multimedia Case-based Environment for Technology Integration (CETI) as a web-based
tool. In this environment, preservice teachers can learn how to integrate technology by observing other teachers'
technology    uses and   reflecting on   them  based on  anchored    video   cases.  Multimedia    cases   of effective ICT
practices-in-use were selected from the EDUNET website (www.edunet4u.net). Video clips were created by
KERIS and each city's Institute of Education Science and Education Research Institute in 2002 and 2003 for the
purpose of training inservice teachers to use ICT-based teaching and learning modules (KERIS, 2005).                   They
are available    through  EDUNET      as resources  for other   teachers.   We   selected  25 video  clips    which showed
middle school teachers teaching Korean (4 clips), English (3 clips), Mathematics (4 clips), Science (4 clips),
Social Studies (4 clips), and Ethics (5 clips). These video clips are accessed and appear within our CETI web
site; their average running time is 18 minutes each.
         Once preservice teachers log in with an ID, they can access every element in the learning environment.
The CETI design provides three central activities. The first is to watch a video case that provides contextual
understanding of technology integration within a chosen subject area. The second is to write a reflection based
on prompt questions to discuss technology use as seen in the video clip. The last is to create a lesson plan by
adopting or revising technology uses, teaching strategies, and assessment strategies in the video clip to a specific
classroom situation that is defined and thus is relevant to the individual user.
         Preservice  teachers  can    choose  the subject of    a video   clip based on   their interests. Each  classroom
practice shown in the video clip is based on teaching-learning modules          (Table 1) using ICT that were developed
by  the Ministry    of   Education    &  Human    Resources     Development     and  research    schools   selected by   the
Metropolitan and Provincial Offices of Education since 2001. The video clip introduces each module in terms of
concept, method, effectiveness, target group, and classroom environment (including technologies needed and
classroom layout). After the introduction, the clip shows real classroom teaching with technology, followed by
children's' interviews.   By watching     the  video  cases,    preservice  teachers  learn   about  each     module   while
observing   teachers teaching  each    subject using  ICT.   Preservice   teachers   can  learn  how to    use technologies
appropriately in different phases of a lesson and reflect on various aspects of technology use. At the end of each
video   clip, interviews   from   children   who   appeared     in that   lesson are  provided.    These   three   elements
(explanation of the ICT module, classroom teaching, and student interview) within the video cases offer a rich
context while providing access to information about learning goals, the content area, student information, and
information   about  the  classroom    environment.     This additional     information   allows  reflection   and  analysis
leading to a deeper understanding of why technology is used in a specific way.
         To help a preservice teacher's reflection, prompt questions are provided after they watch a video clip.
Preservice teachers can revisit the video clip as many times as necessary to recall what they have seen to answer
questions. These questions lead them to reflect critically in order to evaluate other teachers' teaching in terms of
technology use. Questions contain the following four aspects.
    x    Understanding of the respective teaching-learning module as linked to ICT
    x    Analysis of general teaching experience based on the ICT Skill Standards for Teachers
    x    Analysis   of   specific activities  using  ICT  in terms     of learning  objective,   motivation,   interactivity,
         assessment.
    x    Rationale for improving teaching experience by using ICT
By  writing   reflections based   on  prompts   within  the  above     four areas,  we    expect  preservice   teachers will
reinforce their understanding of the ICT module, build up the framework that they can use to evaluate others'
technology use, critically examine the areas to be improved, and eventually use this knowledge in their own
teaching.

                                                                                                                                 1-1
       Methods
        Participants
                  Subjects  were  107    students who  enrolled in  a  `Teaching  and  Learning   Methods'    course that   was
         required for students in a College of Education, in South Korea. Most were in their third year in college and
         some were in either the second or the fourth year. The course had three sections; students signed up for a section
         according  to their schedules.  All  sections were  taught   by the same  instructor.  Students participated    in this
         experiment as a part of their coursework.
                  One section served as a control group (N=29). The control group learned about technology integration
         from  an instructor's  lecture, as usual.  Another  section,  the CETI   group  (N=31),   learned about   technology
         integration by exploring the CETI environment. The third section (N=47) learned about technology integration
         with both CETI and the instructor's lecture, and was designated the "mixed" group.

        Procedure
                  All participants were asked to access the CETI website (http://ceti.cafe24.com) to create a lesson plan
         that was  used  as  a pretest. After three weeks    learning about  educational   media,  computer   and  multimedia
         education, and ICT use in education from the instructor, the control group logged on to CETI again and created
         another  lesson plan  as a  posttest The   control  group did   not watch   video  clips or interact with   the CETI
         environment. For that group, CETI was used only for pre and posttesting purposes. The CETI treatment group
         created a lesson plan as a pretest, watched two video clips of their choice, and created a second lesson plan as a
         posttest. The mixed treatment group logged on to the website to complete the lesson-plan pretest, and visited the
         website again after three-weeks of lectures to watch video clips and complete the posttest.

        Analysis
                  Students' lesson plans were analyzed based on a coding scheme shown in Table 1.          There were seven
         categories on  the  lesson plan  for students to complete.   The  first and the  second  categories  asked  for basic
         information about the topic they chose, such as subject, topic, target grade level, timeline, and learning goals.
         The third category was a teaching-learning module using ICT which was felt most appropriate to achieving
         designed learning goals. The other categories addressed learning materials, activities, teaching strategies, and
         assessment. Students were asked to mention appropriate technologies to improve each category. Table 1 shows
         the categories as well as the coding scheme (see Table 1).

         Table 1: Coding scheme for lesson plan.

                             Category                                                  Criteria
              General Information                         Answered: 1 pointNot Answered: 0 point
              Learning Goals                              Answered: 1 pointNot Answered: 0 point
              Teaching-learning Module                    Answered: 1 pointDescription of the reason why it is chosen: 1 point
              Materials and ResourcesLearning ActivitiesTeaching StrategiesNumber of technology mentioned: 1 point/each technologyNumber of technology described how it will be usedspecifically: 1 point/each technology
              Assessment

       Results
                  103 of the 107 subjects completed all of the requirements. In the post lesson plan, the mixed group
         somewhat   outperformed    the  two  other  groups   students (see  Table   2). However,    the difference  was    not
         statistically significant (F(2, 100)=.927, p=.399).

         Table 2: Means and standard deviations of improvement in posttest by groups.

                                              N              Mean            Std. Deviation              Std. Error
                    Lecture                   29              .48                 3.60                        .67
                    CETI                      28              .43                 3.04                        .57
                    Mixed                     46             1.52                 4.59                        .68
                    Total                     103             .93                 3.95                        .39

1-
         By looking closely into the characteristics of participants to further examine the reason why there was
no statistically significant difference, we detected a significant difference in the pretest scores in terms of their
academic major. We recoded students' pretest scores into low (n=54) and a high (n=49) levels using a mean
score of .93. As shown in Figure 1, many more students who got high scores were majoring in English, while
students who got low scores were majoring in Social Studies.

                    Figure 1. Number of low and high level students in pretest by majors.

We must point out that t students in different majors were not equally distributed across the three groups (since
they had the option to enroll in class sections by themselves). As a result, the mixed group  included more
English majors, most of whom had higher prior knowledge. Contrarily, the CETI group included more Social
Studies students than other two groups (see Figure 2).

                                                                                                                         1-
                              Figure 2. Number of students in each major in three groups.

               Based on this distribution of students, we explored how        lower and higher prior knowledge level
        students differently improved after the implementation in the three groups. Interestingly, lower level students
        showed improvement in the posttest in all three groups, while higher level students only improved in the mixed
        group and actually decreased in both of the groups (see Figure 3).

                        Figure 3. Low and high students' improvement in the posttest by groups

1-
For lower level students, using both CETI and the lecture was most effective, followed by the lecture and the
CETI environment. This difference was proven to be statistically significant (F(2,100)=2.850, p=.067). After
Bonferroni post hoc analysis, it was further confirmed that this difference contributed to the difference between
the CETI and the mixed group.

Discussion and Implications
         We initially hypothesized that the mixed group students who learned technology integration from both
lecture  and  CETI    would outperform     the other  two  groups,  followed    by  the CETI    group and lecture  group,
respectively. However, we did not find a statistically significant difference in improvement among three groups.
Instead, we   gained   an  insight  of  how    case-based  instruction could    be  used for  those  who  had   less prior
knowledge     about   technology  integration.  Further  analysis  revealed  that  the  lower prior  knowledge    students
showed higher improvement in the mixed group than students in the two other groups. This difference was
especially  significant when   we   compared     the mixed   group  and  CETI    group.  The  reason   why   mixed   group
students' scores improved much more than CETI group students' was because of the instructor's lecture. Since
lower   level students  possessed     less prior   knowledge    about  technology   integration,   they needed    to learn
background knowledge about technology integration principles first before watching other teachers' technology
uses. However, since CETI group students did not have an opportunity to accumulate factual knowledge to be
applied in analyzing other teachers' practices, watching video cases may not have been meaningful enough to
result in improvement. This argument is also supported by the fact that lower prior knowledge students gained
more knowledge from lecture than from the CETI environment. This is very important for designing instruction
to teach  technology    integration.  We   need  to  provide students    basic  principles about   teaching  and  learning
methods first, and the opportunity to gain contextual understanding by showing multimedia cases as well.
         The   result  was  different  in  the case  of higher  prior knowledge     students. Interestingly,  higher prior
knowledge students' scores decreased in the lecture and the CETI groups. Only mixed group students showed a
small gain from pre- to posttest. Even though this result was not statistically meaningful, it seemed to have a
corresponding insight to lower prior knowledge students' case. Higher prior knowledge students already showed
considerable amount of background knowledge about technology integration in the first lesson plan, and seemed
not to get much benefit out of the lecture. In addition, since they were asked to create the lesson plan twice in
the pretest and posttest with the same guidelines, they might have felt that the posttest was redundant and might
not have put in as much effort as they did in pretest. Since CETI group students had to finish the pretest and
posttest at the same time when they logged on the website with only about an hour gap (completing the posttest
after watching the CETI videos). Meanwhile, higher prior knowledge students in the mixed group seemed to
gain more knowledge from both the lecture and CETI environment. The combination of these two instructional
methods might have given students new insights about how teaching and learning principles for technology
integration could be used in real world contexts.
         Multimedia case based instruction is unique in the Korean educational system, which relies heavily on
transmission of knowledge largely in relatively decontextualized lecture formats. This study can provide a new
perspective to approach various issues in teaching technology integration to Korean preservice teachers. Further
research   with  a  better design   using   randomization    to better   control  variables  is  needed  to  examine   the
effectiveness of this new method of instruction.

References
Baker,   E. A.  (2005).    Can Preservice   Teacher     Education  Really   Help    Me  Grow    as a  Literacy Teacher?:
         Examining     Preservice    Teachers'   Perceptions    of Multimedia      Case-Based    Instruction. Journal   of
         Technology and Teacher Education, 13(3), 415-431.
CTGV (Cognition and Technology Group at Vanderbilt University). (1993).              Anchored instruction     and situated
         cognition revisited.  Educational Technology (March), 52-70.
Dexter, S. (2006). Content Area Specific Technology Integration: A Model For Educating Teachers. Journal of
         Technology and Teacher Education, 14(2), 325-345.
Hong,   K.  (2004).   Research on   the  current status of  ICT  use  in middle   schools.  The  Journal  of  Educational
         Information and Media, 10(3), 95-125.
Jo, M. (2000). Current Status of the Educational Use of Information and Communication Technology in Schools.
         Korean Journal of Education Technology, 16(4), 175-199.
Kim,  D.,   Kim,  J., & Lee,   T. (2002).  Realities  Analysis  about  Preservice   Teacher's    ICT  Utilization Ability.
         Korean Journal of Technology Education, 2(2), 98-110.
Kinzer,  C.   K.,  Cammack,      D.  W.,   Labbo,    L. D.,  Teale,   W.    H., &   Sanny,    R. (2006a).   The   need  to
         (re)conceptualize   pre-service   literacy  teacher development:       technology's  role and  considerations of
         design, pedagogy and research. In McKenna, M. C., Labbo, L. D., Keiffer, R. E., & Reinking, D. (Eds.),
         International   handbook     of  literacy and  technology    (Vol. 2,  pp. 211-233).    Mahwah,  NJ:  Lawrence
         Erlbaum Associates, Inc.

                                                                                                                              1-
         Kinzer, C. K., Kapur, M., Lohnes, S., Cammack, D. W., Kontovourki, S., Hoffman, D., & Turkay, S.           (2006b).
                 Assessing   Preservice  Teachers'   Conceptual    Change     in  an  Internet-Based,    Case  Instructional
                 Environment.   In M. Miake & R. Sun (Eds.), CogSci 2006: Proceedings of the 28th annual conference
                 of the cognitive science society (pp. 1611-1616). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum Publishers.
         Kolodner, J. L., & Guzdial, M.  (2000).  Theory and Practice of Case-Based Learning Aids. In D. H. Jonassen &
                 S. M. Land (Eds.), Theoretical foundations of learning environments. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
                 Associates.
         Korea   Education and  Research  Information  Service (2002).  Handbook      for ICT Education    Training. Korea
                 Education and Research Information Service, TM 2002-4.
         Korea   Education  and Research   Information Service    (2005).  A  White   Paper:  Adapting   Education   to the
                 Information   Age. Ministry  of  Education &  Human    Resources    Development,  &  Korea   Education  &
                 Research Information Service.
         Kwak,   Y. (2002).  Impacts and  Tasks   of Teacher   Education    Programs   Revealed   by  Preservice  Teachers:
                 Students' Intact Beliefs. Journal of Korean Earth Science Society, 23(4), 309-324.
         Lee, C., Shin, S., Yoo, I., & Lee, T. (2000). Model of ICT Utilization Curriculum for Preservice Teachers.
                 Korean Journal of Computer Education, 3(1), 87-95.
         Park, B.,  Jeong, H., Lee,  M., &  Suh,  S. (2004). An   Analysis    of ICT  Implementation     and Environmental
                 Conditions after a Teacher Training for Project-Based Learning with ICT. Korean Journal of Computer
                 Education, 7(6), 107-116.
         Schrader, P. G., Leu, D. J., Kinzer, C. K., Ataya, R., Labbo, L. D., Teale, W. H., & Cammack, D. W.        (2003).
                 Using Internet delivered video cases, to support pre-service teachers' understanding of effective early
                 literacy instruction: An exploratory study. Instructional Science, 31, 317­340.
         Schulman,  L. S.  (1992).  Toward  a pedagogy  of  cases. In   J. H. Schulman    (Ed.), Case  methods   in teacher
                 education (pp. 1-30).  New York: Teachers College Press.
         Sherin, M.  G., &  van  Es, E.  A. (2005).  Using  Video  to   Support   Teachers'  Ability  to Notice  Classroom
                 Interactions. Journal of Technology and Teacher Education, 13(3), 475-491.
         Van den Berg, E., Jansen, L., & Blijleven, P. (2004). Learning with Multimedia Cases: An Evaluation Study.
                 Journal of Technology and Teacher Education, 12(4), 491-509.
         Williams,  S. (1992).  Putting  Case-based   instruction  into    context:  Examples    from legal   and   medical
                 education.  The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 2(4), 367-427.

1-
