              AR Gone Wild: Two Approaches to Using Augmented Reality
                                                 Learning Games in Zoos

         Judy Perry, Eric Klopfer, Marleigh Norton, MIT, 77 Massachusetts Ave., 10-337, Cambridge, MA, 02139 USA
                                     Emails: jperry@mit.edu, klopfer@mit.edu, marleigh@mit.edu
            Dan Sutch, Richard Sandford, Keri Facer, Futurelab, 1 Canons Road              Harbourside   Bristol BS1 5UH      UK
              Emails: Dan.Sutch@futurelab.org.uk, Richard.Sandford@futurelab.org.uk, Keri.Facer@futurelab.org.uk

                   Abstract: Participants in Augmented Reality (AR) games are equipped with location-aware
                   handheld computers, allowing players to physically move throughout a real world location
                   while   simultaneously     triggering   virtual  information     based   on  their   physical  location.
                   Researchers are only beginning to understand how to leverage the pedagogical strengths of
                   location-based    AR     games.   This   paper  includes   case   studies for   two  separate   research
                   projects:   Researchers    from   MIT    will   present  "Zoo    Scene  Investigators:   Challenges    of
                   Designing      a Mystery   Themed      AR   Game     for   Students  Ages    10-14   in  a  U.S.  Zoo".
                   Researchers      from  Futurelab  will  present  "Crafting    mediascapes    for a   Zoo Setting  using
                   Create-A-Scape with Singaporean Primary School Students".

       Overview: Augmenting Learning through Augmented Reality
                   The two     projects  discussed  below   were   developed   independently    of  each other.  Nevertheless,   they
         display   common    characteristics   in   design  and  implementation,     further exploration    of   which might   reveal
         important lessons for future developers of this kind of learning activity. Here, we present a brief overview of the
         field of mobile learning, a summary of each project, and brief discussion of themes resonating between projects.
                   The use   of   mobile    devices as tools to  support    learning (or  "m-learning")    continues to   be actively
         explored by educators and researchers. As mobile devices become part of everyday life, for learning activities to
         remain relevant they ought to build on the technological practices that learners are familiar with outside the
         school environment. Vavoula and Sharples (2002) suggest that learning is itself inherently mobile, claiming that
         it displays mobility in time (it "happens at different points during the day"), in space (learning can occur "at the
         workplace, at home and at places of leisure") and across different areas of life (it "may relate to work demands,
         self-improvement      or leisure"). Mobile  devices   themselves     can be well   suited  for supporting   certain learning
         activities: Klopfer, Squire & Jenkins (2002) identify five properties of mobile devices that make them useful to
         educators: portability, social interactivity (both face-to-face interaction and data exchange between learners),
         context   sensitivity (through   GPS  and   data  networks,   but  also  through   video  and  image    capture  capabilities,
         mobile    devices can    collect and respond   to  data   particular to  a certain  area), connectivity   and   individuality
         (support for different activities can be tailored for different learners). For researchers and educators whose work
         is informed by sociocultural, constructivist and situated theories of learning, mobile learning is of particular
         interest.  Mobile devices    afford  learners  the opportunity    to leave  the  classroom   and  situate  their learning in
         different geographic contexts, placing them within an authentic environment and giving them tools with which
         to support  the   construction   of new    knowledge    ­ in a sense,   these devices   enable  any  location   to become  a
         student's classroom. From this perspective, the authenticity of the context in which the learner is situated is
         determined   by   the overarching    narrative   under  which   learners'   activities are located.   This  opportunity has
         resonated with those keen to extend Papert's (1980) notion of the "microworld" (a consistent, self-contained
         simulation offering learners the opportunity to engage with systemic thinking) beyond a program running on a
         computer: describing what they term "participatory simulations", Naismith et al. (2004) highlight the benefit of
         having a learner, through a networked device, become part of a dynamic system: "they do not just watch the
         simulation, they are the simulation".
                   In this way, the information and data given to learners does more than just reflect the reality in which
         they are situated: it augments it, supporting them as they engage with the narrative of the learning experience.
         This class of mobile learning activity has become known as "augmented reality" (AR), and draws on research
         into game-based     learning    as well as  work   on   mobile learning    activities. AR  games    engage  participants  in
         activities that combine      real-world   experiences   with   additional  information    supplied   to them  by    handheld
         computers.  As    students   physically  move   about   within geographic     space (e.g., a   school   campus,  an  outdoor
         plaza, a zoo, etc.), their location-aware handheld computers (e.g., Windows Mobile devices equipped with GPS)
         allow them to collect additional information by interviewing virtual characters, viewing rich media or accessing
         real or   simulated   data.   Participants  in AR   games    are   often   tasked with  role-playing    and collaboratively
         investigating a problem or issue in a game-like fashion.           Previous work on AR (Klopfer, Squire & Jenkins,
         2002; Klopfer, Squire & Jenkins, 2003; Klopfer & Squire, 2004; Falk, Ljungstrand, Bjork, & Hannson, 2001;
         Walz, 2002) indicates that these immersive, interactive experiences are promising for learning.

3-3
         In this paper, we discuss two separate research projects: "Zoo Scene Investigators" which takes place at
the Columbus   Zoo and      Aquarium, located   in Columbus,  Ohio   in the United  States. The   Tao Nan    School's
Zooscape AR game was located in the Singapore Zoological Garden.           In both projects, investigators sought to
explore ways in which zoo settings might provide fertile locations for place-based AR learning games.

Zoo Scene Investigators: Challenges of Designing a Mystery Themed AR
Game for Students Ages 10-14 in a U.S. Zoo

Background and Research Objectives
         Building  on   knowledge     gained  from   prior research,   the MIT  Teacher    Education  Program    and
Columbus Zoo and Aquarium collaborated to design and test an AR game designed to teach Zoo visitors about
the illegal wildlife trade. The goals and requirements of the project included:
     x   Age-appropriate content and pedagogy for middle school students on field trip.
     x   Teams of six students plus one adult chaperone:     Based on previous Zoo field trip models, teams of six
         students proved manageable by one adult, without requiring too many chaperones of the school.
     x   Two-hour time limit: Factoring in introduction, tutorial and conclusion, this left an hour for game play.
     x   Manageable by one Zoo staff: The Zoo was able to devote one staff member to running the game.
     x   Illegal Wildlife Trade Theme: The illegal wildlife trade is particularly problematic in southeast Asia.
         The AR game was designed to reinforce this theme, and was located in the "Asia Quest" exhibit.
     x   Mapped to existing math and science content standards: To qualify as an educational field trip, certain
         educational state content standards must be met. This required incorporating additional material such as
         the differences between plant and animal cells, quantitative graphs, and predator-prey relationships.
     x   High engagement      for participants: If the students  are not   engaged, they will  be unlikely   to learn.
         Furthermore, field trips participants expected an enjoyable experience.

         Our  investigations   centered on the   following   key research   questions: (1)  Do students   of various
backgrounds and ages (ranging from 10-14 years old) find a role-playing AR game in which they investigate a
simulated crime while learning about endangered species both appealing and engaging?, (2) Is it possible to
have a meaningful AR experience with middle schools students in two hours or less?, (3) How can we create a
cohesive game  using    key  existing physical  live animal  exhibits?  (4) What   additional steps and/or   research
would permit us to further develop this approach to using AR in a zoo setting?

Walkthrough
         The following description outlines the scenario presented to participants, and reflects the modifications
made based on the piloting process (described below).      Students arrived at the Zoo having already been divided
into teams and assigned a chaperone. They were escorted to a conference room, where the basics of the game
were explained. They were then shown a video to explain the story, narrated by a security guard explaining how
an anonymous `John Doe" nighttime Zoo intruder was captured, possibly trying to steal something.           You [the
players, a.k.a. the famous "Zoo Scene Investigators"] have been brought in to gather clues, and determine what
the intruder was up to.
         Handheld  computers,     GPS  units, and  paper worksheets  ("clue  reports") were   distributed to players,
after which all players went outside for a walking tutorial. A Zoo staff member guided the players through the
types of interactions required in the game, including interviewing animals, interviewing people, filling out clue
reports, and finding clue codes (small signs with numbers on them hidden in the physical space which students
enter into their computers to get information).      After the tutorial, the players separated into their teams and
played the game as individual groups. Teams returned to the conference room at the appointed time to discuss
their findings and to watch a confessional video by the villain.

Methods

Concept Testing
         The project began during summer 2007, taking advantage of the Zoo's week long day camp sessions
for middle school students (mainly 11 and 12, as well as some 13 year-olds) to gauge the appeal of various
game concepts.  The students were split into groups of roughly 10 students and were facilitated by a moderator.
The moderator read two scenarios to the students, after which students completed a written opinion survey. The
moderators then facilitated a focus group in which the students discussed the potential scenarios.        The groups
took place weekly, across     three weeks, with    revisions to the  scenarios in between.    Week One's scenario
consisted of reading scenarios on Zoo Scene Investigators, a detective game about a crime that had taken place

                                                                                                                         3-33
         in the Zoo, and Death by Cookies, an investigation into a cookie company which was using illegally farmed
         palm oil and the ripple effects on the environment.    During the testing which occurred during Weeks Two and
         Three, subsequent revisions to these scenarios were presented for similar feedback.

        Handheld Prototypes 1 & 2
                  A  prototype   of  Zoo  Scene   Investigators was   created  for  GPS-enabled    handheld     computers.  The
         prototype contained several interaction styles and the interviews were in the form of plain text with still images.
         Classes were recruited from local schools to send students to one of three sessions. Each session contained three
         teams of six students and one or more chaperones. The participants in Prototype 1 included two classes (7th and
         8th graders) from an inner city school and one class of 5th graders from a rural school. At least one observer
         accompanied each team to take notes, and written surveys were given afterwards.
                  Participants in Prototype 2 played a version of the game which was revised based on the results of the
         first handheld prototype. These pilot tests had the same structure as the first: three sessions with three teams
         each. The timing of the test--nearly winter and before a major holiday--made it extremely difficult to recruit
         subjects. This time, two sessions included 8th graders from the same inner city school, and the final group was
         made up of 5th graders from a suburban school.

        Findings and Discussion

        Concept Testing
                  The focus groups provided useful insights into the difficulties of designing for this age group. The
         range of maturity of the students was wider than expected and was reflected in their tastes. A good indicator was
         the reaction to the Death by Cookies scenario. Most students either liked the idea because they liked cookies, or
         hated the idea because they thought a cookie game would be for little kids. Since the particular product was not
         central to the concept, it was changed to soap for the next test.
                  For the second    week,  having  discovered   that cookies   were  a  polarizing theme,    the product in the
         second scenario was changed as reflected in the new title, The Dirt on Soap.         The students were much more
         divided on whether they liked the detective scenario or the corporate investigation scenario better. However,
         Zoo Scene Investigators was the preferred scenario, so it was selected as the final concept.
                  The third   and final week   of concept  testing   was used   to collect more    information   on the  way to
         implement   the Zoo  Scene  Investigators idea--whether     it should  be more    serious or silly, or  should involve
         talking animals. Talking animals also proved to be controversial. The compromise solution was to have animals
         talk via a  special machine  that read the   animals'  memories.  This    seemed  to satisfy both   sides as a way  of
         communicating with animals in a less childish way.

        Handheld Prototype 1
                  As can be expected from initial prototypes, the first handheld prototype test turned out to be a useful
         source of data, though unsuccessful as a game. There were many issues to address, including:
              x   Low  literacy:  It was   a surprise  to the  designers   to find that participants  comprising    two  of the
                  sessions--the inner city 7th and 8th graders--were not native speakers of English and whose English
                  literacy was extremely low. As this prototype was almost entirely written text, this made the game
                  impossible  for the  students to play   without assistance.   The  third session--rural    5th graders--were
                  native English speakers, yet they also had difficulty with the amount of reading. After discussion with
                  the Zoo staff, it was decided that low literacy should not be a barrier to playing the game. Adding audio
                  became a high priority revision to the next version of the prototype.
              x   Cognitive overload: Given the already short amount of time for gameplay, the teams were spending a
                  comparatively large amount of time deciding what to do. To focus the students on the content, it was
                  decided to try a completely linear structure for the second prototype: students discover each clue in a
                  predetermined order, and follow this path to solve the mystery.
              x   Lack of teamwork: The game was designed to encourage teamwork by giving different information to
                  each of the three pairs of students on the team, and expecting students to share that information to solve
                  the crime. However, while students were very interested in their own clues, there were not interested in
                  those of their teammates. On some occasions, it was observed that this seemed to be less of a problem
                  when one pair of students received information and the others did not. For the next pilot, it was decided
                  to only give   new  information   to one  pair  of  students  at a time.  The    other two  pairs   would  get
                  notifications to go ask the first pair what they discovered.

        Handheld Prototype 2

3-3
          Generally  speaking,  observations     conducting  during   the second   handheld    prototype  demonstrated
progress  in several problem    areas identified   during  the  previous  round   of  testing. Replacing  the text  with
subtitled audio   improved    playability, though   there were   some problems     clearly hearing  audio.    The linear
gameplay helped maintain momentum and shift students' focus on interpreting the clues, rather than merely
deciding what order in which to get them. Giving information to one role (one pair of students) at a time also
seemed to have its intended effect as students shared information much more freely in this session, though there
was some    confusion  in  teams   where   one   student  tried to go ahead    of his or her   peers. Nevertheless,   the
prototype also introduced new problems that were difficult to see in the previous test, including:

    x     Error-prone tutorial: The tutorial had a walking component in which a single member of the Zoo staff
          led all 18 students through a series of clues. Keeping that many students' attention was a difficult task,
          and sometimes the staff member forgot to address certain topics. Also, if the students were not paying
          attention at a key moment, they may have missed a key instruction regarding the game. Enlisting the
          help of the chaperones, creating tools for the Zoo staff member in the form of checklists, and some sort
          of assessment to make sure that all students understand what to do before they leave for the
          independent portion of the game are all being considered for future iterations of the game.
    x     Unclear integration of clue reports and game: The clue reports were written worksheets given to the
          students and chaperone as a way of focusing the students on the task. They were intended to be used at
          the end of each animal section. However, several chaperones forgot they even had clue reports to fill
          out. Those who did often tried to fill them out too soon, such that they were trying to answer questions
          about clues they had not found yet. Possible fixes include giving clearer cues in the game about when
          to fill out the clue reports and having checklists of clues for the chaperone to know when they have
          collected enough information.
    x     Animals vs. GPS: The viewing areas for most animals is often quite small, made smaller by the fact
          that GPS does not function indoors, so indoor viewing areas were mostly avoided by the game. Further,
          if the character interview hotspots were placed too close together, a student could stand in a single spot
          and unintentionally trigger multiple interviews, creating confusion. This prototype tried to strike a
          compromise between placing characters near an animal enclosure so the animal could be viewed while
          playing the game, and trying to select locations which were likely to be successful with the constraints
          of GPS. The results were unsatisfactory, with students often ignoring the animals ­ thus missing a key
          opportunity for the Zoo. It is unclear how to address this, though a possible solution would be to
          explicitly build in time to look at animals, with the understanding that animals are sometimes
          uncooperative and not available to visitors.

Utilizing mediascapes with Singaporean Primary Students in a Zoo Setting

Background
          "Mediascape", a software conceptualised and developed for use with GPS-enabled PDAs, is a digital
overlay of  sound  clips, video snippets,   etc. on a particular geographic    location or hotspot.   The GUIs   and  the
underlying software architecture are designed so that mediascapes can be easily constructed and analysed on
standard PCs with picture files or video clips.     An interesting feature of the software is that it allows users to
conduct simulated test-runs of the completed mediascapes on PCs before downloading them into the PDAs for
use on the location. These flexibilities allow teachers and pupils to create mediascapes for themselves or others.
          The technology that enables the construction of, and participation in, mediascapes was developed by
Mobile   Bristol, working     with HP  Labs   in  Bristol, UK.     Initially, the technology   was  piloted   as part of
Futurelab's Savannah (Facer, 2004) and Mudlarking projects, and subsequently updated and improved versions
were used in collaborations with other partners (for example, `Ere Be Dragons, and a game set in the Tower of
London).   Following the success of these projects and the decision to allow public to have access to the software
needed to create and use mediascapes, Futurelab and HP Labs, with the support of the Department for Education
and Skills,  developed    the Create-A-Scape     website  (http://createascape.org.uk/)  that  contained  resources  and
support for teachers interested in using mediascapes in their teaching.       A pilot project which put Create-A-Scape
technology to use took place in the UK in December 2006, as part of a pan-European project (PUENTE, an
extension  of the  "La    Piazza"  project), investigating  appropriate   frameworks     for   analysing  and designing
intergenerational activities in public spaces.   The experiences and findings of these previous projects informed
the development of the Tao Nan School's mediascape, discussed below.

Tao Nan School's Zooscape
          Encouraged by the success of projects conducted in the UK illustrating the potentialities of this locative
technology in supporting new and emerging forms of learning, Tao Nan School of Singapore, in collaboration

                                                                                                                             3-3
         with HP and IDA, decided to develop a learning experience for its pupils using the Mediascape technology. At
         the conceptual   stage,  the  research team   was  mindful  of the    fact that for an  IT-enabled   implementation   in
         curriculum to be meaningful to the teachers and the pupils, the use of technology needed to take into account the
         socio-cultural context of the participating schools and education system:        i.e. how the technology would used
         and when it would be used would influence the outcomes of the implementation. The decision thus was made to
         locate the use of the mediascape in the Singapore Zoological Garden over a period of two hours, as part of the
         Primary Six's science enrichment programme during the June vacation.            With this arrangement, not only would
         the use of the locative technology be situated within the larger context of the pupil's outing to the Zoo, but it
         also minimized the impact the implementation of technology had on the already over-crowded curricular slots.
                  In designing the curriculum, the research team was interested in developing an understanding of the
         ways  HP    Mediascape     technology  enhanced    pupils' learning   experience    in  the  Singapore  context.   More
         specifically, the research team considered the following areas worth pursuing further:           (1) Does the technology
         promote  students'   engagement    with  the  learning   objectives?; (2)  Does  the technology    foster  greater social
         interaction between learners in the Singapore context?; (3) What teaching objectives are appropriate when using
         this technology?; (4) What factors contribute to the successful implementation of technology in our schools?

        Activities
                  The project has two broad phases. The first was a planning stage, in which the teachers and students
         worked with a researcher from Futurelab to develop an understanding of the potential of the technology and the
         ways  in which    it might   be used   meaningfully   within the curricular     context of   Tao  Nan   Primary School,
         producing   a plan   for a  set of activities based   at Singapore    Zoo,  incorporating    the use of the mediascape
         technology. The second phase was a practical trial of these activities in the Zoo itself.

        Curriculum Development
                  Developing the curriculum consisted of three segments: planning, testing, and executing.             During the
         planning phase, two science teachers worked with the researcher to extend their understandings of the ways in
         which  the  tool might   be  used  to support  the science  curriculum.    Following    this early planning   work, they
         proceeded to work with the HP support team in developing a set of activities based at Singapore Zoological
         Garden that would use the mediascape technology.         The testing phase was a technical trial of the technology and
         it consisted of three stages:   First, the teachers, with the assistant of HP support staff, introduced the mediascape
         and its functionalities to the pupils by having them to try out the technology on the school compound.          Second,
         the teachers and the HP support staff tested the mediascape at the Zoo to ensure that it was technically viable.
         Third, the teachers, with the help of other science teachers, went through the activities in its entirety at the Zoo
         so that they could have a sense of what the pupils would be experiencing; and, where necessary to fine tune the
         activities. The third and final phase involved 30 Primary Six pupils from Tao Nan School.            They were divided
         into two groups of 15 each and these two groups carried out the same set of activities at the Zoo on different
         days. Within each group, the pupils were organised into teams of three of mixed abilities.         Each team was given
         two PDAs; one for GPS connectivity and the other for capturing audio-video clips as well as taking notes

        The Task
                  During the field trial, the pupils were divided into mixed-ability groups with each group having three
         members.     Each group    was  assigned one   roles:  Herbivore (Pygmy      Hippo),   Carnivore   (Otter) or Omnivore
         (Sunbear); and was given the following storyline (reproduced here in the idiomatic English used in Singapore):
                  You were caught by some poachers and had just made an escape.                  You are heading
                  home to the zoo now but at the same time facing dangers of meeting your predators.
                  Hence, you must avoid certain animals and their enclosures according to your diet.                 To
                  avoid being preyed on, you need to use your survival tool, the PDA, to strategise your
                  safe return.    The team which completes the most tasks and has avoided the most
                  pitfalls wins the game.

         The groups were also told to begin their search of their habitats (indicated as hotspot on the mediascape) from a
         particular tram station and end it at their own habitat (Pygmy Hippo / Otter / Sunbear) within two hours.           Each
         group was expected to visit at least two hotspots plus one compulsory hotspot (excluding their own habitats) in
         order to complete the game.     Within each hotspot, the pupils were required to: (1) From the list, check whether
         there are any animals that have similar diet as yours, (2) If yes, proceed to do the tasks and take a photo of
         another animal in the list that matches your diet for your food points, and (3) If no, move on to the next hotspot.
                  The pupils were told of a bonus hotspot for which double bonus food point would be awarded for every
         task completed in this hotspot. They were also asked to snap a picture of their prey if they were spotted at the
         wrong habitat and the prey would lose a food point.       The pupils were required to save the completed tasks into

3-3
the PDAs.   As a penalty for performing the tasks at the wrong habitat, food points would be deduced at the end
of the game.  All the tasks which were completed needed to be saved into the PDAs.        When the pupils reached
their own habitats, they were expected to record a short video of themselves at the habitats and end the video by
saying, "I am home."

Data Collection
        A post-activity survey was conducted among the pupils to identify pupils' attitudes towards the use of
handheld computers in the activities as well as the nature and quality of learning that took place. The survey
took the form of a Likert-scaled questionnaire with 16 items.   A typical question from the questionnaire was "I
like handheld computers because of its small size" and the pupils were required to provide their answers on a
four-point scale with discreet scores ranging from strong agreement on one side to strong disagreement on the
other side, and with   no opinion   in the  middle.  Besides  quantity data, qualitative  data for  this project was
collected through on-site  observation   and  semi-structured  post-activity  interviews.    For the   two  days  the
activities were taking place, a researcher followed two mixed-ability groups, one on each day, to observe how
the pupils within the groups interact with each other as well as how these pupils interact with the technology.
These  pupils were  interviewed   by   the  same  researcher  immediately    after the field  trial so that a better
understanding of their interactions could be developed.    The teachers and the technical support staff from HP
involved in this project were interviewed within a week from the completion of the activities at the Zoo.

Analysis and Discussion

Effect of Technology
        Of the 16 items in the survey administered, six items were about the functionalities of the handheld
PDAs.  The responses from the pupils for these items showed that the pupils involved in the project took to the
handheld PDAs: they enjoyed using the PDAs because it was a "cool-thing" to engage in a wide variety of
outdoor activities with a PDA that fitted snugly in one's palm.  Many pupils, during the post-activity interview,
commented that having the handheld was "fun and nice" and the device was easy to use because the screen
layouts looked similar to those on PCs.    Many pupils found the camera and video-recording features useful and
one boy   explained that  the video-recording   feature allowed  his   group, "to  take  note  vocally...and  in  the
background we can put the animal we are talking about!"
        It was observed on many occasions during the field trial that the use of technology encouraged pupils
to perform the assigned tasks in ways that were unanticipated by the teachers or the researchers.      For example,
when the boy commented that his group used the video-recorder function of the handheld to do note-taking, he
had indicated that he and his group were not using the PDA's word processing software, which many would link
to tasks like taking notes and recording observations, to record their observations.     In fact, he saw the video-
recording mode as superior in accomplishing the note-taking task as the video-recording feature of the PDA
allowed them to record the animals they were talking about.      This example illustrated the affordance of the
technology that enabled the pupils to complete a task in ways that are far more innovative and creative than
what could be perceived by the teachers or the researchers when they were designing the curriculum.         Similarly
the massive computational power of the PDA coupled with its integrated functionalities afforded the pupils the
ability to attempt a particular task multiple times, selecting the best outcome.     For example, the researchers
observed that the pupils, when tasked to take a snapshot of a particular animal (e.g., a polar bear), tended to take
multiple-shots from various angles and positions instead of just one shot.     After taking the shots, the groups
would view through these photographs on the PDA's screen, selecting the best shot and deleting the rest.         The
criteria for selection were observed to be colour and contrast of the photographs as well as the clarity of the
image of the animal captured by the PDA's camera.
        The field trial showed that it was not just the locative technology that encouraged and supported the
effort put in by the group but that more traditional tools were necessary.    The paper map of the Zoo was vital
during the activities and gave the group a shared purpose; it was large enough for a group of pupils to view it
simultaneously. The affordance of coupling pen with map in this field trial had enabled some pupils to actually
share their ideas in a concrete manner through creating markings on the map.

Nature and Quality of Learning
        It  was observed   that  the use of  this locative technology  during  the  activities had   allowed  greater
opportunities for contextualized learning of the subject that otherwise would not be possible in the classroom.
One of the teachers involved in the project observed that:
        "During   classroom   teaching,  pupils tended  to be more   passive  with  lots of spoon   feeding
        taking  place, difficult to  assess [pupil's understanding,] we  wouldn't   know    [whether]  they
        understand it or memorized the fact.      The task in [the] real world stretched them further and

                                                                                                                         3-3
                 they tended to think and analyse, and through the discussion we know whether they know
                 how to apply the knowledge learned [in classroom].       [In class,] when they have problems they
                 will raise their hand  to asked   the teacher    and the teacher  would prompt    or tell them  the
                 answer.   Now they don't have a teacher to help them and were left alone, now they don't
                 know whether their answer was right or wrong but they just have to do it.    They have to do it
                 and to decipher for themselves the information around them."

                 Given that the content and pedagogical approach within the Zoo game differed markedly from their
        standard classroom practice, some pupils were obviously uncomfortable with such change.             During the post-
        activity interview, a girl commented that she supposed she could learn the same science content in the classroom
        and it would be much faster and more comfortable to do so in the classroom, especially since the teacher was
        always there  ready  to provide   help, so  doing the  activities  in the Zoo was not that    beneficial to  her. Her
        response echoed that of the survey findings.   In the survey findings, the two items among those that had the least
        percentage of pupils stating they "agree" or "strongly agree" were about the effectiveness of technology as an
        enabler in learning: (n) I know more about the subject because of the using handheld computer (78%); and, (o)
        Handheld computer helped me learn better (88%).      All the other items of the survey generally have at least 90%
        of the respondents stating "agree" or "strongly agree".
                 The researcher observed that there was a relatively high degree of engagement among the pupils in the
        groups he observed during the field trial.     Pupils were deeply engaged in exchanging their ideas, asking for
        clarification and requesting for confirmation.  Similar observation was made by one of the teachers involved in
        the project who reported during the post-activity interview that the behaviours of the pupils, during the field
        trial, as compared to that in the science classroom were "very different":
                 During the [field] trial they actually ask each other questions.    `Is this chimpanzee?' ... The
                 other pupils will help by looking at the list... They will prompt each other question and that is
                 how they arrived at the answer, so called answer which they are not very sure of.

        The comments the pupils made during the interview about the ways they interacted with each were consistent
        with those made by the researcher and the teacher.     One girl, during the interview, commented that during the
        field trial she could easily move around to exchange ideas using the resources like PDA, signposts and maps
        with her peers  in  the group  whereas   in the classroom     it would  be more  difficult to do   so because of   the
        constraint of space and sitting arrangement.

       Discussion points
                 While there are many differences between the two projects, some core themes resonate in each. The
        first, and perhaps most obvious, difference is the cultural context: with one project located in the USA and
        another in Singapore, it might be assumed that users came to the trials with different attitudes towards the
        technology, grounded in the wider social expectations of and familiarity with mobile technology. Similarly, we
        might assume that the location itself holds different places in the respective cultural imaginations: the purpose
        and role of a "zoo" might be expected to have historically different beginnings and to differ still in the present
        day. And from a more specifically educational perspective it might be expected that different pedagogic
        experiences and attitudes informed every aspect of each project, from understandings of the roles of teachers
        and learners to the purpose and value of field trips. Neither trial, however, was undertaken with the aim of
        furnishing data for a comparative cultural study, so we can do nothing more here than note that these broad
        cultural differences might exist.
                 Continuing to view the two trials from an educational perspective, it is clear that the pedagogic aims of
        each differ sufficiently to make it impractical to compare their relative success or failure in successfully
        addressing the curricula aims of the teachers involved. The ages of the two cohorts of students differed
        significantly, as did the way in which each activity was designed. The tasks necessary for the completion of
        each activity also differed in their focus and approach, making a comparison between the two meaningless.
        However, there is one important difference between them that is worth highlighting in a discussion of possible
        approaches to design and pedagogy within learning-focused locative activities. In each project, learners were
        asked to take on a different identity, in effect playing a role other than "learner" throughout the activity: for the
        students in the MIT project this role was that of a human unaffiliated with the zoo, while for the Singaporean
        students the identities they were asked to inhabit were those of various animals resident in the Zoo. In this case,
        examining the difference in approach might lead to a productive exploration of the role of identity in learning
        activities of this kind and the degree to which teachers and designers feel this role might need to be tied to the
        physical location in which the activity takes place.
                 Perhaps of most interest, given the focus on physical location, was the choice of venue for each: a zoo.
        This suggests a number of lines of possible enquiry. Firstly, the place a "field trip to the zoo" occupies within
        the discourse of formal education may be similar in each case: this is an activity about which people involved ­

3-3
parents, school staff, learners themselves ­ already hold certain beliefs and understandings. The specifically
technological and mobile dimension of the two projects discussed above is thus not taking place in a location
that challenges wider notions of what learning consists of. From a practical point of view, it is a safe, regulated
location well used to being treated as a pedagogic resource.
          Secondly, from a design perspective the zoo affords clearly designated locations that map to the
clearly-defined GPS co-ordinates that underpin the activity. "The monkey house" or "the crocodile pool" have
more sharply defined boundaries than other, more nebulous concepts of places such as "near the gate" or "just
past the playing fields". Even if the real physical location has messy and ill-defined boundaries, the mental
models of a zoo provided for visitors (even those not trialing a new location-based technology) and constructed
through signs and maps are themselves clear. This may well be of use to designers attempting to represent a
location with quantitative methods. Of course, GPS detection itself is not exact, and finding ways to plausibly
incorporate a certain "fuzziness" on the ground regarding individual players' locations is a challenge for
designers. Exploring the tensions between these two constructions of place would perhaps lead to a greater
understanding of productive design approaches for this type of tool.

References
`Ere be dragons (n.d.). Retrieved November 19, 2007, from http://www.i-am-ai.net/erebedragons/intro.htm
Ackermann, E., Chabert, A., Decortis, F., Magli, R., Napoletano, L. & Owen, M. (2006). `La piazza:' Convivial
          spaces for   intergenerational learning:  What  places  for the  digital age? In Mendez-Vilas,     A.  (Ed.),
          Current developments in computer-assisted education.
Davis, S. B., Moar, M., Cox, J., Riddoch, C., Cooke, K., Jacobs, R., Watkins, M., Hull, R. & Melamed, T.
          (2005, November). `Ere Be Dragons: An Interactive Artwork. Paper presented at MM '05, Singapore.
Facer, K. (2004). Savannah: A Futurelab prototype research report. Retrieved November 19, 2007, from the
          Futurelab                                                                                           website:
          http://www.futurelab.org.uk/resources/documents/project_reports/Savannah_research_report.pdf
Falk, J., Ljungstrand,    P., Bjork, S.,  &    Hannson  R.  (2001).   Pirates: Proximity-triggered   interaction in  a
          multiplayer game. Extended abstracts of computer-human interaction (CHI), ACM Press: pp. 119-120.
Futurelab     (n.d.).  Futurelab   ­     projects   ­  la   piazza.   Retrieved     November       19,   2007,   from
          http://www.futurelab.org.uk/projects/la_piazza/
Futurelab  (n.d.).    Futurelab ­  projects ­   mudlarking    in deptford.  Retrieved   November     19, 2007,   from
          http://www.futurelab.org.uk/projects/mudlarking_in_deptford/
Hewlett-Packard    Development    Company,     L.P. (2006). HP   feature article:  researchers plot interactive media
          experience      at     tower      of    London.        Retrieved     November        19,     2007,     from
          http://h41131.www4.hp.com/uk/en/feature_stories/story4010.html?PHPSESSID=a5afda86954494
Klopfer, E. & Squire, K. (2003). Augmented reality on PDAs. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the
          American Educational Research Association, Chicago, IL, April.
Klopfer,  E., Squire,  K. &   Jenkins, H. (2002).   Environmental   Detectives  PDAs    as a Window     into a  Virtual
          Simulated World. Paper presented at International Workshop on Wireless and Mobile Technologies in
          Education.
Klopfer, E. and Squire, K.    (2004). Getting Your Socks Wet: Augmented Reality Environmental Science. Poster
          published in the Proceedings of the International Conference on the Learning Sciences (ICLS), Los
          Angeles, CA.
Naismith, L., Lonsdale, P., Vavoula, G., Sharples, M. (2004) Literature Review in Mobile Technologies and
          Learning.                                           Futurelab,                                           UK
          (http://www.futurelab.org.uk/resources/publications_reports_articles/literature_reviews/Literature_Rev
          iew203)
Solano Martin, J. Mesa-Gonzalez, J.A. Mesa Gonzalez: FORMATEX, Badajoz, Spain. Vol. 2. pp. 1359-1363.
          Retrieved    November    19,   2007,  from   http://www.formatex.org/micte2006/pdf/1359-1363.pdf         on
          29/03/2007.
Vavoula,  G.   & Sharples,    M.  (2002)  KLeOS:    A  Personal,  Mobile,  Knowledge    and    Learning  Organization
          System. In IEEE International Workshop on Wireless and Mobile Technologies in Education (WMTE
          '02) p. 152, from http://www.eee.bham.ac.uk/vavoula/publications/wmte02V.pdf.
Vincent, J. (2004) 11-16 Mobile: Examining mobile phone and ICT use amongst children aged 11 to 16. Digital
          World Research Centre, University of Surrey from       http://www.dwrc.surrey.ac.uk/portals/0/11-
          16Mobiles.PDF.
Walz, S. (2002). On the Move between Proximate Distance and Distant Proximity. Master's thesis published by
          the University  Tuebingen,     Germany,   Dept.  of Cultural   Anthropology,   and   commissioned     by the
          University for Art Media and Design Zurich. University Tuebingen, Germany.
Wehmeyer, K. (2007) "Assessing Users' Attachment to their Mobile Devices"; International Conference on the
          Management of Mobile Business (http://doi.ieeecomputersociety.org/10.1109/ICMB.2007.19)

                                                                                                                          3-3
