              Roles of Parents in Fostering Technological Fluency

             Karin S. Forssell, Brigid Barron, Caitlin Kennedy Martin, Lori Takeuchi, Rachel Fithian
                                                Stanford University
                   Email: forssell@, barronbj@, ckmartin@, loritake@, rfithian@stanford.edu

          Abstract: In this poster we share results from a study focusing on parent roles in learning,
          part of a larger research project describing conditions that support the continued engagement
          of middle school students in projects that use new media technologies. We identify ways in
          which parents can support their children's pursuit of digital media skills, and analyze roles
          that vary as a function of the child's gender and experience level with activities that build
          technological fluency.

Introduction
          The digital divide is shifting from a split in access to a split in participation (Jenkins, 2006). Yet in the
discourse around equitable access to technology and the skills needed to use it, little attention has been paid to
the critical role of parents in fostering their children's participation. If children born after 1985 are seen as
"digital natives," while their parents are "digital immigrants" (Prensky, 2001), there may be a belief that parents
have little to offer their children in terms of skills with digital media. However, the importance of the support of
others to early interest development in general has been well documented (Hidi & Renninger, 2006).
          This poster extends a study that focused on parent roles in learning where we obtained rich interview
data from eight students and their parents that allowed us to characterize the role of specific resources in their
learning histories (Barron, Martin, Takeuchi, & Fithian, 2008). We were able to reliably differentiate seven
parent roles that were instrumental for children's learning and project work: teaching, collaborating on projects,
providing non-technical support, brokering learning opportunities, providing learning resources, learning, and
employing their children to assist with technical projects.
          This interview-based study revealed that within our small group of learners, all with high levels of
access to computing tools and parents with domain expertise, there were differences in the quantity and quality
of parent involvement. There was substantial variation in the range of roles played by either parent, the total
number    of roles played  by  both  parents, and   the number  of  unique   examples  that were    discussed.  These
differences in range and number of roles were linked to gender. The parents of the boys in our sample played a
greater number of roles (i.e., the number of roles played by mothers added to those played by fathers) and
played  a  greater range of roles (i.e., more  types  represented) than  the parents of   girls. These gender-linked
patterns raise questions about the origins of informal teaching and co-learning relationships.
          In order to investigate this pattern in a larger sample, we surveyed 35 middle-school students about the
roles their parents played in their technology learning. In this poster, we look at (1) how the number of roles
filled by a parent differs across student gender and technology fluency building experience, and (2) how parents
of boys and girls and students who with more and less experience differ in the types of roles they play.

Methods
          Participants: Thirty-five students enrolled in a summer school elective course entitled "Multimedia,
Internet & Web Page Design" in a suburban neighborhood in the San Francisco Bay Area. The 19 boys and 16
girls ranged in age from 10 to 14, with a mean age of 11.8 years. The level of access to technology was high;
every student reported having Internet access and anywhere from 2 to 7 computers at home.
          Prior experience with activities in which students created with technology varied. Using 16 activities
considered   to have  fluency-building   potential, such as making   a digital movie   or publishing   a  website,  we
created  a   fluency breadth   score representing   students' prior  experience   with technology.     Students  were
classified as high- or low-experience based on a median split of fluency breadth (Barron, 2004). In our sample
65%   of  the boys   and only  38%   of  the girls  were high-experience,  but  a Chi-square     analysis showed   the
association between gender and experience was not statistically significant (F2(1, N=30)=2.04, p=.15).
          Measures: Students responded to a survey item "For each description, check if a parent has ever played
this role." In the survey, we also explored one of the roles, resource provider, in more detail. Breaking this role
into three   parts--buying  learning  tools,  buying  entertainment, and  lending  the  parents'   own    resources at
home--brings our total number of roles to nine.

Results
          To look at the relationship of gender and experience level to the number of roles played by at least one
parent  (mother  OR   father), a univariate  ANOVA      was carried  out with  gender  and  experience    level as the

                                                                                                                           3-33
       between subject factors. Of the 30 students who responded to the experience survey items, 16 were classified as
       high-experience and 14 as low-experience. This analysis yielded a main effect of experience level F(1, 26)=4.13
       p=.05. Students with greater experience reported significantly more parent roles filled (M=7.02, SD=2.27) than
       those with less experience (M=5.27, SD=2.43).     There was no main effect of gender (F(1, 26)=1.39, p=.25), and
       no interaction between gender and experience.
               We also examined the relationship of gender and experience level to the total number of roles played
       by both parents (mother AND father), again using a univariate ANOVA with gender and experience level as the
       between    subject factors. This analysis yielded  a main    effect of gender   F(1, 26)=3.62, p=.07,  approaching
       significance. Boys reported more parent roles overall (M=9.74, SD=3.80) than girls (M=7.10, SD=3.72). There
       was no main effect of experience (F(1, 26)=2.09, p=.16), and no interaction between gender and experience.
               Specific roles showed differences as well (see Table 1). Significantly more boys than girls reported that
       a parent played the role of a lender: "Has resources at the house that I use." Significant differences appeared
       between    high- and  low-experience  students in  the roles of learning  broker:  "Looked  for technology-related
       activities for me   to participate in and/or signed    me  up for   them" and   employer: "Paid  me    money   to do
       something technical or on the computer for her/him." High-experience students also reported more often that a
       parent was a learning tool purchaser: "Bought me things to support my technology activities and learning."

       Table 1: Percentage of students reporting that at least one parent filled role supporting technological activities.
                                        % boys    % girls      F2          p       % high    % low     F2           p
          Learning broker                    74       88       1.04         NS       100        57     8.57      < .01
          Teacher                            84       75         .46        NS         75       86      .54         NS
          Collaborator                       47       31         .94        NS         56       36     1.27         NS
          Learning tool purchaser            84       63       2.14         NS         88       57     3.52         .06
          Entertainment purchaser            89       75       1.28         NS         88       79      .43         NS
          Lender                             84       38       8.12      < .01         69       57      .43         NS
          Non-tech support                   84       63       2.14         NS         88       64     2.25         NS
          Employer                           47       44         .04        NS         75       21     8.57      < .01
          Learner                            74       69         .10        NS         88       64     2.25         NS

      Discussion
               These findings underscore the importance of considering parents' roles when seeking to provide equal
       access to technological fluency. Parents do not need to provide direct technical expertise in order to support
       their child's acquisition of digital media skills. Roles such as collaborator, non-technical supporter, learning
       broker, resource provider, learner, and employer all provide crucial support for the child's self-directed learning.
               The    larger  survey sample  supports the  original  finding  that the roles parents  play in their child's
       learning about technology may differ by the child's gender. Parents of boys fill more roles on average than
       parents of girls. More boys than girls report that parents lend their own resources.
               In the larger sample, we also find that the number of roles that parents fill relates to the level of their
       child's experience with technology. Highly experienced students in our sample reported significantly higher
       numbers of roles filled by their parents than low-experience students. The roles of learning broker and employer
       are significantly more common among parents of students with high levels of fluency-building experience.

      References
       Barron, B. (2004). Learning ecologies for technological fluency: Gender and experience differences. Journal of
               Educational Computing Research, 31(1), 1-36.
       Barron, B., Martin, C.K., Takeuchi, L., & Fithian, R. (2008). Parents as learning partners in the development of
               technological fluency. Manuscript under review.
       Hidi, S. & Renninger, K.A. (2006). The four-phase model of interest development. Educational Psychologist, 41(2), 111.
       Jenkins, H., Clinton, K, Purushotma, R., Robinson, A.J., & Weigel, M. (2006). Confronting the challenges of
               participatory culture: Media education for the 21st century White Paper. Chicago, IL: The MacArthur
               Foundation. Retrieved April 24, 2007.
       Prensky, M. (2001). Digital natives, digital immigrants. On the Horizon NCB University Press.

      Acknowledgments
       This research was supported by grants from the National Science Foundation (REC-238524, REC-354453), and
       from the John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions expressed
       are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the sponsoring agencies. We are grateful for
       the participation of the students.

3-3
