                      Supporting and Tracking Collective Cognition in Wikis

                Palmyre Pierroux, Ingvill Rasmussen, Andreas Lund, Ole Smørdal, InterMedia, University of Oslo
                             Email: palmyre@intermedia.uio.no, ingvill.rasmussen@intermedia.uio.no,
                                 andreas.lund@intermedia.uio.no, ole.smordal@intermedia.uio.no,
                                    Gerry Stahl, Drexel University, gerry.stahl@ischool.drexel.edu,
                                     Johann Ari Larusson, Richard Alterman, Brandeis University
                                      Email: alterman@cs.brandeis.edu, johann@cs.brandeis.edu

                   Abstract:    This symposium      explores   central  themes    related to the  design of  specific   wiki
                   features  to  support  collective   cognition,    and  presents  analyses   of wiki   use    in authentic
                   educational settings. Through the presentation of four different projects, the symposium will
                   take  up  issues related  to the   significance   of iterative design  approaches   for  aligning  social
                   networking technologies with specific contexts, and how these 'tweaks' are in turn generating
                   new   activities and  emergent     forms   of  collaborative   knowledge   building.  In  particular   the
                   studies  in this  symposium     all explore   different means    of  representing  and   tracking  group
                   cognition in wikis - tags, chat rooms, social bookmarking, whiteboards, blogs, timelines, and
                   transcripts - based on the shared understanding that fostering awareness of activity at group
                   level can be productive for learning. Methods and findings from these studies have relevance
                   for designing and learning with social networking technologies.

       Introduction
                   The   transition  from  the  20th   to the 21st century  is  metaphorically    captured  in  the term  'networked
         knowledge society,' a notion that draws attention to how people interact with each other through cultural tools in
         order to develop and learn (Säljö, 2002; Wertsch, 1998). It is also becoming increasingly clear that a knowledge
         society requires people to collectively take on challenges that are too demanding for the individual, and that
         technologies are developed to meet the need for such collective practices. This understanding of the role of
         collaboration and networked technologies in contemporary knowledge practices, and the challenges that this
         entails, is the rationale for this symposium on wikis.
                   Wikis make it possible to coordinate individual agency with small groups and with larger collectives.
         The potential to support collective cognition through representations of 'local ­ global' activities in wikis is one
         of the shared interests among the presenters in this symposium. This interest is grounded in an understanding
         that fostering awareness of activity at group level - over time - can support knowledge building. As Stahl points
         out in his paper, knowledge building can more easily be operationalized and studied when products of group
         work such as discourse and theory statements are made apparent.
                   The   support and  tracking    of  these kinds    of collective  cognition  is accomplished     through    carefully
         'tweaked' design iterations that are informed by analyses of people's interaction and discourse in the authentic
         use settings, another common approach in the projects. This 'finding' of similar interests and methods in our
         research  suggests    that flexibility in   functions   and  representational    forms   are important    aspects  of social
         networking   platforms  like  wikis    and  their appeal  as   sustainable  learning  technologies,    allowing  them  to be
         closely aligned - and realigned - with needs in specific contexts.

       About the studies
                   There are still relatively few scientific studies on the use of wikis (see Lund & Smørdal, 2006 for a
         recent overview).     This  symposium     presents   four different   wiki projects  developed     for various   disciplinary
         subjects at secondary, upper secondary, and university levels. All of the studies have a design/re-design focus,
         with wiki components added or changed through an iterative process involving analysis of use in naturalistic
         settings. Analytical approaches and the relevance of such design methods as scenarios, user stories, co-design
         workshops,   and   prototypes   for the   respective    projects will  be  discussed.   Empirical  material   in the  studies
         includes face-to-face interactions as well as chat discourse, collected in the form of video recordings or by tools
         such as WikiPlayer, described in the paper by Larusson and Alterman. Although the analytical focus of the
         different studies   varies, there   is a  shared   general   concern   with understanding     relations   between    students'
         interactions and wiki activity in educational settings, and how these resources are made relevant in knowledge
         building.
                   In this  symposium,   we     focus  on  how   wiki   technology  may   be  designed   to support   - and   reveal ­
         knowledge    building   activities  that  entail   local  (individual,   small   group)  as  well  as  globally  distributed
         (networked, whole class, and beyond) participation on the part of the students. The aim of the symposium is to
         contribute   to the development     of   perspectives    on the  relationship    between local  and    global  awareness    in

3-330
processes of collective cognition, and to explore how these may be used to frame the research and design of
wiki technologies   for  educational  purposes. We      propose  that  wiki technology,     which   affords a   collective
orientation to knowledge building, has potential in educational settings to prepare learners for future work and
societal participation.
        Barbara   Wasson,   Intermedia,  University    of  Bergen,  is the  discussant   for the symposium.     The   four
presentations for this symposium proposal are outlined below.

References
Lund,  A., &   Smørdal,  O. (2006).  Is There a Space      for the Teacher  in   a Wiki?  In  Proceedings   of  the   2006
        International Symposium on Wikis (WikiSym '06) (pp. 37-46). Odense, Denmark: ACM Press.
Säljö, R. (2002). Lärande i det 21:a århundradet: it och skolans lärkultur. In R. Säljö & J. Linderoth (Eds.),
        Utmaning@r och e-frestelser (pp. 13-29). Stockholm: Bokförlaget Prisma.
Wertsch, J. V. (1998). Mind As Action. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

 Extending meaning from museum visits through the use of wikis
                                         and mobile blogging
                                Palmyre Pierroux, InterMedia, University of Oslo

        Abstract: In the past thirty years a large body of museum research has been done on school
        field trips to evaluate their educational value, analyze the impact of preparation for a field trip,
        and determine factors that influence learning. It is generally agreed that engaging in 'pre-visit'
        activities  and  following up   museum      impressions  in 'post-visit' activities  are important  for
        knowledge building. However, for a diversity of reasons, students often arrive unprepared for
        what   they  will see in  the   museum,     and post-visit  activities rarely   move  beyond   a   brief
        classroom discussion. This is the problem addressed through the design of the project that is
        presented in this symposium. The project combines wiki, blog and mobile phone applications
        in   the aim of  extending   encounters with    art across   classroom     and  museum   settings.  The
        presentation    discusses the conceptual    framework    for   the design,  the  design  process,   and
        findings from the pilot project.

Introduction
        As early as 1984, Nelson Goodman (1984) reflected on how understandings of art are developed over
time through   comparison   and   experience with   other  works,   advocating     "means of  extending    the  museum's
influence beyond the museum building into the more natural setting ­ of home and working places" (p. 59).
Such  interest in 'extending  the museum     visit' corresponds    with the  understanding    that  meaning    making    in
museums enters into visitors' longer learning and identity-forming trajectories taking place outside the museum
space. In  keeping  with  increasing  awareness     of the unique   educational    role played   by museums,     outreach
programs are also rethinking relationships with schools. Traditionally, lectures, guided tours, and worksheets
have been important mediating artefacts used by teachers and curators on museum field trips. Since the mid-
1990s, however, museum education curators have also explored the innovative use of digital technologies in
their work with schools, and particularly teenagers, developing web-based curriculum plans, designing teen-
curated websites, and more recently, generating teen folksonomies through social tagging opportunities. Today,
mobile phones are perhaps the most familiar and easily accessible technologies through which museum visitors,
particularly teens, are extending  their educational    experiences,   both before,  during,  and   after their visit to a
museum.
        In this symposium I discuss a project in which a combination of tasks, activities and technologies,
including wikis and mobile phones, has been designed to support and extend collective knowledge building
across classroom and museum settings. The study builds on previous research on art education and learning
technologies in classroom and museum settings, with a particular focus on upper secondary school 'art majors.'
However, interest here is not in the individual, creative work with different types of media that constitutes a
large part of an art curriculum. Rather, the project addresses how to design technologies that can support high
school students in mastering and appropriating knowledge of art history and contemporary art theory through
collective knowledge building in direct encounters with art. This disciplinary knowledge is required in order to
critically reflect on artworks encountered in museums and galleries, to inform their own artistic practice, and to
become legitimate participants in the social language of art.

                                                                                                                              3-33
       Designing Gidder
                  Gidder (Groups in Digital Dialogues) draws on two areas of museum-related research in its design.
         First, the design   of the project as a  whole   is informed   by sociocultural  perspectives   that have  increased
         awareness of the contrasts between formal learning activities in schools and the nature of inquiries in museums
         in which motivation, identity, previous knowledge and not least, interaction with authentic artefacts and other
         assume   new   significance. Second,  in designing  applications  and  combinations   of technologies   we  draw   on
         previous   research in  museums    on the pedagogical    use  of mobile    devices, phones, and  social networking
         software, such as wikis and blogs. These different interests and perspectives, learning-focused on the one hand
         and design-led on the other, have framed this study.
                  A class of thirty upper secondary students, their two teachers, and an art museum curator participated
         in the three-week pilot study in late 2007. The activities were designed based on the pre and post visit model
         typically used by museums in their work with schools:

         x        Pre-visit: In advance of the visit, the students work in small groups (two to three) in the classroom to
                  select several artworks from the exhibition that interest them. This initial selection of works is made in
                  the wiki, which contains images and texts provided by the curator, among other resources. The students
                  select works, or aspects of works that they want to explore more deeply at the museum, and write
                  labels for the information they collect prior to the visit. Each group has its own space to work in and to
                  collaboratively develop a presentation of their 'collection.'
         x        Museum visit: Students are invited to explore the exhibition and their pre-selected artworks. They are
                  encouraged to use their mobile phones to send MMS's with 'labeled' information - video, audio, text,
                  images - to the blog in the wiki to share with the class and to use as a resource for their presentations.
         x        Post-visit: Back in the classroom the following week the groups use the wiki and information in the
                  blog, which now includes video and audio recordings, text, and images, to discuss and develop their
                  interpretations and presentations.

                  Other resources and shared spaces in the wiki include a description of the task, help and instructions for
         using the wiki, links to useful information, and assessment criteria from the teacher. The purpose of the labels is
         to scaffold the meaning making process by asking student to reflect and articulate the main ideas in their writing
         entries. These labels then appear in a tag cloud, familiar from wikis such as Flickr. The 'tag cloud' design is also
         aimed at fostering awareness of meaning making across the different groups, at the collective level, as students
         'click' on the labels and make connections with concepts and ideas of others related to specific works of art.

        Methods
                  In the  symposium,    methods   used in the   design and development    of  technological   features will be
         presented, which include ethnographic observations, success criteria, co-design workshops, and user stories. In
         addition, I present the data collection methods used during the three-week pilot. The class was observed and
         videotaped during activities in the classroom and on the field trip, and interviews with teacher, curator, and most
         of the student groups were also conducted. The data corpus comprises approximately thirty-five hours of video
         and audio recordings, phone, wiki, and blog logs, multimodal texts produced by the students, and field notes.
         Interaction analysis is the main method used to investigate how knowledge resources, including artworks, texts,
         discourse, interaction, and technologies, are made relevant in the students' collective knowledge building in each
         authentic context.

        Findings
                  Findings from the ongoing analysis will be presented in the symposium. Findings include new types of
         group collaborations in the classroom, deep engagement with art works at the museum, active and personalized
         use of mobile blogging, and the need to carefully design the timing and sequencing of information that is woven
         into specific activities and unfolding interactions. Problems of individual assessment, teacher engagement, and
         the need   for alternative technological  features  in the next  iteration of Gidder  will also be   taken up  in  the
         presentation.

       References
         Goodman, N. (1984). Of Mind and Other Matters. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

         For a list of publications from the Gidder project see http://www.intermedia.uio.no/display/Im2/Gidder

3-33
TWEAK as pedagogical and technological co-design for collectively
                                            oriented practices

                 Andreas Lund, Ingvill Rasmussen, Ole Smørdal, InterMedia, University of Oslo

          Abstract: In this paper we report on empirical studies where pupils have used wikis when
          solving tasks in collaboration and on how teachers and researchers cooperate on the re-design
          of wikis. Based on analysis of these studies we argue for a pedagogical and technological co-
          design that balance  learner  exploration   and   negotiation  with more    goal  directed  efforts  to
          bring knowledge advancement more up front in school subjects. We see the technological and
          social aspects of the design as mutually constituting of the wiki activities that develop and that
          a main challenge for the students is to align their individual and group contributions to the
          larger collective. Hence, our design emphasizes social interaction and visualizations of local
          and global  activities.  This means    that the   design  includes  a  space  also  for  the  teacher,
          feedback  on  activities, and  models   for  pedagogical   use   of tags,   chat facility,  and   social
          bookmarking for organizing content.

Introduction
          In this paper we report on the TWEAK project, which involves pedagogic and technical co-design of
collectively oriented practices. In the TWEAK project we have identified three interrelated goals. Firstly, to
match  collectively  oriented  tools  such  as wikis  with   tasks  that requires collaborative    efforts.  Secondly,   to
analyze   and   support activities  where   learners  engage   in   and  across  diverse   activities that  require   local
(individual, small group) as well as globally distributed (networked whole class and beyond) participation. The
rationale is found in the knowledge society's requirements for people to take on challenges too demanding for
the individual.  Wikis  make   it possible  to coordinate    individual  agency  with  small  groups   as   well  as larger
collectives, and we argue that such coordination needs to be addressed in the classroom in order to prepare
learners for future work and societal participation. By juxtaposing wikis with tasks and activity structures we
seek   to bring knowledge   advancement     in and    across domains     more up  front  in collaborative    applications.
English as a foreign language (EFL) and History are our selected domains. We have chosen EFL because it is an
international language resource mirroring ongoing communication change. History is chosen because in this
subject teachers and learners take on increasingly complex issues concerning our global society and how we
relate past  experiences to current   ones. Thirdly,  we  address   the  role of the  teacher   as a  most  vital  force in
designing and supporting activities conducive to knowledge advancement. Studies show that teacher presence
and participation in online activities are vital for learners to progress (Darling-Hammond, 1999). However, we
see  that  teachers struggle  to   participate in   activities that  are enacted    offline and    online   more   or   less
simultaneously. Often, teachers resort to working offline, leaving the online activities to learners alone.

TWEAK as pedagogical and technological co-design
          TWEAK     focuses  on   the relationship   between   the  educational  tasks  and  the   functionalities   of the
technology. This relationship is under-researched but vital for understanding how learners and teachers orient
themselves towards a shared learning object (Hampel, 2006, Lund & Rasmussen, in review). In education the
purpose of exploiting resources is to respond to a challenge, a problem, or a task that has been designed for a
particular  educational purpose.    We  argue  that  the task  is intrinsically linked  to  questions   concerning    what
resources are picked up by learners and how the resources are used in collaborative activity. If available tools do
not facilitate the disentangling of the problem at hand there is simply no need for learners to pick them up. To
put it bluntly; if the task can be solved individually, learners will not engage in demanding collaborative and
networked activities.
          In the TWEAK      project  we develop    new   designs   and  models   that balance   learner exploration     and
negotiation  with  more  goal  directed  efforts  to  bring  knowledge   advancement       more up    front in the   school
subjects:

     x    Technologically   we  re-design   a  wiki  by  adding   a series of   supporting  mechanisms      that   facilitate
          concept development and domain specific vocabulary (tags, chat facility, social bookmarking). From
          other types of software we know that such features are conducive to learning. At the same time, it is
          widely reported that there are individual differences in the abilities of learners to take advantage of

                                                                                                                                3-333
                 computer tools because the complexity becomes too great for some (Darling-Hammond, 1999). These
                 learners need support and guidance from the teachers.
             x   Pedagogically we facilitate social agency by increasing: the possibilities for teachers to participate in
                 the wiki. Our studies show that teachers only to little extent find a space for themselves in a wiki. Thus,
                 a careful analysis and development of technological prompts needs to be aligned with a perspective of
                 teacher participation.

       Method
                 We are currently doing longitudinal intervention studies in Norwegian Senior High Schools. They rest
         on principles of design-based research where interventions are iterative, theory-informed and aim to capture the
         ecology of the learning situation. Research is carried out in a team involving computer scientists, educational
         researchers, and teachers at the schools in question. We gather data from multiple levels in order to capture the
         complexity of wiki knowledge advancement and design; videotaped interaction data, the aggregated log files
         from the wiki, and audiotaped team meetings. The data is analyzed from a sociocultural perspective in which
         mediated action is the unit of analysis. In the TWEAK project, such actions are seen as cumulative moves in the
         design process as well as in the knowledge advancement involving learners and teachers.

       Findings
                 Our analysis shows that tasks were approached, negotiated, and solved locally in a jigsaw-like manner
         on a  small group level,   but that  learners struggle in aligning   their local production  with  that   of the larger,
         collective  knowledge    construction.  This, we  argue,  is  partly an    issue related to  the design    of  the  wiki
         environments. The empirical analysis showed that the teachers lack a space for supporting the students' work in
         the wiki. We argue that the findings on an empirical level make visible some of the complex relations that exist
         between agents, tasks, and tools in CSCL environments. Hence, we see a need to align task design with the
         development of technological features that boost agents' awareness of the different levels of collectivity that are
         involved in joint knowledge construction so that such practices can be integrated in the repertoire of schooling.
         Our contribution is then found both in the empirical analysis and the suggested technological and pedagogical
         co-design as a principle for examining activity on individual, small group and larger, collective levels.

       References
         Darling-Hammond,    L.   (1990).   Teacher professionalism:   Why   and How?     In  A. Lieberman     (Ed.), Schools  as
                 Collaborative Cultures: Creating the Future Now (pp. 25-50). Philadelphia: Falmer.
         Hampel, R. (2006). Rethinking task design for the digital age: A framework for language teaching and learning
                 in a synchronous online environment. ReCALL, 18(1), 105-121.
         Lund, A., & Rasmussen, I. (in review). The right tool for the wrong task? Match and mismatch between first and
                 second stimulus in double stimulation.
         Wertsch, J. V. (1998). Mind As Action. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

         For a list of publications presenting findings from the Tweak project and related wiki research by these authors
         see http://www.intermedia.uio.no/display/Im2/Complex+challenges+-+collective+responses and
         http://www.intermedia.uio.no/display/Im2/Tweak

                      Integrating a wiki into support for group cognition
                                                    Gerry Stahl, Drexel University

                 The   Virtual    Math  Teams   (VMT)   project is part  of  an  effort   to investigate group  cognition--the
         accomplishment   of   problem-solving   and   knowledge-building    tasks  by  small  groups,   particularly  in online,
         distributed contexts. The  VMT     environment  has recently   integrated  a wiki   component    into its text chat and
         shared whiteboard system. The wiki component serves a number of purposes, such as summarizing synchronous
         small-group interactions and sharing the results among groups in a knowledge-building community.
                 We   are exploring    ways   of integrating activities in  the different    work-space   components,     such as
         automating  the posting   of  text from the whiteboard  to  a  wiki  page  associated   with the chat  room,   allowing
         collaborative browsing and editing of the wiki from the whiteboard, referencing elements of the wiki from the
         chat, and   facilitating seamless   navigation  among   the   components.    The    wiki pages   for  chat   rooms    are
         automatically linked via categories within a 'wikipedia' for the specific domain of interest to the knowledge-
         building community.

3-33
          The   VMT  system   including    wiki  is currently    being used  for middle-school,    high-school    and junior
college math students, for masters-level information science students and for research teams. Logs of VMT
system  usage    in these    authentic  settings  are  analyzed    in  considerable    detail; to date,  about   a hundred
publications  have   resulted  from    research   on  the   VMT    system.   This   symposium     contribution  focuses  on
technological   design   issues  stemming    from     the   pedagogical   goal   of  integrating  knowledge     building    at
individual, small-group   and    classroom  levels.   Detailed   analysis of how    technology    is actually used  plays   a
central role in VMT's design-based research approach.

Designing for Groups and Group Cognition
          This paper is about how to design software to support group cognition, i.e., to open a communication
space or medium for groups of people to solve problems together and to build shared knowledge. To reflect on
the software design process, we build on the approach of human-computer interaction (HCI). HCI as a field has
historically been oriented largely toward the relationship between the individual computer user and the interface
of computer software. Classic HCI studies investigated the effects of different designs of desktop software upon
individuals  using   the software.   The   theory   of HCI   was,    accordingly,   closely aligned   with  the  science    of
individual psychology. In contrast, we look at human-human interaction that is mediated by computer software
and by the networking of computers. Software is here seen largely as a technological communication medium
which both supports and constrains interaction among groups of users. More precisely, our concern is with the
small-group interaction itself, that is, the group processes, rather than the interaction of one individual as such
with  other  individuals  in  the   group.  Conceptually     and   methodologically,     this  involves  a  shift  from  the
psychology of mental processes, representations and conceptual change of individuals to the largely linguistic
interactions of small groups.
          This fundamental re-orientation entails a shift from the education of individual minds to knowledge
building within groups. The issue changes from tracing effects on students of the transfer of factual knowledge
from  authorized    sources  (teachers,  textbooks,   drill software)  to understanding     how   groups   build  and  share
knowledge.   This   new  focus   is  sometimes    termed    collaborative learning,    which   includes  both  how    groups
increase knowledge and how the individuals within the groups learn concomitantly. We actually prefer the term
knowledge building to either 'education' or 'learning'. Our preference is partially because the terms 'education'
and  'learning' tend to  be  closely   associated with  traditional   institutions  of schooling  and  with   psychological
theories of individual minds. It is also due to the fact that one can observe the building of knowledge in products
of group work, such as discourse, theory statements and documents; knowledge building can more easily be
operationalized  and    studied. This  presentation   will  discuss  studies that   we have    undertaken  recently to  take
advantage of the social networking phenomenon to promote collaborative learning of domain knowledge in a
variety of math discourse settings.

Social Networking and Web 2.0
          Software   for collaborative   learning--like     that for  workplace   learning  and   community    learning--is
associated with significant HCI issues, that exceed the difficulties of single-user desktop-interface and web-page
design. They call for new theories, assessment tools and principles. They must centrally take into account the
interactions among group participants as mediated by the software medium, and not just the interaction of an
individual  user to  an  interface.  The number     of possible   combinations    of views  of  the  software  by  different
participants at any given time and the variety of interactions possible explodes, making traditional HCI analysis
techniques inadequate. Many technical problems and many potential uses of the software are unpredictable and
have to emerge from actual usage by groups of people under naturalistic conditions. This limits the utility of
scenarios, mockups, walkthroughs, prototypes and lab studies as assessment tools--as essential as they may still
be to specific phases of the design process.
          Despite   the difficulties facing  the  development     of   effective collaborative    learning technology,   the
potential benefits loom larger than ever. The recent increase in Internet usage, particularly by high school and
college students, bodes well for the adoption of new educational technologies. In particular, the popularity of a
range  of social   networking    sites and  of so-called    Web   2.0  interactive  technologies   has  already   instilled a
familiarity with computer-supported collaboration, its handiness and its benefits
          During the past five years, we have been investigating pedagogical, technological and methodological
issues related  to  fostering online   discourse  among     math  students.  We    have  developed    an approach   to  chat
interaction analysis    that provides   the evaluative    component    of  design-based     research  of networked    group
cognition. Most recently, we have been integrating the use of a wiki into our online environment to extend
synchronous math discourse by small groups to asynchronous math knowledge building by larger communities
over extended time periods.

References

                                                                                                                                  3-33
         For a list of publications presenting findings from the VMT project--with links to the full text--see the VMT
         wiki page http://mathforum.org/wiki/VMT?ProjectPapers

                               Wiki technology for collaborative learning
                                    Johann Ari Larusson, Richard Alterman, Brandeis University

                 Abstract:     At  Brandeis,   several  courses    have used   a  wiki-based    collaborative  learning
                 environment,     the WikiDesignPlatform      (WDP),    to  support class  work.  The   WDP    can   be
                 coupled with other components, like a mailbox, and it provides a number of features that
                 support  navigation,     awareness,    and   help users   to  organize  the wiki    site. The    WDP
                 automatically produces complete transcripts of the online collaborative activity. With the aid
                 of  the WikiPlayer     analysis   tool students can  examine    these transcripts, explore    different
                 theoretical frameworks while practicing a variety of methods and techniques of analysis. In
                 our talk we will demonstrate both the WDP and the WikiPlayer.

       Introduction
                 At Brandeis, several courses have used a wiki environment called WDP to support class work. The
         WDP includes features that make it easier for the students to share their work and keep track of how the wiki
         environment is changing. The WDP automatically produces complete transcripts of the online collaboration.
         These transcripts can be replayed using the WikiPlayer analysis tool, thus providing a basis for an in-depth
         detailed view of the students' online collaboration. Using the WikiPlayer, the complex wiki data (transcripts)
         can  be closely  examined      by an  interdisciplinary   mix   of  students, while    exploring  different theoretical
         frameworks  and  practicing    a  variety of   methods  and  techniques  of   analysis - ranging   from  discourse  and
         conversational analysis to interaction analysis. This sort of reflective activity has educational value, especially
         for interdisciplinary students   who  are  learning  about   technology. Students   interested in  design,  informatics,
         library science, human-computer interaction, computer supported cooperative work or educational technology,
         are examples of those that benefit from the introduction of reflective technology into the classroom. Teachers
         also benefit from the WikiPlayer as they can easily monitor and evaluate individual student contributions in a
         collaborative wiki assignment.

       WDP
                 The WDP       is a collaborative   learning  platform   that supports  both asynchronous      and  synchronous
         activities. It is a shared workspace for co-authoring, exchanging ideas, and communicating about joint projects
         and common interests. The core component of the WDP is a customized MoinMoin wiki. The WDP can be
         coupled with other components ­ such as a mailbox, a CVS code repository, and an instant messenger ­ so as to
         better support the range of tasks required for a given class. The exact composition of additional components
         depends  on the  requirements      of  the domain     activity that  the platform   will   be  supporting.  The   WDP
         automatically produces complete transcripts of the online activity that occurs on the wiki ­ a record of events far
         richer than the traditional "recent changes" history collected by most wikis. Some features and components of
         the WDP that facilitate navigation, support awareness, and help users organize the wiki site, include:
         x       WikiEye provides a fisheye view of recent activity on the wiki summarizing both editing and reading
                 activities on wiki pages and uploading and downloading of files and emails.
         x       Searching:    With   a single  search   the  student can  access all  the materials   related to a  given topic
                 regardless of the representational form.
         x       WikiNewsletter is an email message that is sent out daily to all subscribers. It is tailored to summarize
                 daily activity on the wiki.
         x       WikiStickies:    are "post-it"  like   notes that  users  can embed    inside  a  wikipage.   They  are   easily
                 distinguishable from the permanent page text and can be addressed to a specific target audience.
         x       Tagging: Every data type (wikipage, email, and so on), stored on the WDP, can be tagged and the tags
                 can be used as a search criteria.

         We have used the WDP in several classes for a variety of educational tasks, for example:
                 WDP as a class website:       The WDP supports the sharing of materials such as lecture notes or paper
         handouts, as well as scheduling and coordination of class and lab work. A daily newsletter is automatically sent
         out to the entire class that summarizes any activity on the class website on the previous day.

3-33
        WDP as a central repository and workspace: Teams of students participating in a design term project
used the WDP to share material and develop ideas and code. The WDP was seeded with templates, checklists,
and  examples  that made   it easier for the  students to do their  work. Both  students  and the   instructor  used
awareness features to monitor the progress of the students on their term project.
        WDP as a collaborative blog medium: A prefabricated version of the WDP was given to students as a
platform for their weekly online collaborative blogging exercise to discuss the course material.
        WDP    as   a  modifiable/extendable     platform  for  cognitively  engineering  collaborative      learning
environments: Teams of interdisciplinary students cognitively engineered collaborative learning environments
by adding components to the basic WDP platform.

Supporting analysis of WDP transcripts using the WikiPlayer
        A   course  taught in  the fall of 2008   focused on   collaborative learning. Students   read material   on
frameworks for the analysis of online collaborative activities.  In this course, the WDP technology was used as
students participated in collaborative blogging exercises, exchanged ideas, and wrote position papers. The WDP
automatically produced a complete transcript of the online activity of the students. As a part of their term project
for the course, the students analyzed these transcripts using the WikiPlayer.
        The WikiPlayer includes a set of components that provide the analyst with a statistical overview of the
data as well as the capability to review the transcripts ­ the goal is to make navigation and data mining of the
vast record of the   collaborative   activity a fast and  efficient process.  The analyst can     initially view the
collaboration at a higher-level using a timeline, find a set of events or time periods of interest, and then dig deep
into the activity to examine the interaction among the collaborators and how it manifested itself in terms of their
online representational work. The sequence of events represented in the transcript can be replayed as if one was
viewing videotape: the controller interface allows the analyst to pause, fast/step forward and backward as the
wiki transcripts are being "played". Before starting playback, as well as during "replay mode", the analyst can
filter the transcripts so only pages of a certain type, or pages authored by certain users, et cetera will be shown.
The transcripts are also searchable: given a type of activity (reading or editing) or content-related phrase the
controller will move forward to the next occurrence of that activity or phrase in the transcript.

References
Larusson, J. A., & Alterman, R. (2007) WikiPlayer: Press play to start the wiki revolution. Technical Report
        CS-07-266,      Computer         Science     department,     Brandeis     University.      Available      at
        http://www.cs.brandeis.edu/~johann.

Further information on features and examples of WDP and WikiPlayer functions is provided in (Larusson &
Alterman, 2007).

                                                                                                                        3-33
