                 A Blended Model for Knowledge Communities:
                                  Embedding Scaffolded Inquiry
                            Jim Slotta, Vanessa Peters, University of Toronto, Toronto,
                                            Email: jslotta@oise.utoronto.ca

         Abstract: This study investigates a new approach that connects scaffolded inquiry activities
         within a knowledge building curriculum in secondary school science. We present a blended
         model  that   accounts   for  the flow   of ideas  within   such  a curriculum.     Using  a co-design
         methodology,     researchers  collaborated    with   veteran  secondary    science  teachers   to create
         engaging   curriculum    that provided   the  context  for two  studies. Study   1  created  a four-day
         biology lesson     where  104   grade-ten   students developed    a knowledge    base  of  ideas  about
         human   physiology,    then   connected  those   ideas  to inquiry  activities. Students  and  teachers
         succeeded   in collaborative    knowledge     construction,   and  individual   students  demonstrated
         impressive    learning   gains.   Study  2  extended    these  principles  to   create an   eight-week
         curriculum    unit on biodiversity.   This  study  replicated  the  co-design   process,  resulting in a
         successful curriculum, and further refined our technology environment. The outcomes of this
         work offer promising evidence for a blended model where knowledge building intersects with
         scaffolded inquiry.

Introduction
         For more than two decades, educational research has considered the notion of knowledge building,
where students collaborate with their peers and teachers to develop a shared understanding of their learning
goals and the process by which they will reach those goals (e.g., Brown, 1992; Brown & Campione, 1994;
Brown  &   Palincsar,  1989).  For  example,   in  the  research program     called Fostering   Community      of Learners
(FCL)  Brown   and   Campione      (1994,  1996)    carefully  choreographed     an elementary     classroom,   selectively
presenting materials   to   small groups   of  students with   different  areas  of expertise   so that the  students  and
teachers within the classroom grew as a "knowledge community." Scardamalia & Bereiter (1991, 1992) have
also investigated a knowledge building approach where students are given exclusive responsibility for the high-
level processes  of    knowledge     construction:   generating     new  ideas,  building   on  classmates'     ideas, and
synthesizing ideas into higher level concepts. Through this process, the student community comes to develop its
own knowledge base, supporting individual students in the process of intentional learning, which ultimately
supports their development as autonomous learners (Bereiter & Scardamalia, 2004).
         However,   despite  the  acclaim   given   to research  approaches   of  knowledge     building   and  knowledge
communities (e.g., Bransford, Brown & Cocking, 2000), the theoretical ideas have made little progress and the
instructional method has not been widely adopted by teachers. This is most notable at the secondary level, where
teachers are faced with substantial content expectations and traditional assessments, and are thus reluctant to
embrace  the wholesale    changes   required   to enact   a knowledge    community     model.   The  knowledge     building
approach is not only challenging for teachers to enact, but it is also daunting for researchers,        in part because of
the need for an intensive and sustained collaboration with teachers and the resulting unpredictable, uncontrolled
learning activities of  students.  Thus,   the significant  theoretical  perspective   of knowledge     communities     has
suffered a lack of scientific progress, in part because of the challenging methodology that is required to research
this theoretical view.
         For the theoretical perspective of knowledge building to have a continuing, productive impact within
the learning sciences, the ideas and methods must be accessible to researchers (i.e., the ideas must be available
for their replication and extension). This paper introduces a new effort to extend the theoretical perspective and
research method  of    knowledge   building   by  integrating  a dimension   of  scaffolded  inquiry.   The  new   blended
model is applied within a secondary science context with the aim of engaging all students and teachers within a
knowledge   community       while  addressing    specific   science  learning   goals.   The project    employed   a   new
technology environment to coordinate all knowledge building and inquiry activities, helping students contribute
new knowledge, collaboratively edit their knowledge base, and retrieve knowledge as needed within the context
of inquiry activities.  The   technology    environment     serves  to  scaffold  the  complex    movements     of people,
materials and activities required by the research. Ultimately, the goal of this work is to further the theoretical
perspective of knowledge building and enable a wider community of researchers and teachers to explore this
important pedagogical approach.

Scaffolded inquiry

                                                                                                                              2-
                  The  notion   of  scaffolding was  introduced   to  describe  explicit supports  provided    by teachers   or
         instructional materials that enable learners to achieve intellectual results that would otherwise fall beyond their
         capacity (Wood, Bruner & Ross, 1976; Palinscar & Brown, 1983). The term "scaffolded inquiry" now refers
         generally to any method where students are guided through activities and interactions by instructional materials
         and technology environments (Linn & Eylon, 2006; Linn, Husic, Slotta & Tinker, 2007). Within the scaffolded
         inquiry  literature, complex  patterns activities and  groupings   of  students  are  often referred  to as "scripts"
         (Dillenbourg & Tchounikine, 2007) in loose reference to theatrical scripts in which players and materials move
         about the stage. Researchers have investigated scripts such as reciprocal teaching (Palinscar & Brown, 1984),
         peer tutoring (Chi, Siler & Jeong, 2004) and collaborative reasoning (Anderson et al., 2001). The theoretical
         commitments underlying scaffolded inquiry research are essentially constructivist, concerned with how inquiry
         activities help students build on their existing ideas to develop a deep understanding of science topics through
         various kinds of interaction with tools, materials, peers and instructors (Linn & Eylon, 2006).
                  Scaffolded inquiry research often makes use of technology environments to coordinate the delivery of
         materials and   provide  cognitive and  procedural   guidance  (Slotta   & Linn,  2000).  Such   a method   has been
         employed to investigate inquiry activities such as modeling (White & Frederickson, 1991), anchored instruction
         (Vanderbilt,  1993),  personally relevant   scenarios  (Linn   &  Songer,  1982), scientific visualizations  (Pea   &
         Gomez, 1993; Edelson et al., 1999), argumentation (Bell, Davis & Linn, 1996; Linn & Hsi, 2000), and many
         other aspects of learning and reasoning. One example of such a technology environment is WISE, the Web-
         based Inquiry Science Environment (see http://wise.berkeley.edu). WISE was developed to scaffold students as
         they conduct technology-enhanced inquiry projects that include a variety of activities (e.g., viewing web sites,
         collecting data, debating arguments, holding online discussions, drawing concept maps). WISE also helps to
         scaffold teachers as they adopt such activities for their classrooms (Slotta, 2002, 2004).
                  Thus, unlike the theoretical domain of knowledge communities, that of scaffolded inquiry has received
         considerable attention from a large number of researchers.       In part, the relative success of scaffolded inquiry
         methods is due to the fact that they are so accessible to researchers. Because of the range of possible approaches
         and inquiry   models,   learning scientists   can easily embed     theoretical  ideas within   a  scaffolded inquiry
         framework. Research materials can be developed in advance of any classroom study by graduate students or
         other  research assistants  who  work   in partnership with    teachers. The resulting   curriculum  and   assessment
         materials are typically straightforward to enact in classrooms, with student responses providing ample data to
         serve as measures in the study. Thus, the broad domain of scaffolded inquiry has been scientifically productive
         because it is so accessible to the research community.      Researchers can share their materials and technology
         environments, such as when several research labs adapted the WISE technology environment and curriculum
         materials for their own purposes (e.g., Kollar et al., 2004; Kollar, Fischer & Slotta, 2007; Gobert et al., 2002;
         Jorde & Mork, 2007).

        Embedding scaffolded inquiry within a knowledge community: A blended model
                  The present work builds on more than a decade of research on inquiry science learning with particular
         emphasis on scaffolding technologies (Author, 2004, 2007). This work has been conducted with a number of
         different collaborators, and has addressed a variety of theoretical conjectures about inquiry. During this time, the
         notions of knowledge building and knowledge community have been compelling but elusive. Inspired largely by
         the work of Brown and Campione (1996) and Scardamalia and Bereiter (1989) we sought to expand on the
         scope of the learning context that is typically addressed by scaffolded inquiry. One of the most compelling
         notions was that a classroom of students might be thought of as a community of learners.         However, achieving
         this vision is quite a challenge, and is one of the primary obstacles facing researchers who may want to adopt the
         methods of knowledge building. This is largely because the goal of helping a classroom of students come to
         identify as a learning  community   inherently  includes the   challenge  of helping  the teacher  of that classroom
         embrace that same vision. However, the potential rewards in terms of rich, collaborative, authentic learning are
         profound.   We  were   thus drawn  to  the idea of  transforming   a classroom  into  a  learning  community   where
         students build upon one another's ideas and come to reinterpret the purpose of learning from one of individual
         consumption to one of collaborative growth.
                  While our program of research is still in its early stages, we recognize the importance of developing
         explicit models and representations of the complex inquiry processes that we will investigate. Figure 1 presents
         our first effort to capture the flow of knowledge and activities within a classroom in a blended model where
         knowledge   building   and  scaffolded inquiry  are combined   in a  complementary    fashion. This   model  emerged
         from our efforts to develop an accessible knowledge building curriculum unit in an advanced secondary science
         program, working with an outstanding teacher. This teacher had attempted a knowledge building approach some
         years before and given up because it was not well suited to the high level of content coverage for which she was
         responsible. To paraphrase her initial comments, "I started to use the knowledge building method, but it takes so
         long to get the kids to generate any of the important ideas in my course, and they were frustrated because they
         didn't feel they had   much  guidance."    Of course, one   of the  main  objectives  of  knowledge   building  is for

2-
students to take responsibility for their own learning. However, in high school science, teachers must ensure that
students come to understand major segments of theory (e.g., genetics, biodiversity, chemical equations) and it is
very difficult to motivate all students in the classroom to efficiently pursue the understanding of such topics as a
knowledge community.        In secondary science instruction, teachers must generally feel that every class period is
used efficiently and that students are engaged in learning relevant science topics. Any curriculum lesson or unit
must  be  able   to  fit  within   a tight schedule       of content  coverage,     with   outcomes      that are    assessable by
conventional measures.
          It is important   to  note  that any      hybrid   or  blended  approach       that satisfies  such requirements      will
probably not adhere to the strictest definition of knowledge building, although such definitions are not well
specified in the literature. Our goal in this work is simply to move forward in our own theoretical description of
knowledge communities, in hopes of eventually building connections to the broader theory in this domain. We
began  by articulating    a basic  model   of   how    knowledge   can   be    created   collaboratively  by  students,   with  the
resulting knowledge base made available within subsequent inquiry activities that in turn create new connected
knowledge.                                       Content Expectations & Learning

                                     Knowledge     Community        Scripted     Content
                                      Building      Knowledge       Activities  Knowledge
                                       Activity       Base                      Elements

                                             Emergent Themes & Community Voice

                   Figure 1. The flow of knowledge and activities within a classroom community.

          The model begins with a knowledge-building activity (left side of Figure 1) where students explore and
investigate their own ideas in the context of a broader knowledge building activity. The resulting knowledge
elements  (e.g.,   notes,  wiki  pages,   files    or discussion  comments)       are    then aggregated   into    a "Community
Knowledge Base." One of the essential features of knowledge building (Scardamalia & Bereiter, 1996) is that
learning  activities (e.g.,   inquiry-type  investigations)      must  be      guided by   the  community     itself   through  the
knowledge construction process. Common themes, challenges or interests should emerge, reflecting the "voice"
of the community.     The   instructor   must      listen to this voice  and     respond   by  way   of  the  kinds    of activities
presented to students. The model above acknowledges this critical juncture in the process, with the influence of
"Emergent Themes and Community Voice," that feed into the design of the scaffolded inquiry (represented as
"Scripted    Activities").  However,    in designing      any    inquiry activities,   the    instructor must  also    address  the
"Content  Expectations      and Learning   Goals"      of  the  curriculum.    This is   clearly not  an  easy  task   -  designing
inquiry activities that respond to the community interests while addressing the learning goals, all within the
time-sensitive  context    of a  specific  curriculum      unit.  Students     work independently     or  collaboratively    in the
scripted activities, drawing upon the knowledge elements from the community knowledge base, producing new
contributions   to that  knowledge    base      as well   as specific outcomes      that  serve  as  assessments     of   individual
understanding.

Method
          This  model    used   in this research      represents  our ideas     about  how    inquiry   activities can    be deeply
interconnected with the processes and resources of a knowledge community approach. Of course, describing the
process and actually creating such a learning community are two very different matters. In the following two
sections, we    describe   two  additional  characteristics      required    for this research   to  succeed:   i)   a scaffolding
technology environment to support students, teachers and researchers in all project activities; and ii) a co-design
process to ensure that all materials designed for use in our partner school were ecologically valid and able to be
implemented by teachers with no assistance from researchers. Following those sections, we describe two studies

                                                                                                                                       2-
         where the model was enacted in a curriculum where knowledge building was interconnected with scaffolded
         inquiry activities.

        A scaffolding technology environment
                    This project employed a unique new technology infrastructure to support the design and delivery of all
         research materials, including the various scripted activities and knowledge building processes. This technology
         environment     is based  upon   the  Scalable  Architecture   for  Interactive Learning     (SAIL)   ­  an open   source
         framework    developed    over  the past five  years by   a community   of   researchers  and technologists    in order to
         support the rapid development of tools and environments across the learning sciences. We participated in this
         vision, employing    SAIL   to  develop  a  technology    environment   that  supports  various   methods   of knowledge
         building and many different tools and user interfaces for scaffolded inquiry activities.
                    To begin, researchers carefully designed the knowledge building environment, including customized
         knowledge entry forms that are accessed by students via the Web. A wiki provided the ideal functionality for
         knowledge building, as students could easily access and edit one another's ideas, reorganize pages in order to
         capture  emerging    themes,    and  build  connections   between   related   ideas. We   created   a  new   hybrid   wiki
         environment that improved our control over student accounts, groups, editing permissions and other features.
         While we wanted to preserve the open-ended feeling of collaborative editing that typifies wikis, we needed a
         simple, structured way for students to create wiki pages so that we could scaffold their treatment of science
         concepts. We thus developed a capability of "New Page Scripts" that allowed students to simply click a link on
         a wiki page in order to add a new page ­ but instead of the usual "new wiki page" functionality, they are taken
         to a special Web form (implemented in the Ruby on Rails language). The Web form queries students about the
         name of their new page and collects metadata (using check boxes and radio buttons), then generates a new wiki
         page that is linked to the proper location, with pre-specified headers and all the relevant authoring and access
         permissions. This new method has greatly expanded the capability of wikis for use in our research. The wiki is
         one important      layer within  the  broader  technology   environment,     which   includes a   server and   portal that
         coordinate all student accounts and a variety of java-based interactive inquiry tools. This rich infrastructure
         ensures that students always have a clear understanding of what to do, receiving scaffolding in the form of web
         pages or other technology scripts, and thus ensuring faithful adherence to the curriculum design.

        A co-design community for curriculum, assessment and technology tools
                    It is challenging to design complex instructional materials that accurately embed a theoretical model
         while complementing a teacher's curriculum. The effectiveness of any classroom-based research will depend
         critically on   the  teacher's   understanding   and     enactment  of  the   materials  and  approaches.      Technology
         environments can provide scaffolding, but a complex method such as knowledge building requires complete
         investment   of the  participating   teachers. This  can  best be   achieved  through   a process  known    as  co-design
         (Roschelle, Penuel, & Schechtman, 2006) where all research materials and instructional designs are developed
         in close   collaboration   between   researchers   and   teachers, with   each  group   learning  about  the   values and
         perspectives   of  the other. Working    together,   the co-design  team   creates materials  that address   the  research
         questions as well as the teacher's learning goals (Peters & Slotta, 2007). The resulting curriculum is likely to be
         enacted faithfully by teachers, since they were essentially in charge of the design process. While this entails a
         more intensive process of ongoing design discussions and trade-offs, it does ensure that teachers accurately
         understand the research and that they firmly believe in all curriculum materials. One benefit of this approach is
         that the researcher can remain completely hands-off when it comes time to enact the designs, ensuring a high
         level of ecological validity (Roschelle et al., 2006). Finally, because the teacher's enactment is not likely to
         deviate from the design, we can be more confident that any measures (e.g., of student understanding) would
         truly reflect the underlying theoretical model (Slotta, 2007).
                    Two years prior to the work reported in this paper, we initiated a co-design community with a local
         partner school.    This  process required   a  considerable  effort in the   beginning,   and expanded    on   an existing
         partnership with one of the science teachers in the school. We began meeting with the school principal and vice
         principal  for curriculum,   as  well as the   other science  teachers  in the  department   to discuss  the   prospect of
         establishing a long term curriculum planning community. We wrote a small grant proposal to help sustain the
         community, and introduced the process of co-design, as well as our blended model of knowledge building and
         how we might put it into practice within the school. This is one of the premier secondary science schools in
         Canada,    with a   reputation  for  excellent  preparatory  instruction.  The  excellent    students,  the creative  and
         reflective teachers,   and  the  supportive   administration  make   this  an ideal  setting  for an  ongoing   co-design
         partnership.

        Study 1: Co-design of a knowledge building lesson
                    For three months,    two  teachers  and   two researchers  co-designed    a 4-day  physiology    lesson  where
         students collectively built a knowledge base by creating wiki pages about human system diseases. The research

2-
began  by  conducting   field  visits to the school    to  learn about  the practices   that teachers   were  using in the
classroom. For the next several months, the researchers and teachers participated in a series of design meetings
where teachers learned about the theory and methodology of knowledge building and researchers learned about
the values held by the teachers and the specific content requirements related to human physiology.
         The study used both qualitative and quantitative methods to analyze the co-design process and the flow
of ideas in the knowledge building activity. Data were drawn from: i) teacher and student interviews; ii) student
contributions to the wiki and to the scaffolded activity; and iii) student scores on the physiology section of the
final exam.   Teacher   interviews  added    to our understanding   of  the co-design    process,   and helped    provide a
measure   of  the success  of  the  designs.    Student interviews  provided    insight  into learners'   experiences  and
satisfaction with the lesson. Quantitative data from students' final exam scores were analyzed and compared
against those from previous years to gauge differences in course achievement levels.

Participants
         Participants included two veteran high school biology teachers and 104 grade ten students from an
urban  school   in  the Toronto    metropolitan   area.    The   students  were  distributed  into  four   sections of  an
intermediate-level  biology    class  (two   sections   per teacher).   All 104   students    worked    as a  community,
collaboratively   editing the  wiki   across all four   periods.  This  unusual  design  led  to  a fascinating   interplay
between class periods, and helped to underscore the value of knowledge communities for everyone involved in
this project.

Design
         Students   began   by  creating  a  wiki   that   covers  human    diseases  of three   different body    systems
(respiratory, digestive   and  circulatory), including     the specific biological   processes   relating  to the  disease.
Students created disease pages in the wiki using a special "New Page Script" where they were able to specify
the metadata for the disease (see Figure 2). Students were free to create new disease pages or edit any existing
disease page within their assigned body system. Thus, students became specialists in one body system and relied
on their peers to adequately prepare the wiki materials for the other two systems. Students then performed a
scripted activity where they applied their knowledge to create "challenge cases" for their peers where a fictitious
person was described in terms of physical symptoms that required diagnosis (Figure 3).

       Figure 2. "Disease Page" Script and Completed Page.                   Figure 3. "Challenge Case" Page.

Study 1 Findings and Discussion
         Both teachers were able to successfully enact the curriculum in their classrooms with no interventions
from  the  researchers.   Teachers  and  researchers    were   excited  by  the level of engagement     demonstrated    by
students in the creation of their disease pages. Across the four classes, students created wiki pages for seven
respiratory diseases, ten circulatory diseases, and six digestive diseases. One worry expressed by teachers and
researchers during the design meetings was that students would be reluctant to work with their peers' materials,
preferring instead  to  create a new   disease   page   of their  own.  However,   approximately     half  of all students'
authoring  efforts  were   focused    on editing  a  pre-existing   page.   When   solving    their challenge   cases, the
researchers worried that students would use Google instead of their own knowledge base. However, classroom
observations by the teachers and researchers revealed that students made nearly exclusive use of the disease
wiki pages, presumably because of the ease with which students could access directly relevant information.
Another hopeful interpretation of this phenomenon is that there was a strong identity amongst students within
their own knowledge community.
         We also measured the impact of the lesson on student achievement. We compared the scores of our
participants on the physiology portion of their final exam with the scores from the same two teachers' grade ten
students from the previous year who received a more traditional physiology unit consisting of lectures and a lab
(n = 67). The final exam in each year employed similar open-ended questions where students were asked to
describe  the  role of  human    physiology     within  biological processes.   Results  from   the  analysis  revealed   a

                                                                                                                              2-
         significant difference in students' scores. Those who participated in the knowledge building activity (M = 8.84,
         SD = 1.59) had significantly higher scores than students from previous years who were taught with the regular
         curriculum (M = 7.90, SD = 1.15), p = .011. Both teachers commented that students' exam performance had
         surpassed their expectations.

        Study 2: Expanding the model to an 8-week curriculum unit
                   The second study was conducted in the following term with a new cohort of students. The co-design
         team was expanded from two science teachers to three, as over the summer a new biology teacher was recruited
         who wished to join the project. Over the course of 4 months, we held 14 co-design meetings, using laptop
         computers and a computer projector to take running minutes within our own wiki design space. A separate wiki
         space was    used  for creating the student  wiki  pages and  New Page   Scripts. This dynamic   archive became a
         valuable resource to our group ­ indeed, our own community knowledge base ­ that was referred to frequently
         in all phases of the research partnership.

        Participants
                   Student-participants were 113 grade ten students who were enrolled in an intermediate-level biology
         class. One teacher taught two classes of 28 and 29 students, respectively; the second and third teachers each
         taught one class of 28. In the classroom, students used wireless laptop computers for all wiki-related activities.
         This arrangement allowed students to freely maneuver when interacting with their classmates and teacher during
         an activity.

        Design
                   The knowledge building activities that were designed for the biodiversity unit were patterned after our
         successful experiences in the first study. In pairs, the students created wiki pages for all Canadian ecozones and
         biomes. They were free to create a new page or edit an existing one. The New Page Script (see Figures 4 and 5,
         below) was designed to collect metadata for each ecozone, and to generate a page that included headers that
         would help focus students' edits on the specific biological organisms and ecosystems that were unique to their
         chosen  territory. This  provided   a level of  consistency among the   ecozone   pages, and ensured that students
         included specific biological content.

        Procedure
                   Students from all four periods of the biology class created new wiki pages or revised existing ones,
         resulting in an   anthology  of 25  terrestrial and seven marine eco-areas.  In response  to teachers' concern for
         quality control   within the wiki,  we added    a peer-review activity where pairs of  students provided  feedback
         regarding the content and aesthetics of several other wiki pages. Students were provided with the opportunity to
         revise their pages before the teacher's assessed them for accuracy and completeness. The resulting knowledge
         base became the main resource for subsequent scripted activities.
                   Students' next assignment was to create new "Biodiversity Issue" pages in the class wiki that often
         affected several ecozones within Canada. For example, the invasion of the Zebra Mussel (a species of shellfish
         that was transported from Russia to North America several decades ago) has now influenced all the Great Lakes,
         with serious implications for more than a third of the ecozones in Canada.         Students are scaffolded to find
         relevant ecozones by the metadata attached to those wiki pages, including social tags that they populated in an
         earlier knowledge building activity. Further scaffolds within the "biodiversity issue" pages help students focus
         on the scientific elements of these authentic environmental problems, with particular emphasis on matters of
         biodiversity. These issues included sufficient detail to enable students to formulate solutions that addressed a
         real biological concern.

2-
          After students  had created   biodiversity issues, we   addressed    the element   of the model   where    the
"emergent    themes and   community   voice"  would   influence   the design   of  subsequent   inquiry activities. The
teachers and researchers met for an afternoon meeting to review the current knowledge themes within the wiki,
particularly those  biodiversity issues  that seemed   most    compelling   to students and   most  connected    to  the
community knowledge base. Teachers and researchers built a consensus on the most important themes relating
to biodiversity. These   were   used in creating  a  final inquiry  activity:  for students  to create  a scientifically
plausible response to the issues, with optimistic outcomes over a 50 year time frame. Students were assigned to
create this response using creative writing or other media formats.

Study 2 Findings and Discussion
          This  study further confirmed  for  all participants  ­ teachers, students  and   researchers alike  ­ that a
knowledge community focus can have a powerful influence on students at a secondary science level.             The final
student activities have just recently been completed, and the school principal has already announced that the
innovative student solutions are to be published nationwide.    Students are literally telling their teachers that they
don't ever want to hold another class where there is not an aspect of student-generated knowledge. Students are
continuing to edit their wiki pages, even though the due-date for their completion has long passed. For those of
us in the co-design community, this genuine level of enthusiasm and participation is a powerful demonstration
of community, more than any theoretical description or model.
          Based on the formative analysis of the ideas within the biodiversity wiki, we identified three powerful
themes: climate change, habitat destruction, and invasive species.      The majority of the biodiversity issues raised
by students were determined to be related to one or more of those categories (e.g., climate change will often
influence the loss of habitat).  Thus, the students were instructed to include at least two of the themes in their
responses, and to connect their solution scenario to as many ecozones as possible.     Student solutions were highly
creative and deeply connected to the science.  This latter aspect of the inquiry assignment was of high priority to
the teachers, who felt strongly that the final assignment of this unit must be heavily connected to science content
goals. Students were thus told that their solutions would be assessed for both creativity as well as scientific
merit, and both dimensions were taken to heart.
          Measures from Study 2 include all student wiki pages, peer review comments, biodiversity issues and
creative solutions, as well as student and teacher interviews. The co-design community is currently working on a
new  curriculum    unit on nutrition  and  sustainable    food,   using sophisticated  scaffolding   technologies    for
interconnecting the inquiry activities and the community knowledge base.        As part of a larger dissertation study
by the second author, we are analyzing the wiki contributions of students in order to understand the growth of
knowledge within the community, as well as to the impact of the community knowledge on student reasoning.
This will include a detailed analyses of student interactions and achievement, including a comparison of final
exam results with previous cohorts.
          The co-design team has overcome a number of challenges, particularly in relation to working with
teachers during the school term.     Both researchers  and   teachers   agreed  that small   pockets of   time became
extremely valuable, with meetings often taking place in the school staffroom during a lunch break.             We are
developing new wiki-based models for supporting these often fragmented planning cycles, so that all co-design
participants can maintain contact and manage the creation of their own knowledge community.

Conclusion
          Our  research provides  support for  the   blended   knowledge    community   model,   in which   scaffolded
inquiry activities provide students with incentive and opportunity to make use of the community knowledge
base. The co-design method was effective, and indeed essential for helping teachers feel deeply committed to
the curriculum.  This commitment from teachers was itself essential in order to ensure that students felt engaged
by the curriculum and actively participated. The findings of this study demonstrate that knowledge building
methods can be successfully designed for high school biology classrooms, and offers a powerful mechanism for
how  such  methods    can succeed.   Our wiki-based   method    for knowledge      building, coupled   with scaffolded
inquiry activities that target specific content learning goals allows us to leverage the wider knowledge base of
the community as a productive curriculum resource. This work thus responds to an ongoing challenge of how to
make knowledge building activities more relevant for secondary teachers, and opens up possible avenues for
future research and theoretical models.

References
Bereiter, C.,  & Scardamalia,    M.  (1989).  Intentional  learning as  a goal  of  instruction. In L.  Resnick   (Ed.)
          Knowing, learning, and instruction: Essays in honor of Robert Glaser (pp. 361-392). Hillsdale, NJ:
          Erlbaum.
Bransford, J., Brown, A., & Cocking, R.      (2000). How People Learn: Brain, Mind, and Experience & School.
          Washington, DC: National Academy Press.

                                                                                                                           2-
        Brown,   A.  (1997).  Transforming     schools  into  communities     of  thinking  and   learning  about  serious matters.
                 American Psychologist, 52(4), 399-413.
        Brown,   A.   (1992).  Design     experiments:   Theoretical     and  methodological   challenges    in creating   complex
                 interventions in classroom settings. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 2(2), 141-178.
        Brown, A., & Campione, J. (1996). Psychological theory and the design of innovative learning environments:
                 On procedures, principles, and systems. In L. Schauble & R. Glaser (Eds.), Innovations in learning:
                 New environments for education, (pp. 289-325). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
        Brown,   A.,  &  Campione,     J.  (1994). Guided    discovery    in  a community     of  learners. In  K. McGilly   (Ed.),
                 Classroom     lessons:   Integrating  cognitive theory   and   classroom   practice  (pp.  229-270).  Cambridge,
                 MA: MIT Press
        Edelson, D. C., & Reiser, B. J. (2006). Making authentic practices accessible to learners: Design challenges and
                 strategies.  In  R.  K.  Sawyer    (Ed.), Cambridge      handbook     of the  learning sciences   (pp.  335­354).
                 Cambridge.
        Fischer, F., Kollar, I., Hakke, J., & Mandl, H. (2007). Perspectives on Collaboration Scripts. In . In F. Fischer, I.
                 Kollar,  H.  Mandl,    &   J. M.  Hakke   (Eds.),  Scripting   Computer-Supported      Collaborative    Learning:
                 Cognition, computational and educational perspectives (pp. 1-10). NY: Springer.
        Gobert, J., Slotta, J. & Pallant, A., Nagy, S., & Targum, E. (2002). A WISE Inquiry Project for Students' East-
                 West    Coast Collaboration.    Presented   at American     Educational   Research   Association,  New    Orleans,
                 LO.
        Hoadley,   C.  M. &   Pea,  R. D.   (2002). Finding   the   ties that bind:  Tools  in support  of  a  knowledge-building
                 community.      In K. A.   Renninger   &  W.   Shumar    (Eds.), Building  virtual  communities:    Learning and
                 change in cyberspace (pp. 321-354). NY: Cambridge University Press.
        Jorde,  D.,  & Mork,   S.   (2007). The   Contribution   of information    technology    for inclusion  of  socio-scientific
                 issues in science: The case of wolves in Norway. In D. Corrigan, J. Dillon and R. Gunstone (Eds.) The
                 Re-Emergence of Values in Science Education. 179-196. Sense Publications, the Netherlands.
        Krajcik, J.  S., &  Blumenfeld,     P. C. (2006).  Project-based     learning. In  R.  K. Sawyer    (Ed.), The  Cambridge
                 handbook of the learning sciences (pp. 317-334). New York: Cambridge University Press.
        Kollar, I., Fischer, F., Slotta, J. D., & Meister, D. (2004). Missbildungen bei Fröschen: Parasiten oder chemische
                 Substanzen? Online-Kontroversen in WISE. Praxis der Naturwissenschaften                53(3), 38-39.
        Linn, M. C. (2007). Can evidence inform the debate? Review of Why Aren't More Women in Science? S. J.
                 Ceci & W. M. Williams, (Eds.) Science, 317, 199-200.
        Linn, M. C., & Eylon, B. S. (2006). Science Education: Integrating Views of Learning and Instruction. In P.
                 Alexander    &  P.  Winne     (Eds.), Handbook     of Educational    Psychology   (pp. 511-544).    Mahwah,    NJ:
                 Erlbaum.
        Peters, V., & Slotta, J. D. (2007, August). Co-designing a knowledge building activity with secondary school
                 science teachers. Paper presented at the annual IKIT meeting, Toronto, Ontario.
        Reiser, B. J. (2004). Scaffolding complex learning: The mechanisms of structuring and problematizing student
                 work. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 13(3), 273.
        Roschelle, J., Penuel, W. R., & Schechtman, N. (2006, July). Co-design of innovations with teachers: Definition
                 and dynamics. International Conference of the Learning Sciences, Bloomington, IN.
        Scardamalia,     M. &    Bereiter,  C.  (1996).  Computer      support   for  knowledge-building      communities.   In T.
                 Kotchmann (Ed.), CSCL: Theory and practice of an emerging paradigm. Mahwah, NJ: LEA.
        Scardamalia, M. (2001). Getting real about 21st century education. Journal of Educational Change, 2, 171­176.
        Slotta, J. D. (2004). The web-based inquiry science environment (WISE): Scaffolding knowledge integration in
                 the science classroom. In M. C. Linn, P. Bell, & E. Davis (Eds.) Internet Environments for Science
                 Education (pp. 202-231). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
        Slotta, J.  D. (2007).   How    we  test  our  theoretical  models:     Media  dependencies   and   empirical   paradigms.
                 Presented    at the   biennial   meeting  of   the European      Association  for   Research   on  Learning  and
                 Instruction (EARLI).
        Zhang,   J., Scardamalia,    M.,   Reeve,   R.,  &  Messina,     R.   (2006, April).   Designs  for   collective cognitive
                 responsibility in knowledge building communities. Paper presented at the annual AERA meeting, San
                 Francisco, CA.

2-0
