                                                      First Things First:
                 Design Principles for Worthwhile Educational Videogames
                          Daniel T. Hickey, Sasha A. Barab, Adam Ingram-Goble, Indiana University, USA
                             Email: dthickey@indiana.edu, aingramg@indiana.edu, sbarab@indiana.edu
                          Steven J. Zuiker, National Institute of Education, Singapore, steven.zuiker@nie.sg

                  Abstract: Three design principles are advanced for multi-user educational videogames. First,
                  they should support situative embodiment in academic knowledge, where personally meaningful
                  activities and  coherent    narratives  foster collective  engagement.      Second,   they  should   offer
                  multiple levels and forms of meaningful assessment and the opportunity to succeed, fail, and try
                  again. Third, they should provide useful feedback that is used to enhance participation, learning,
                  and curricula. These principles were developed in three annual design-based refinements of a 15-
                  hour ecological sciences gaming curriculum in nine upper elementary classes. Across years, the
                  situative embodiment afforded by the curriculum was refined with informal assessment, and
                  innovative virtual formative feedback was incorporated around a key curricular activity. Results
                  across years revealed incremental improvements in participation, understanding of key concepts,
                  and achievement of targeted standards. The ultimate gains in understanding and achievement
                  were larger than those in comparison classrooms that used a conventional text-based curriculum
                  covering the same concepts and standards.

                  The worldwide success of commercial multi-user virtual environments (MUVES) is arguably the result
         of the amount of learning those games support. While the knowledge learned is often dismissed by parents and
         educators,  games   and  the   gaming  industry  support   unprecedented      levels and    types of learning.   Games  like
         World   of  Warcraft   allow   novices   to  quickly develop      sufficient  skills and    understanding    to  become an
         increasingly  central  participant.  Game-based    and   emergent    social   scaffolding   defines   a remarkably   strong
         trajectory  towards    sophisticated collective  activity, requiring    thoughtful    communication      and  sophisticated
         insights about the thoughts and actions of other participants. Arguably, this level of learning is unprecedented in
         designed   learning environment.     This has profound    implications    for advancing     and supporting   learning more
         broadly.
                  The success of commercial games has fostered an explosion of interest in educational relevance, fueled
         by books   (e.g., Gee,  2003;   Shaffer,  2006), articles  (i.e., Squire, 2006;  Schaffer,    Squire,   Halverson,  &  Gee,
         2005),  reports  (Federation   of  American  Scientists,  2006),   and  initiatives  (e.g., The   MacArthur   Foundation's
         Digital Learning    Initiative (1) and  the  European   Union's   ELEKTRA      project   (2)).  While   acknowledging   the
         fundamental   differences  when     considering  educational      content and  contexts,    most   of   the aforementioned
         scholars argue    that educational   researchers should    examine   the  design     features of  commercial     games  that
         support learning, and study how those features are (or are not) related to learning academic knowledge. Most of
         these scholars also argue that newer situative views of teaching and learning are ideally suited for appreciating
         and enhancing the ways that videogames might be used to enhance learning of academic knowledge. This paper
         presents   three  design features   that  emerged  across   a three-year      effort that   used  situative  approaches  to
         engagement, assessment, and feedback to enhance student participation, understanding, and achievement around
         on multi-user educational videogame.

        Quest Atlantis and the Taiga Ecological Sciences Curriculum
                  Quest Atlantis (QA) immerses learners in a virtual environment where they can experience complex
         situations and participate in compelling interactive narratives.(3) QA affords a game experience while including
         sufficient academic content to warrant use by classes of school children, typically in close collaboration with
         their classmates and teacher in a school computer lab. Questers are asked to help resolve virtual dilemmas on
         Atlantis by generating and evaluating solutions. Students navigate the three-dimensional space via their avatars,
         interacting with  other  players   via  text-based "chat,"  and    with   non-player  characters   (NPCs)    via structured
         dialogues. Academic content is organized around "Quests" that students complete and submit electronically in-
         game,   which are   then reviewed    by  the teacher who   inhabits  the  role  of   one of   the NPCs   in  the underlying
         narrative. Quests are embedded in a mission, which make explicit the sequence of tasks Questers experience in
         accomplishing their goals. Authoring software makes it simple to add or remove features, and a sophisticated
         interface allows assignment of different features or versions to different students or classes. This makes QA an
         ideal laboratory for studying how different design features impact engagement and learning.
                  Taiga, one of the many worlds in QA, is a park located along a river, populated by loggers, tourists,
         indigenous farmers, a fishing resort, and park administration. Taiga was designed to support 15-20 hours of

1-0
activity where students grades 4-6 learn standard ecological science concepts like erosion, eutrophication, and
hypothesis testing, via interaction with virtual characters and data that allows students to evaluate competing
explanations for declining fish populations in the Taiga River. Students learn this content while also learning to
engage in complex and potentially controversial socio-scientific inquiry (SSI, Sadler, 2004). The problems go
well beyond what even middle school teachers typically attempt. Players interact with 15 Non-Player Characters
(NPCs) in Taiga and complete four Quests. Success in the game requires students to understand and use (1)
indicators  such  as pH   and    dissolved oxygen,  (2)  the  processes  of erosion,  eutrophication,  and,   and  (3)  the
dynamic relationship between indicators and processes in socioscientific inquiry in the virtual water system.
          Between 2005 and 2007, Taiga was refined across three implementation cycles implementations, in a
total of 9 classes with data collected from 200 Questers (data was also collected in two non-QA comparison
classrooms taught by one of the QA teachers). Each year, design-studies were conducted in order to build useful
theories  and  practices  for  enhancing   the  quality  of   student experience   and  learning  of  academic     content.
Following is a summary of the first key design principle that emerged in these studies. This is followed by a
more   detailed account    of the  second  and   third principles, whose    usefulness  are closely   bound   to   the first
principle.

Using Conceptual Play Spaces to Foster Situative Embodiment
          One of the most important factors in the success of commercial videogames is their support of deep,
extended engagement in activities that players find personally meaningful. As popularized by Gee (2004), this
engagement is highly situated in the virtual space of the game; arguably 3-D virtual environments afford a type
of engagement that is best captured by contemporary embodied characterizations of cognition (e.g., Glenberg,
1997). The title of this paper reflect our belief that the first step in designing worthwhile educational videogame
is creating an  engaging    narrative  situation  that supports embodied     experiences  in    which relevant   academic
content can play a meaningful role. Thus, the first design principle explored in this paper is that educational
videogames should to support situative embodiment in academic knowledge. The initial implementations in this
study focused on engaging questers in personally meaningful ways with an important socio-scientific dilemma,
which could only be solved using scientific concepts and inscriptions. These efforts highlighted the interesting
junction  which   we have   reached.   On  the one  hand,   teachers  and  schools face  increased   pressure  to  prepare
students for standardized tests, while on the other hand, they face a generation of students who regard the school
curriculum as largely irrelevant to their own lives. The efforts to bridge this gap resulted in a related design
principle known as conceptual play spaces. As elaborated in Barab et al. (in press), conceptual play spaces are
curricular contexts that leverage what is known about how people learn, the metaphorical power of narratives,
and game design principles, to establish an educational, entertaining, and personally transformative context for
learning. Rather than using technology to efficiently deliver abstracted content, Quest Atlantis is designed so
that content maintains its connection to the world. Rather than imparting some ready-made, expert description of
a  concept  (a thing),  the curriculum  itself should   constitute an   experience   or world-to-be-lived   (an  activity).
Fundamentally, conceptual play spaces establish a problem situation that can only be solved if one employs
disciplinary concepts as a tool. They define an immersive context that changes in response to user actions. That
provides opportunities to examine one's participation in relation to the impact of one's choices in the immersive
context.
          Conceptual play is characterized by four modes of engagement: conceptual engagement, immersive
engagement,    transactive    engagement,   and   reflexive  engagement.    Briefly, conceptual     engagement     involves
enlisting  target concepts    in the service of   solving   a particular task.  Immersive   engagement    then     involves
situating  the task  in the context  of a  larger  dramatic   storyline in which the    learner participates. Transactive
engagement occurs when one's actions affect another, and at the same time, impacts the actor. This serves to
position the self in terms of the virtual world. Reflexive engagement involves the learners examining how their
participation changed the environment, and then using this understanding to interrogate the dynamics of the
environment    as well  as  their role in  influencing  these  dynamics.   In creating  spaces   to support   this kind of
learning, we have elsewhere described twelve design structures that developers can use to establish the four
modes of engagement. The space should contain both real and fictional elements, all designed to embed the
player and  the   concept   within a context   not typically  available  to the learner  based   on  constraints   of  time,
funding, or reality.
          An essential aspect of conceptual play is that the individual is experientially situated within the play
space in which she has a legitimate role. For example, a QA student becomes a scientist, examining the water
quality of the green, murky water in a virtual river. Similarly, such spaces serve to situate disciplinary content.
For example, the student-scientist must make use of their understanding of the related formalisms (i.e., algae
blooms and eutrophication) to correctly characterize the problem and advance a successful solution. In this way,
engaging in conceptual play allows for an extension of oneself into a context-of-use, establishing a new world
and self--a virtual-real being (Gee, 2003). This being is nested in a virtual-real world wherein the disciplinary
concepts have meaning and the learner has impact in that world. To summarize, our work focuses on using a

                                                                                                                               1-1
         narrative storyline and a virtual environment to narratize and make situationally concrete the use value of the to-
         be-learned concepts. Our theory of action states that such participation gives rise to legitimacy (established by
         conceptual engagement), intentionality (established by immersive engagement), consequentiality (established by
         transactive   engagement),    and  accountability    (established  by reflexive   engagement).      This  nascent   theory  of
         situated learning of academic content in conceptual play spaces has been deemed situative embodiment (Barab
         et al. 2007).

        Assessment for "Learning to Be" in Educational Videogames
                  Another     reason  commercial    videogames     support   massive   amounts  of     learning is that    they present
         players  with  repeated   assessments   of  their  developing    knowledge    and  skills. Importantly    these   assessments
         occur at multiple levels: at the more immediate levels, players are continually assessed by the game and other
         players  regarding     their enactment     of specific   game    activities; at the   more    distal   levels, players    have
         opportunities to attain status among the players that takes months or years of success to attain. We contend that
         such assessment of developing academic knowledge is crucial for educational videogames. Thus, the second
         design principle examined in this study that educational videogames should offer multiple forms and levels of
         meaningful assessment. After the conceptual play space had been established in the initial design cycles, the
         research   team   set about   refining the  informal   assessment    practices  in the space,     along   with  more     formal
         assessment practices used to refine and document learning in that space
                  Closely related to assessment is feedback. Assessment in videogames supports feedback that players
         use to enhance the success of their participation and learning. Some of this feedback is structured by the game,
         including the relatively immediate hints games give player who are lost or confused, while some is afforded by
         the game design, such as when a successful move (or mistake) is recognized and acknowledged by another
         player. This design study explored how feedback in educational games might be transformed to support learning
         of academic content. Thanks to widely cited reviews such as the one Black and Wiliam (1998), many have
         recognized    the tremendous     potential    of formative  feedback    for   supporting   academic    learning.    However,
         feedback only supports learning and improvement if that feedback is useful and used to advance learning and
         instruction  (Fredericksen    and  Collins,   1989). Unfortunately    there  is overwhelming      evidence     that (1)  many
         teachers struggle to provide useful feedback, (2) much of the feedback that is provided goes unused, and (3)
         some   feedback   is  used   in ways  that undermines     learning  and   educational  improvement      (National   Research
         Council,   2001a;   2001b).  Hence,    the third  educational  game   design   principle   is the educational     videogames
         should offer useful feedback that is used.
                  Arguably,      assessments   and  feedback    often   undermine     learning in   educational    environments.     In
         particular, educators are increasingly using sophisticated computer-based systems to directly increase scores on
         external tests. Such program train students to recognize the specific associations that might appear on a targeted
         test. Because such practices deliver modest test gains, school computer labs are increasingly being dedicated to
         such practices, to the exclusion of innovations such as Quest Atlantis. This study illustrated how newer design-
         based research methods (e.g., Barab, 2006), newer multi-level approaches to assessment (e.g., Hickey et al.,
         2006), and innovative approaches to formative feedback (Hickey, Kindfield, Horwitz, & Christie, 2003) can be
         used  to   directly   enhance   curricular  innovations     like Taiga    while indirectly    but   consistently    increasing
         achievement on targeted content standards. Across the three annual design studies, learning was aligned across
         four increasingly formal assessment levels (immediate, close, proximal, and distal). These refinements aimed to
         (a) foster enhanced     participation  in  socio-scientific inquiry,  (b) enhance   understanding      of targeted  scientific
         formalisms,   and   (c) increase  achievement     on externally  developed    achievement     tests aligned to    the  targeted
         standards but independent of the curriculum.
                  At the first assessment level, "event-oriented" observations using qualitative methods were carried out
         around the enactment of the Taiga curricular activities. These include informal observations used to provide
         feedback   to shape    those enactments    in situ, as well  as  more  formal   observations   used    to support   and  build
         nascent  theories   of  participation  and learning   in  this type of  educational   gaming    environment.      Rather  than
         focusing on individual understanding, this "immediate-level" assessment focuses on collective participation in
         domain specific knowledge practices. These analyses examined how the enactment of QA activities afforded
         students the shared opportunities to embody the role of water quality scientists. Put differently we, our intention
         was for them to "try on" the identities of water quality scientists, and "try-out" the discourses and practices that
         define  that  scientific community.    These     analyses were   conducted    with an  eye    towards  the  way     that many
         commercial game environments focus as much on learning how to "be" a particular professional as they do on
         how to "do" the range of skills and practices associated with a particular profession. In this sense, successful
         videogames provide players with ongoing opportunities to succeed (and sometimes fail) at what Gee (2005)
         characterized  as   "distributed  authentic   professionalism".   The  Taiga   curriculum     was designed     to provide  the
         players and their avatars distributed experiences with the authentic skills of professionals, and their authentic
         value systems and identities. In this sense, the research team assessed whether the design of the Taiga activities
         engaged students with real world problems where perspective on a particular way of knowing determines what

1-
critical knowledge is lacking. It examined the functional relations between what is significant and how one can
come    to know    what   is significant, mutually     reinforcing  what   Scardamalia     and  Berieter  (1994)    deemed
"intentional learning". Because the results of this assessment of participation are so tightly bound to the Taiga
curriculum, the perspective used and the nascent theories of participation that emerged that are more broadly
relevant than the actual results of the analyses.
           Complementing the notion of situative embodiment detailed above, these analyses assessed how the
conceptual play space of the Taiga activities supported transitional forms of participation (Beach, 1999). These
transitions   were   framed  in  terms of   liminality  (Turner,    1967),   which   examines    experiences    in-between
recognized    social boundaries.  Liminal   transitions are  activities  seeded  along    an unfolding    pathway   through
game play. The structure of each activity engages learners with ways of doing science and being scientific that
are different from but complementary to curricular experiences. These activities simultaneously engage students
in  the work   of  transforming  scientific   practices and    evolving  their  scientific roles.  Designing    for liminal
transitions, then, represents a principled approach to assessment of "learning to be" that coordinates the QA
backstory, the Taiga narrative, a player's networked assets (e.g., in-game photos, maps, data, books, and so
forth), and evolving status (e.g., ranger internship, lab credential, peer and Atlantian advisor), in order to expand
ongoing participation with authentic ecological sciences professionalism (elaborated in Zuiker, 2008).
           As  an  example    of design   based    research,   liminal   transitions  illuminated    design   tensions   for
understanding the general consequences of learning and evolved a local theory of assessment for learning to be.
Videotaped enactments of Taiga were analyzed to understand ways that this interleaving series of activities both
support learning and make knowing visible. A concurrent, nested approach to data analysis featured interpretive
analyses of learners' trajectories of participation with the curriculum as well as the transformations arranged by
liminal transitions. The analysis revealed a range of specific episodes in which some (but not all) students recast
relevant   practices and  roles  in light of  the  situations  they  encountered     during  some    (but not  all) liminal
transitions. This highlighted the importance of refining liminal transitions to help balance situational complexity
and  social   collaboration  during relatively   brief curricular   episodes.  This  guided    the enactment    of  existing
activities to provoke students to wrestle with learning as a way of being scientific (not just a process of coming
to  know   about  science).  These  insights  contributed   to the  ongoing   refinement   of  those activities  and Taiga
curriculum, and provided useful insights in the design of other academic play spaces in the QA world.

Feedback in Support of Participation and Understanding
           Work  at  the next assessment    level concerned    the  four quests that  students   completed    in the Taiga
curriculum. Each quest was framed as a report that that the field investigators were submitting to Ranger Bartle
for his review    and approval.  In  reality, the quests    were reviewed    by the  teacher   who   "played"   the Ranger
character. In more conventional curricular terms, they were somewhat akin to the "semi-formal" quizzes that
teachers   use to  assess  learning  from   the enactment    of  classroom    activities.  Such "close-level"    classroom
assessments    afford  feedback  that  is  ideal  for  directly  advancing    student  understanding      and guiding    the
enactment of the associated curricular activities. A major focus of last design studies was refining the usefulness
of the feedback that students received around the quest submissions, searching for ways to ensure that students
used that feedback, and examining the impact of that feedback on individual understanding and achievement.
           While the Taiga includes four quests, it is Quest 2 (Q2) that is crucial to their learning of the key
ecological science concepts, which are in turn used in the socio-scientific inquiry in Quests 3 and 4. In the initial
implementations, students were provided relatively modest feedback on their Q2 submissions. The responses
were evaluated by a research team member, and the feedback generally encouraged students to elaborate. Given
the centrality of Q2 and the well-documented potential of formative feedback, enhancement of the Q2 feedback
was an obvious target for further refinement of the Taiga curriculum. The first refinement to the Q2 formative
feedback was a new 3-point scoring rubric for teachers to use when evaluating their students' submissions. The
rubric assigned 0-3 points based on the students' apparent understanding of water quality indicators, processes,
and their interrelationship. The rubric included specific text which the teacher was invited to cut and paste into
the feedback window when returning the submitted quests to the students. This rubric alone was expected to
improve learning by focusing the teacher's (and therefore the students') attention on the key content of the Taiga
curriculum.
           The second refinement to Q2 consisted of feedback from the Lab Technician, a scientist NPC in charge
of analyzing water samples for the Taiga park administration. Teachers were expected to reject most initial Q2
submissions;   the   feedback on the  scoring   rubric  for Quests  assigned   0-2 points    advised students   to visit the
technician for help in revising their submission. The Technician then invited students to review 21 screens of
fairly  dense  technical  information  regarding    the  three   key  Q2   elements   (indicators,   processes,  and   their
relationship). At   three decision  points,  students  were  asked   if they wanted   to   see the specific feedback     and
wanted to learn more about each. The feedback dialogue pages used the relatively dense, technical jargon of the
domain. In light of the theorizing around the first design principle, we aimed to support meaningful "embodied"
participation  around    "embedded"    scientific  content.    This highlighted  the  balancing     act   between   making

                                                                                                                                1-
         feedback useful (for advancing student understanding as much as possible) and ensuring it is used (by making it
         accessible and directly relevant to the task at hand). Our general design strategy is that before simplifying the
         feedback   in order   to make    it more   accessible   and  readable  (and   potentially   less  useful  for   maximizing
         participation and individual learning), we should first search for ways to maximize use of that feedback.

        Learning Measures and Research Design
                 At the third assessment level, a more conventional assessment was used to capture student learning
         from   the Taiga   curriculum    (including   the embedded      assessment   and    formative  feedback)     and  guide   its
         refinement.   This "proximal"     assessment    was  intended   to assess  individual   gains   in  understanding     of the
         scientific concepts and forms of socio-scientific inquiry taught in the Taiga curriculum. Such assessments are
         akin to the formal classroom assessments that teachers typically use at the end of a unit or semester (often for
         assigning  grades).   They  are   "curriculum-oriented"     in  that they    assess the    concepts   taught   in particular
         curriculum,   but in  a  somewhat    different  context. Proximal-level    assessments     have   more   modest   value  for
         directly advancing student understanding (because they are removed in time and context), but are quite useful
         for (a) refining the curriculum, (b) comparing versions of a curriculum, and (c) guiding formal remediation for
         specific topics and/or students. The project tried out a number of different formats, including open-ended essay
         items, short answer items, and multiple choice items that had been constructed or carefully selected. In the final
         implementations, the distal assessment consisted of a comprehensive set of 15 open-ended items concerning
         another fictional watershed system (The Lee River).
                 At the fourth assessment level was a traditional multiple-choice test that measured student achievement
         on the science content standards that were aligned to the Taiga curriculum. The test was akin to the externally-
         developed   criterion  referenced   achievement   tests. It was  "standards-oriented"      in that it was   aligned   to the
         standards  that   were   aligned  with   the  Taiga  curriculum,   but  were   otherwise    unrelated    to this  particular
         curriculum. Such "distal" tests have little value for directly advancing student understanding, but are useful for
         comparing   different   curricula   that target the  same   standards, and   documenting      the  impact   of  a particular
         curriculum  on   other  similarly-constructed   tests.  To  make   the test, the research     team first created   pools  of
         released achievement test items that were aligned to the targeted content standards, independent of the way that
         standard was addressed in Taiga. After sorting each pool of items in terms of apparent difficulty, items were
         randomly selected from each pool to create a test of about 20 items. Twelve standards were targeted in Year 1,
         and four standards in Years 2 and 3.
                 Two     teachers implemented      the Taiga   curriculum   across three  annual    implementation      cycles. Both
         teachers were in the same district that served relatively high-achieving students in a town that surrounded a
         university in the Midwestern US. The majority of the students (roughly 80%) were Anglo American. Few of the
         students (roughly 10%) qualified for free or reduced lunch. The first teacher had been working closely with the
         Quest Atlantis project from the start, and used Taiga in a single class of academically gifted fourth-graders in
         each of the three implementation years. The second teacher was new to Quest Atlantis, and taught science to
         four classes  of  sixth-grade students.   During  the   second  implementation      cycle, he  used   Taiga  in   two of his
         classes, and used a high-quality custom-made textbook in his other classes. While the custom text covered the
         exact same science content as Taiga, it did so using more directly expository presentation of that content, much
         of it appropriated from other widely used textbooks. This was necessary because no other textbooks include
         such a focused consideration of water quality and socioscientific inquiry, which would have precluded a valid
         comparison.

        Increased Gains in Understanding and Achievement Across Years
                 Figures 1 and 2 summarize the gains on the proximal and distal outcome measures for the two teachers
         across the  implementation    cycles.    To  reiterate, the curricular  refinement   described     in Barab    et al  (2007,
         summarized above) were carried out between the first and second implementation cycles; the virtual formative
         feedback routines (and other more modest refinements) were carried out between the second and third cycles.
         For comparability across years and measures, pre-post gains have been transformed into effect sizes using the
         pooled standard    deviation. (4)   The  statistical likelihood of   each gains  using  repeated    measures    analysis  of
         variance is indicated on the graphs (p < .05 = *, p < .01 = **, p < .001 = ***).
                 In the first implementation year, the fourth-grade teacher implemented the Taiga curriculum for the
         first time. In this implementation, the proximal assessment consisted of two open-ended essay items that asked
         students quite directly about socio-scientific inquiry in the context of water quality. They were scored by two
         research team members who assigned up to six points on each essay for the presence of specific elements, and
         who attained adequate inter-rater reliability (i.e., < .80). While the proximal gains were quite substantial (over
         1.5 SD), gains on the distal test (which targeted 12 standards) were quite trivial and may have occurred by
         chance. Following the first round of curricular refinements, gains on the new proximal assessment (with a range
         of items) declined some. This was not surprising as the new proximal assessment was less aligned to the Taiga
         curriculum. Encouragingly, gains on the distal test were substantially larger, and were (for the first time for

1-
valid distal measures) statistically unlikely to have occurred by chance. In the third year, following the inclusion
of the virtual formative feedback described above, gains on the proximal assessment (the comprehensive Lee
River  assessment)    were     over two     standard  deviations. Average    gains  on   the   distal test in   the  third
implementation were slightly smaller than year two, but were more consistent across students and therefore even
less likely to have occurred by chance.
          Figure 2 shows that the sixth grade teacher obtained statistically unlikely gains on both the proximal
and  distal measures     in both conditions   in Year    Two.  While  the  Taiga  gains were   substantially   larger,  the
differences between the gains in the two conditions were themselves not statistically unlikely. The subsequent
incorporation of the virtual formative feedback after Year 2 resulted in dramatically larger gains on the proximal
test and modestly larger gains on the distal test. Like the fourth grade teacher, the sixth grade teacher showed the
intended pattern of increasingly larger gains on the proximal assessment, leading to an "echo" of increased gains
on the distal test. These finding show that using proximal assessments to guide implementation and refinements
of game-based curriculum and embedded formative assessment practices can deliver gains on distal standards-
oriented achievement tests that are independent of the particular curriculum. Because the students were never
directly  instructed on    the associations  included  in the distal test, and because   such  tests  have proven    quite
difficult to impact with short term curricular interventions, we contend that this is convincing evidence of the
broad value of the Taiga curriculum.

The Relationship between Engagement in Feedback and Learning Outcomes
          In order to examine the impact of virtual formative feedback, additional post hoc analyses were carried
out around the Quest Two submissions and student engagement in the virtual formative feedback routine. These
analyses were conducted on the Year Three results for the sixth-grade teacher. Each of the initial and final (i.e.,
revised) Quest Two submissions were scored by two members of the research team on a detailed 5-point scale
(inter-rater reliability = .85). Of the 79 students were asked to resubmit their quests, scores increased an average
of 1.7 points on the five point scale, representing a gain of 1.5 SD (F = 110, p < .0001). Clearly, the revision
process was resulting in improved submission quality.
          The crucial question concerns the extent to which the improvement in submission quality was due the
virtual formative feedback. Examination of feedback log files revealed that 18 of the 79 students did not even
access the feedback, 17 quite minimally accessed the three decision screens while electing to not examine the
detailed content, 16 students examined 1 of the 3 sections, 15 examined 2 of the 3 sections, and 13 examined
everything in all 3 sections. As shown in Figure 3, the gains on the proximal assessment showed a clear trend,
with  the students   who    accessed   all three sections gaining  double    what  the students   who  did not    visit the
technician at all. Quite remarkably, as shown in Figure 4, the students who accessed everything on all three
feedback sections were responsible for most of the entire group's gain on the distal test. Obviously these are
correlation data, and so no claims of causality are supported. However, they suggest that the obvious next step is
identifying the factors (e.g. extrinsic incentives) that support or undermine student engagement in formative
feedback to support even greater gains in understanding and achievement. Indeed, the fourth design principle
that we are exploring in subsequent studies is that educational games should provide students incentives for
using formative feedback.
          More broadly,     the study   shows  that  the general  model   of using  close-level   feedback to  maximize
individual participation and learning, while using proximal level feedback to guide refinements of the learning
environment,  while   using    distal-level data as  feedback  about the   success at  raising achievement,    is a viable
model for doing so. These results have spurred the research team to plan subsequent implementations of the
Taiga curriculum in which attempt to maximize engagement in feedback using different configurations of the
feedback  routine   (e.g.,  more or  less  embedded   in  the game)  and   motivation  practices  (public  recognition   of
expertise according to Quest scores).

Endnotes
(1)  www.digitallearning.macfound.org
(2)  www.elektra-project.org/
(3)  www.questatlantis.org
(4)  Most considerations of effect sizes follow Cohen's (1992) characterization of effect sizes of .3, .5, and .8 as small,
     medium, and large.

References
Barab, S,   Zuiker,  S., Warren,    S, Hickey,   D., Ingram-Goble,   A, Kwon,   E., Kouper,    I, &   Herring, S.  (2007).
          Situationally embodied curriculum: Relating formalisms and contexts. Science Education, 91, 750-782.
Barab, S. A. (in press). Narratizing disciplines and discliplinizing narratives: Games as 21st century curriculum.
          In S. Barab and A. Ingram-Goble (Eds), Games as 21st century curriculum. Dordrecht, Netherlands:
          Springer

                                                                                                                              1-
         Barab, S. A. (2006). Design-based research: A methodological toolkit. In K. Sawyer (Ed.), The handbook of the
                   learning sciences (pp. 153-170). Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press.
         Beach, K. (1999). Consequential transitions: A sociocultural expedition beyond transfer in education. Review of
                   Research in Education, 24, 101-139.
         Bereiter, C.    & Scardamalia,    M. (1989).   Intentional  learning as a  goal  of instruction. In   L. Resnick (Ed.),
                   Cognition and instruction: Issues and agendas (pp. 361-379). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
         Black, P. & Wiliam, D. (1998). Assessment and classroom learning. Assessment in Education, 5(1), 7-74.
         Cohen, J. (1992). Quantitative methods in psychology: A power primer. Psychological Bulletin 112(1): 155.
         Federation of American Scientists (2006). Harnessing the power of video games for learning. Washington, DC:
                   Author.
         Frederiksen, J. R., & Collins, A. (1989). A systems approach to educational testing. Educational Researcher
                   18(9), 27-32.
         Gee, J.   P. (2003).  What    video  games   have   to teach  us about  learning   and literacy  (1st ed.). New  York;
                   Houndmills, England: Palgrave Macmillan.
         Gee, J. P. (2005). What would a state of the art instructional video game look like? [Electronic Version]. Innovate,
                   1(6). Retrieved November 16, 2007 from http://innovateonline.info/index.php?view=article&id=80.
         Glenberg, A. M. (1997). What memory is for. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 2, 1-55.
         Hickey, D. T., Kindfield, A. C. H., Horwitz, P., & Christie, M. A. (2003). Integrating curriculum, instruction,
                   assessment,  and   evaluation  in  a technology-supported   genetics  environment.    American    Educational
                   Research Journal, 40 (2) 495-538.
         Hickey, D. T., Zuiker, S. J., Taasobshirazi, G., & Schafer, N. J., & Michael, M. A., (2006). Three is the magic
                   number: A design-based framework for balancing formative and summative functions of assessment.
                   Studies in Educational Evaluation, 32 (180-201).
         National  Research    Council   (2001a). Knowing      what  students know:   The   science and   design  of educational
                   assessment.    J. W. Pellegrino,   N.   Chudowski,  &  R.  W.    Glaser  (Eds.). Washington,    DC:   National
                   Academy Press.
         National Research Council (2001b). Classroom assessment and the national science education standards. J. M.
                   Atkin., P. Black, & J. Coffey, (Eds.). Washington, DC: National Academey Press.
         Sadler, T.   D. (2004).  Informal  reasoning   regarding   socioscientific issues: A critical review   of the literature.
                   Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 41, 513-536.
         Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (1994). Computer support for knowledge-building communities. The Journal of
                   the Learning Sciences, 3(3), 265-299.
         Shaffer, D. W. (2006). How computer games help children learn. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
         Shaffer, D. W., Squire, K. A., Halverson, R., & Gee, J. P. (2005). Video games and the future of learning. Phi
                   Delta Kappan, 87(2), 104-111.
         Squire, K. (2006). From content to context: Video games as designed experience. Educational Researcher, 35
                   (8), 19-29.
         Turner, V. (1969). The ritual process: Structure and anti-structure. Chicago: Aldine.
         Zuiker, S.   J. (2008, March).    Transforming    practice: Designing   for liminal  transitions along    trajectories of
                   participation.    Paper presented    at the  annual convention    of  the American     Educational  Research
                   Association, New York, NY.

       Acknowledgements
         This research was supported by a grant from the US National Science Foundation to Indiana University (Grant
         REC 0411846). We gratefully acknowledge the many other individuals who contributed to this research effort.
         These include Eun Ju Kwon, Anna Barab, Ina Kouper, Scott Warren, and Tyler Dodge. Anna Barab led the Year
         Two  grade    six implementation     effort, including  the   development   of  the comparison    curriculum.   We     are
         especially   grateful to teachers  Elizabeth   Piekarsky and  Jake   Summers   for  implementing  Taiga,    and to their
         students for their hard work and patience during in the data collection.

1-
Figure 1. Gains Across Years in Fourth Grade Classes          Figure 2. Gains Across Years in Sixth Grade Classes

 Figure 3: Differences in Proximal Gains According              Figure 4. Differences in Distal Gains According
        to Amount of Feedback Accessed                                To Amount of Feedback Accessed

                                                                                                                1-
