                         Early Years Learning with Digital Technologies:
                         The Relationship Between Research and Design
                              Rosamund Sutherland, Sarah Eagle, Claire O'Malley, Andrew Manches
                                          Graduate School of Education, University of Bristol,
                                   Email: lpxam5@nottingham.ac.uk, com@nottingham.ac.uk
                                                         Dan Sutch, Futurelab

                 Abstract: The overall aim of this symposium is to focus on the relationship between research
                 and   design  of technologies   for  early years  learning.  Presentations   will centre around   two
                 studies, one concerned with understanding the role that digital technologies play in shaping
                 interactions between parents and young children in the home and the other with understanding
                 the  role of  digital manipulatives   in early  years  learning of  numeracy   in  school. It will be
                 argued that whereas a common theme emerging from these studies is the importance of shared
                 physical and social interaction within early years learning, digital technologies for this age
                 group tend to be designed for individual use. Participants will be invited to offer explanations
                 for this emphasis on individual learning and discussion will focus on alternative approaches to
                 design that might take into account the intimacy of the interaction between young children and
                 adults.

        Background and Aims of Symposium
                 This symposium draws on the work of an ESRC1 and Futurelab2 funded network that aims to develop
         an understanding   of early   years learning  with digital technologies.    The work   of the symposium     will centre
         around two studies carried out by members of the network. The first study is concerned with understanding the
         role that digital technologies play in shaping interactions between parents and young children in the home and
         the second with understanding the role of digital manipulatives in early years learning of numeracy in school.
         These  studies are concerned     with different  learning  domains   (literacy and  numeracy),   different age   groups
         (under-fives and early primary) and different contexts for learning (the home and the classroom).
                 One common theme that emerges from the research reported in this symposium is the importance of
         shared physical   and social  interaction. Within  the  first study, the  context  is the intimacy  of the  interaction
         between children and parents ­ a key context for learning in the home. Within the second study, it is the close ­
         even huddled - work between children and teachers around physical objects that support numeracy activities in
         early primary school. Another common theme that is emerging is the way in which informal learning in the
         home is influenced by considerations of schooling and learning in school is influenced by informal learning in
         the home. Study one shows that although interactions between children and adults in the home tend to focus on
         the here and now, directed towards practical activities, parents and care-givers also take time to think beyond the
         here and now, to notice relationships, to teach, providing an educational experience for children at home. Study
         two highlights the importance of informal interactions (i.e., non-prototypical teaching interactions) within the
         more formal classroom setting. In this respect both at home and in school the interactional dynamics of intimate
         shared moments between children and adults around shared artefacts is an important aspect of learning.
                 How then should we design intimate digital technologies that support sharing between young children
         and adults?  Most  designs    of interactive technologies  are,  implicitly at least, aimed  at  supporting individual
         interactions with technology. They are designed for the individual child, interacting in a fairly solitary fashion
         with the software. It is interesting to probe why this should be the case. Does it relate to a view of learning in
         which one-to-one teacher/learner interaction is considered to be the most effective situation to be strived for,
         echoing the private tutors employed by the privileged, where the `personal tutor' idea is replaced by the idea of
         a  `personal computer'?   These    kind of   designs stand    in contrast to   the multiple and  diverse   and   rapidly
         developing   forms of  technologies     which   support  a different  kind   of use.   Technologies   for  leisure and
         entertainment are shared, mobile, allow creativity, authorship, communication and physical interaction ­ for
         example digital video and still cameras, networked games consoles, digital audio players and recorders, and
         interface devices which respond to the user's body movements and allow a sense of immersion.
                 Whereas both studies point to the need to take into account the shared intimate interactions between
         children and adults when designing digital technologies for early years, each study was originally influenced by
         different theoretical considerations. Study one draws on sociocultural theories in which tools and artifacts within
         the environment are considered to be integral to learning and cognition. In contrast study two takes a more
         cognitive approach in which the artefact is theorized as augmenting learning and cognition. Through working
         within the network we have not only become aware of these differences but also to a certain extent there has
         been some convergence in approach.

3-3
         Given this background the overall aim of this symposium is to focus on the following questions:

     1.  How might we most productively develop the relationship between the research and design fields in
         this area?
     2.  What are the key messages for designers (and commissioners) of digital technologies for early years
         learning ­ both from general principles and from the specific examples discussed here?
     3.  Where do sociocultural and cognitive perspectives meet with respect to young children's learning, and
         what is the emerging common ground?

         The symposium will be organised around an introduction which sets out the aims and background to
the  symposium,  presentations   of study   one and   study  two   and  discussion  which  focuses   on   the questions
outlined above.

Study One: Digital technologies in the home
Introduction
         This presentation    draws on   ongoing   research   that is  concerned   with  understanding    the role  that
interactive digital technologies play in shaping interactions between parents and young children in the home.
Underpinning the research project is an approach to cognition in which artefacts are considered to contribute
structure to the organisation of mental processes; we are able to offload cognition onto them (Hutchins, 1995;
Pea, 1993).  From    this perspective, conventions    of social relations,  features and   landmarks   in the  physical
environment, and language itself are artefacts which are used to structure the complexity of the world.
         The ways in which such artefacts are used relates to their material nature (or affordances) and at the
same time are inseparable from our experience of other people's ways of using them;
         (the knowledge carried in artefacts) ... may come to be exploited in activity by a new learner
         through a variety of genetic paths: through observations of use by other humans and attempts
         to imitate  it, through playful discovery    of its affordances   in solitary activity, and through
         guided participation in its use by more knowledgeable others. (Pea, 1993, p.54)

         Barbara Rogoff and colleagues have studied the informal social processes as they occur between adults
and young children in families and communities, defining guided participation as the process and system of
involvement of individuals with others as they communicate and engage in shared activities (Rogoff et al, 1993).
Through   active engagement    with their   children, and  often  in  response  to children's initiation, adults  make
arrangements for them to be involved in everyday activities, providing informal opportunities to learn. During
shared activities, children and adults are actively involved in a collaborative process of meaning making with the
objects, language, and social relations which are the artefacts of their culture.
         The research to be presented in this part of the symposium is guided by questions relating to young
children's use of interactive digital technologies in the home:

     x   What are the circumstances in which young children engage with others in the use of interactive digital
         technologies in the home?
     x   What kind of interactions take place between children and other family members as they use interactive
         digital technologies?
     x   How    do  a) the physical features   of  artefacts used  and  b)  the family  approach    to learning   guide,
         contribute to, constrain or discourage shared activity?

         Families   who   are participating in the research  study   have  been asked   to make   video  recordings  of
occasions when their child (aged 3 +) uses interactive digital technologies with another person. Suggestions for
possible occasions of interest are made during the course of an informal interview, whose purpose is also to
collect information on other family members' use of interactive digital technologies in the home and on the
family culture as it relates to learning, described as philosophies-in-practice (Matusov & Rogoff, 2002). Follow
up interviews based around the material collected on the video tapes allow further exploration in accordance
with the research questions.
         Analysis of the data is based on Rogoff's qualitative pattern analysis (Rogoff et al, 1993), abstracting
coding categories through close observation of activities. In relating interactions to the design features of the
technologies being used and to the families philosophies-in-practice, the analysis refers to an existing body of
research  literature on   family  practices with   young  children    that take place   around   another  artefact, the
storybook. This literature includes detailed studies of interactions between parents and children as they share
books,  studies  which    compare the  approaches   of   families  with different  experiences   of and   beliefs about
learning, and studies which relate the design of the book to interactions with children as it is read.

                                                                                                                           3-3
        Family practices and story book reading
                   Research  literature   on family   literacy provides    us  with a basis  for  the comparison    of  the nature   of
         family   practices  with books     and with    interactive   digital technologies,   and  a  basis for  thinking   about   the
         relationship  between    these   practices   and   young   children's   learning,   both  informal   and   formal.   Such   a
         comparison immediately raises issues for consideration. Whereas family practices with books have a relatively
         long history and a clearly developed relationship with formal education, the history of family practices with
         interactive digital technologies is relatively short. To complicate matters, widespread use of digital technologies
         is destabilising certainties in formal education, including the definition of what it is to be literate.
                   Whereas it has been possible for research to describe cultural norms in the sharing of books with young
         children,  norms   which    relate to  ideas   about  the  educational   value  of  reading  and   which   are informed    by
         practices in educational settings, corresponding norms are unlikely to have been established in young children's
         use of interactive digital technologies in the home. However, studies of the use of books and other artefacts in
         family life help us to understand what makes a participative practice a rich learning experience, and how such
         practices can become norms, embedded within family routines.
                   For young children, sharing books is potentially a rich experience when co-readers know the child well
         and reading takes place at times when they are free to engage fully in the activity. Research studies document
         how, during shared reading, it is common for children to be active in initiating and contributing to conversations
         which relate elements from the book to their own experience. If a co-reader is familiar with the child and shares
         their knowledge     of  the people,   events   and other   elements   of daily   life, they  are better   able to  notice  the
         relationships between the book and the child's life, and to share with the child in building meaning.             Meanwhile
         it has been demonstrated that adults are more likely to respond to children's interests and engage with them in
         rich conversations which build meaning, explore concepts beyond the here and now, and involve explanations,
         at times of the day when they are not distracted by the need to fulfil tasks. Examples of this are at mealtimes
         (Snow,   1993;   Cloran, 1999)   and   during  story  reading.  Susan    Nichols'   study of  parental  involvement     in the
         bedtime    story suggests   that story-reading   at   bedtime  is    maintained as  a  regular   practice because    it fulfils
         multiple functions, namely of settling the child and providing an opportunity for contact between children and
         parents who are out during the rest of the day, in addition to being underpinned by its relationship with formal
         education. (Nichols, 2000).

        A perspective for thinking about design
                   The research literature on family practices with story books has motivated the framing of a perspective
         on   the design  of interactive    digital technologies    for young    children,  articulated here  in   the  form  of  three
         questions:

              x    How    might  we  think   about  young   children's   experiences     at home   in terms  of  preparing    them  for
                   practices with interactive digital technologies in schools?
              x    How    might  interactive   digital  technologies    be designed   to    encourage  shared   use between      young
                   children and others?
              x    How might sharing interactive digital technologies become established as a context in which children
                   and adults engage in conversations about ideas and concepts beyond the here and now?

                   The symposium presentation offers an exploration of these questions, illustrated with findings from the
         research study. It will include a description of the variety of ways in which participating families use interactive
         digital technologies, and will foreground examples identified as being rich participative experiences.

        Study Two: Digital technology to support numeracy in the early years classroom
        Introduction
                   The    notion  that learning     can be  described    in   terms   of progression    from  concrete     to abstract
         representations (e.g., Piaget, 1965) is reflected in pedagogical practice by the use, followed by withdrawal, of
         physical learning materials (manipulatives) in early education. However, the effectiveness of manipulatives to
         support learning has been brought to question (Ball, 1992; Uttal, Scudder, & DeLoache, 1997). Understanding
         this  area has   now   received    renewed   interest as   a result  of  the technological    advances    that allow    digital
         technology to be integrated almost seamlessly into physical objects (e.g. Marshall, Price, & Rogers, 2003).
                   This paper draws on arguments surrounding the author's current research investigating the potential for
         tangible (handheld) technologies to support early numerical development in the classroom. Initial studies have
         examined children's performance in numerical tasks using physical or pictorial representations and findings are
         intended to help inform the design of digitally augmented manipulatives to support learning in this domain.

3-3
Numerical development in early Mathematics
         Children do not start school without any previous experience of number. Their interactions with the
physical  and  social  world     have allowed   them  to construct  an   `informal' numerical   sense  built  upon   innate
capabilities such as enumerating small quantities visually (see Hughes, 1986). When children start school, they
are generally familiar with the counting procedure but have a limited understanding of the meaning of number
words and are inexperienced in applying their knowledge to more formal school mathematical problems. As
children's number sense develops; they learn how a number represents a set rather than simply a position along
a sequence, and then how numbers can be decomposed into smaller amounts. This developing knowledge allows
children to apply more sophisticated and flexible strategies to solve numerical problems of greater complexity.
However, despite our growing understanding of how children develop their numerical concepts (e.g., Nunes &
Bryant, 1996), it is not yet clear how different representations foster this development. There are several ways
that manipulatives may play a role.

How manipulatives might support numerical development
         The   categories:    Generating    conceptual   metaphors,    Generating   actions,  Offloading     concepts    and
Focusing    attention  (Mix,     in press)  have   been  used   to help   describe  the possible     learning  benefits  of
manipulatives.  Although      there  is interesting  overlap with  the   more  widely recognized     terms   computational
offloading, re-representation and graphical constraining (Scaife & Rogers, 1996), these refer more to problem
solving using graphical representations rather than learning through physical representations.
         Generating conceptual metaphors: Using features such as quantity, length or colour, manipulatives
may  provide   conceptual     metaphors    for number    concepts  which    may  consequently     be embodied     by  these
perceptual  experiences    (Lackoff     &  Núñez,   2000). Unlike   graphical    representations, manipulatives      can be
directly manipulated    and   it has  been  hypothesised   that these  actions might  foster new   interpretations   of  the
environment and consequently help individuals develop their ideas (Martin & Schwartz, 2005). This theory was
supported   through    studies   examining  children's   understanding   of fraction  problems.   As  Thompson       (1994)
states, "[children]   are  empowered      when   they recognize    the multiplicity  of viewpoints    from    which   valid
interpretations can be made for they are then alert to choose among them for the most appropriate to the current
situation".
         Generating     actions:    The  actions   generated by    using manipulatives   are  metaphors      for numerical
operations. Collections can be added, subtracted, shared equally or broken apart in different ways. These actions
are familiar to children from their informal experiences and may help them construct mathematical meaning by
providing a way to develop concepts through the sensorimotoric encoding (Wilson, 2001). Indeed, the rising
literature on embodied cognition (e.g., Lackoff & Núñez, 2000) and research into the importance of gestures in
mathematical cognition (e.g., Goldin-Meadow, Nusbaum, Kelly, & Wagner, 2001) may prove highly relevant to
arguments concerning physical interaction in learning.
         Offloading    cognition:    Similarly  to  diagrammatic   representations,  physical representations     have   the
benefit  of organizing     information   by location  (Larkin   &  Simon,   1987).  However,    information      can be  re-
represented spatially using motor actions. Direct physical manipulation may prove cognitively advantageous
over    annotation, for    example:     through  reduced   demands     on   fine motor   control,    tactile  feedback   or
proprioception  therefore     allowing    incremental  (and  retractable)   changes  to be   made    more    easily. Three
dimensional    spatial groupings     may  also  be  perceptually   supportive  allowing children   to identify   units   and
collections more efficiently using perceptual mechanisms such as subitizing: an innate capacity to enumerate
small collections (Dehaene & Cohen, 1994). Consequently, manipulatives may facilitate exploration of various
numerical concepts such as how taking from one group to add to another preserves the total (compensation) or
how collections can be added in any order (additive commutativity).
         Focusing attention: Manipulatives may help focus attention on key concepts by constraining not only
what information is presented but also how this information can be altered. Accordingly, it has been suggested
that the amount of extraneous features be minimized to reduce the chances that children are distracted from what
is intended to be represented (Uttal et al., 1997).

Limitations of manipulatives
         It is difficult   to evaluate   how   transparent numerical   concepts   embodied   in physical     objects are to
children  who  are   still unfamiliar   with   these concepts.  Manipulatives    may  be  objects    which   children   find
interesting in their own right and which may distract, rather than focus children on numerical concepts (Uttal et
al., 1997). In the case of graphical representations, it is possible to add supportive symbols and text (e.g. number
lines); the possibility for doing this with manipulatives is limited. Speculatively, it is possible that this restriction
encourages teacher to model more specific procedures using manipulatives for children to emulate; a practice
that has been criticized (e.g., Gravemeijer, 1991; Thompson, 1994).

                                                                                                                               3-3
        Augmenting manipulatives through technology
                   Increasing sophisticated features such as lights and sounds can now be integrated into smaller physical
         materials which are able to remotely communicate with each other and separate devices. These features can be
         used   to emphasise   important  numerical    concepts  to  children  such as: what   items they   have   tagged  when
         counting,  when   collections   have  increased in size or  the significance   of collections  of ten. It is important,
         however,   that digital augmentation    focuses  attention  on  these ideas and   does not  simply  aim   to make   the
         materials more appealing.
                   Arguably,  the  most   exciting  possibility afforded  by   tangible technology   is to  help   map  physical
         representations to verbal and written notations of number. Through communication between objects, devices can
         enumerate collections and provide these representations through integrated speakers or graphical displays. This
         affordance means that children can explore symbolic representations of number through physical interaction;
         such as how quantities can be decomposed in different ways (additive composition). However, it may prove
         beneficial to integrate costs such as delays between representations to encourage children to plan more before
         acting (see O'Hara & Payne, 1998).
                   Virtual (screen based)    manipulatives  (see   Moyer,  Bolyard,  &   Spikell,  2002)   can  already provide
         multiple external representations of number, however, indirect manipulation within a small 2D space may lose
         some of the cognitive benefits of physical manipulation and therefore be more limited in building on children's
         informal   understandings.   Virtual   manipulatives   do  have  other advantages,    such  as:   providing  structured
         activities, feedback and assessment. However, these features could also be extended to tangible devices through
         remote connection with computers thereby providing the flexibility for both unstructured and structured use.

        Final comments
                   The arguments made in this paper will be discussed at the conference using findings from two studies
         examining    children's interactions   with different  external representations   when  solving   numerical  problems.
         Children in both studies were asked to solve part whole problems using physical or pictorial representations.
         The   findings  help elucidate  the   role of physical manipulation    as well  as limitations  of the  materials. The
         research provides a platform to start considering how technology might address these limitations and moreover,
         build on the benefits of intimate interaction with these artefacts to support learning within this domain.

        Discussion: The Relationship between Research and Design
                   Discussion within the symposium will be orchestrated by two co-applicants, one whose work focus in
         on the design of technologies for learning and the other whose work focus is on research in the area. Discussion
         will be organised around the questions set out in section 1, with an overall aim of provoking debate, teasing out
         differences and establishing common ground. The discussion will feed back into the work of the network on
         early  years learning   with digital  technologies in  order to  develop  guidelines  for the  development    of digital
         technologies for this age group.

       Endnotes
          (1)  See http://www.futurelab.org.uk
          (2)  Economic and Social Research Council, UK (www.esrcsocietytoday.ac.uk)

       References
         Ball, D. (1992). Magical hopes: manipulatives and the reform of math education. Maths Educator.
         Bruner. (1966). Toward a theory of Instruction. Cambridge: Belknap Press.
         Cloran,   C. (1999)  Contexts   for Learning.  In Christie,  F. (ed)  Pedagogy    and the Shaping  of  Consciousness:
                   Linguistic and Social Processes. Continuum, NY. pp 31-65
         Dehaene, S., & Cohen, L. (1994). Dissociable mechanisms of subitizing and counting - Neuropsychological
                   evidence from simultanagnosic patients. Journal of Experimental
         Goldin-Meadow, S., Nusbaum, H., Kelly, S. D., & Wagner, S. (2001). Explaining math: Gesturing lightens the
                   load. Psychological Science, 12(6), 516-522.
         Gravemeijer, K. (1991). An instruction-theoretical reflection on the use of manipulatives. In L. Streefland (Ed.),
                   Realistic Mathematics Education In Primary School (pp. 21-56). Utrecht, Netherlands: Technipress.
         Hughes, M. (1986). Children and Number. Oxford: Blackwell.
         Hutchins, E. (1995) Cognition in the Wild. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
         Lackoff,   G.,  & Núñez,     R. (2000).    Where  Mathematics    Comes    From:   How   the Embodied      Mind   Brings
                   Mathematics into Being. New York: Basic Books.
         Larkin, J. H., & Simon, H. A. (1987). Why a Diagram Is (Sometimes) Worth 10000 Words. Cognitive Science,
                   11(1), 65-99.
         Marshall, P., Price, S., & Rogers, Y. (2003). Conceptualising tangibles to support learning. Paper presented at
                   the Proceeding of the 2003 conference on Interaction design and children.

3-3
Martin,  T., &  Schwartz, D.   (2005). Physically  Distributed Learning:  Adapting and   Reinterpreting  Physical
         Environments in the Development of Fraction Concepts. Cognitive Science, 29, 587­625.
Matusov,  E.,   & Rogoff, B. (2002).   Newcomers    and oldtimers: Educational  philosophy-in-actions    of parent
         volunteers in a community of learners school. Anthropology and Education Quarterly, 33(4), 1-26.
Mix, K. (in press). Spatial Tools for Mathematical thought. In L. B. Smith, M. Gasser & K. S. Mix (Eds.),
         Thinking Through Space. New York: Oxford University Press.
Moyer, P., Bolyard, J., & Spikell, M. (2002). What are Virtual manipulatives? Teaching Children Mathematics,
         8(6), 372-377.
Nichols, S   (2000) Unsettling  the Bedtime  Story: parents'  reports of home  literacy practices. Contemporary
         Issues in Early Childhood, 1 (3) 315-328
Nunes, T., & Bryant, P. (1996). Children doing mathematics. Oxford: Blackwell Publishers.
O'Hara, K. P., & Payne, S. J. (1998). The effects of operator implementation cost on planfulness of problem
         solving and learning. Cognitive Psychology, 35(1), 34-70.
Pea, R.  D.  (1993).  Practices of  distributed intelligence and designs  for education.  In  G. Salomon    (Ed.),
         Distributed  cognitions:   Psychological  and  educational   considerations,   (pp. 47-87). Cambridge:
         Cambridge University Press.
Piaget, J. (1965). The Child's conception of number. New York: Norton.
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 20, 958-975.
Rogoff, B., Mistry, J.J., Göncü, A., & Mosier, C. (1993). Guided participation in cultural activity by toddlers
         and caregivers. Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development, 58
Scaife, M., & Rogers, Y. (1996). External cognition: How do graphical representations work? International
         Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 45(2), 185-213.
Snow, C. (1993) `Families as social contexts for literacy development', in C. Daiute (ed.), The Development of
         Literacy Through Interaction. San Francisco: Jossey Bass. pp. 11­24.
Thompson,    P. (1994). Concrete  materials and  teaching for  mathematical understanding.    Arithmetic Teacher,
         42(9), 556-558.
Uttal, D. H., Scudder, K. V., & DeLoache, J. S. (1997). Manipulatives as symbols: A new perspective on the use
         of concrete objects to teach mathematics. Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology, 18(1), 37-54.
Wilson, M. (2001). The case for sensorimotor coding in working memory. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review,
         8(1), 44-57.

                                                                                                                      3-3
