                                Concept Mapping for Learning from Text:
                                Evidence for a Worked-Out-Map-Effect
                      Tatjana Hilbert, Matthias Nückles, University of Goettingen, Educational Psychology,
                                            Waldweg 26, 37073 Goettingen, Germany
                   Email: tatjana.hilbert@psych.uni-goettingen.de, matthias.nueckles@psych.uni-goettingen.de
                       Sandra Matzel, University of Freiburg, Educational Psychology, Engelbergerstr. 41,
                                        79085 Freiburg, Germany, sandramatzel@gmx.de

                 Abstract: A concept map consists of nodes representing concepts and links representing the
                 relationships between the concepts. To examine the influence of concept mapping on learning
                 from texts, we varied the support strategies. Eighty students either learned by constructing
                 concept  maps   on their own,  by  correcting   an  incorrect worked-out    map,  or by studying  a
                 correct worked-out map. A control group did not engage in any follow-up activity for learning
                 from  text. As  expected, learners    profited most from  studying   the  correct worked-out   map.
                 Students who corrected an incorrect worked-out map did not have a better learning result than
                 students who generated concept maps on their own or the control group. On the contrary, they
                 produced many false conclusions in the comprehension test.

       Introduction
                 Concept  maps   are  two-dimensional,    graphical  representations  consisting   of concepts  illustrated by
         hierarchically arranged nodes and labeled links that connect the nodes (Jonassen, Beissner, & Yacci, 1993). The
         hierarchical organization of the concepts and the explicit representation of the logical and semantic relations
         between the concepts distinguish concept maps from other maps, such as mind maps (Buzan & Buzan, 1995).
         Based on Ausubel's (Ausubel, Novak, & Hanesian, 1978) assimilation theory of meaningful learning, Novak
         and Gowin   (1984)  developed  the method     of concept   mapping   in  order to promote    meaningful learning   by
         integrating new  ideas  into the  learner's   prior knowledge.     A  variety  of   studies  have demonstrated     the
         effectiveness of concept mapping as a learning method, including a meta-analysis of 19 quantitative studies by
         Horton et al. (1993). The authors found a generally positive effect on knowledge acquisition. As several studies
         have shown, meaningful learning can be assisted through the construction of a concept map (Novak, 1990).

        What Makes Concept Mapping Beneficial?
                 Novak (1995) describes a variety of applications of concept mapping in learning. For example, concept
         maps can assist the preparation of lessons and the sequence of topics presented; they can serve as a basis for
         discussions; they can be used as a tool for knowledge evaluation. Furthermore, concept maps can assist learning
         from texts (Hilbert & Renkl, 2008). It is this latter application of mapping that is the focus of this article.
                 Concept  mapping    as a follow-up    strategy in  text learning can   have several  important functions.   In
         theory, four functions can be differentiated:
                 (a) Reduction function: Weaver and Kintsch (1991) found that macropropositions which contain the
         top-level information of a text are recalled in more detail. Maps can enhance the acquisition and retention of
         macrolevel ideas (O'Donnell, Dansereau, & Hall, 2002). Learners have to appraise the importance of concepts in
         order to decide whether they should integrate them in their concept map. Thus, learners concentrate on the most
         relevant macrostructure information of their learning topic.
                 (b) Coherence function: Concept mapping requires the externalization of knowledge and its structure.
         Thereby working memory is offloaded and the construction of coherence is facilitated (Kintsch, 1998). Labeling
         the links   connecting nodes   emphasizes   the  kind   of relationship  between    concepts.  Additionally,    spatial
         arrangements or the use of similar colors can emphasize that concepts belong together. Thus concept mapping
         fosters the building of a coherent structure of knowledge.
                 (c) Elaboration function: Due to the affordance of expressing notions in nodes and relations in links,
         concept maps foster elaboration processes (Weinstein & Mayer, 1986). This means that learners have to relate
         new information to their prior knowledge in order to determine what concepts are important and whether and
         how they interrelate.
                 (d)  Metacognitive   function: Metacognitive       processes  are  supported   through    concept mapping.
         Knowledge and comprehension gaps can become obvious when constructing and explicating relations between
         concepts, (e.g., Chi, Bassok, Lewis, Reimann, & Glaser, 1989). At best, learners can overcome these gaps when
         they become aware of them.

1-
Supporting Concept Mapping
          Despite   the   positive  effects of   concept  mapping,    this learning   strategy also  poses   high  processing
demands    on  learners.   For example,     in a  study   by Reader   and  Hammond       (1994),  participants   learned  from
hypertext by either note-taking or concept mapping. Even though learners in the concept mapping condition
performed better in a post-test on the learning topic presented in the hypertext, qualitative analyses showed that
they failed to structure and integrate the information provided by the hypertext in a favorable way. The learners
were not able to use the advantages of the method to the expected degree.
          In order   to cope   with     beginners'  difficulties in using  concept    maps for   learning   from texts, a   few
studies have been conducted that tested the effectiveness of different support measures. One support measure is
to present learners with worked-out expert maps. In general, learning from worked-out examples has proven to
be  very  effective    in  initial skill  acquisition  in  well-structured    domains    such  as   mathematics,   physics     or
programming (e.g., Atkinson, Derry, Renkl, & Wortham, 2000) as well as in more complex domains such as
computer-supported cooperation (Rummel & Spada, 2005). According to the worked-example effect postulated
by the Cognitive Load Theory (e.g., Sweller & Cooper, 1985), learning from examples prevents learners from
using load-intensive strategies and focuses their attention on learning. In the domain of concept maps, studies
examining a worked-out effect in the context of mapping as a follow-up study strategy are rare. Nevertheless,
the results of O´Donnell et al. (2002) point out that learning with teacher prepared maps (i.e. expert maps) as
teaching materials, can be more effective than learning from text. For instance, learners with low verbal ability
profited particularly from studying worked-out expert maps.
          Chang, Sung, and Chen (2001) compared students who either learned by constructing a concept map or
by completing a worked-out concept map. Two different completion tasks were realized: One group had to fill
in gaps in a worked-out concept map; another group had to construct a concept map from given concept nodes
and   given  labeled   links. The   students   who    accomplished    the  completion    task  achieved   better  results   in a
comprehension test than the students in the map construction group. In a follow-up study, Chang, Sung, and
Chen (2002) showed that text comprehension was most strongly enhanced by correcting a partly incorrect expert
map which contained some incorrect links and nodes. The correcting map condition outperformed two map
generation   conditions    and  a   no  mapping    control   condition,  even   when   map    generation  was   supported   by
scaffolds.  It is   noteworthy     that in both   studies by Chang    et  al., those  students   who   generated  maps    were
presented a list of concepts and relations to choose from. Thus, they did not have to develop their own concepts
and  relations.   Instead, the  provided    lists of concepts    and  relations functioned    as scaffolds  for  the   mapping
process.
          Hauser,   Nückles,    and     Renkl  (2006)  similarly    compared    different degrees    of  scaffolding   concept
mapping for learning from text: In their experimental study, students were either supported by a list of concepts
which they had to spatially arrange and link, or by spatially arranged concepts which they only had to link. A
third group    of learners  studied     a worked-out   expert    map. A  fourth   group   constructed   a concept  map    from
scratch, that is, no list of concepts or relations was provided. In this study, students in the two "semi-structured"
conditions (concepts provided and concepts arranged conditions) performed no better than students in a fifth
group, that is, the control condition which did not engage in any follow-up activity. At the same time, providing
students  with    a worked-out     map    supported   learning   most effectively   compared     with   the other  conditions.
However, constructing a map from scratch was almost equally helpful.
          Thus, Hauser et al. (2006) reported an advantage of learning with completely worked-out maps as a
follow-up    activity  for  learning    from   text  ­ a  result  which    is  in line   with  the  worked-example      effect.
Nevertheless, a possible restriction of presenting learners a completely teacher-prepared concept map may be
that  the learners  merely    process   the map    superficially. For example,    Renkl   (1997)    found that most    students
learning with worked-out examples in mathematics could be classified as superficial or passive learners. To
avoid such superficial processing, Chang and colleagues successfully implemented an incomplete map which
had to be completed by the students (Chang et al. 2001). Hauser et al. (2006), however, found that substantial
scaffolding  of   the  mapping     process, for   example  by    providing students   with a   list of  concepts  or   with the
relevant concepts already spatially arranged may narrow attention to specific aspects of the learning process in a
dysfunctional way. Also, Hilbert, Renkl, Kessler, and Reiss (in press) showed that a completion task can pose
high processing demands on learners and thus hinder them in learning from worked-out examples.
          Metacognitive     reflection    that contributes   to  deep   comprehension     can  also   be  fostered   by  errors
(VanLehn, 1999). There is evidence that learning from worked-out examples can be supported by presenting
solutions  with   errors   (Große   &     Renkl,  2007).  Similarly,  Chang    et al. (2002)   successfully   implemented      a
correction   task   in learning    with   worked-out   concept    maps.  To    stimulate  metacognitive     reflection (cf. the
metacognitive function of concept mapping), learners had to find and correct errors in a presented worked-out
concept map. However, the authors did not compare this map-correction condition with a condition in which
students studied worked-out maps without errors. Thus, strictly speaking, no definite conclusion can be drawn
from this work on whether a correction task actually has a surplus value to learning with worked-out expert

                                                                                                                                     1-
         maps.  The   study  of  Große   and   Renkl  (in press) suggests    that incorrect  examples    can also    hinder  learning
         especially if the learners do not possess the relevant prior knowledge that would enable them to detect the errors.

       Research Questions
                   The empirical studies discussed above provide rather mixed evidence regarding the question of how
         concept   mapping    as a  learning   strategy can be   effectively    scaffolded. Partly,  prior  research   suggests   that
         providing students with worked-out concept maps may facilitate learning (Hauser et al., 2006; O'Donnell et al.,
         2002). Studying    a worked-out      concept map   may   be  regarded    as a less load-intensive   learning   activity  (cf.
         Sweller & Cooper, 1985) as compared with the affordance of generating a concept map from scratch that can
         easily overwhelm learners (Reader & Hammond, 1994). On the other hand, presenting learners with a worked-
         out solution may also lead to superficial processing (Renkl, 1997). Against this background, the aim of this
         study  was   to investigate  the   potential benefits   of worked-out    concept   maps   on   the acquisition    of factual
         knowledge and deep comprehension in further detail. Following Hauser et al. (2006), providing students with a
         worked-out    concept   map  for  learning   from text, should  facilitate  comprehension      substantially. Chang   et  al.
         (2002) additionally showed that the dangers of superficial processing can be averted by encouraging students to
         detect errors in a partly incorrect worked-out map. However, in Hauser's study, students who constructed a map
         on their own performed almost equally well as students who studied a worked-out map for learning from text.
                   Given the results of Hauser et al. and Chang et al., it would be interesting to directly contrast a worked-
         out map condition, a map-correction condition, and a map construction condition within the same experimental
         design. Following Hauser et al., students studying a worked-out map for learning from text should outperform
         students in a control condition who engage in no such follow-up activity. Following Chang et al., encouraging
         students  to detect  errors  in a  worked-out    map containing     errors might   even lead   to better learning   success.
         Finally, if constructing a concept map from scratch helps students to focus on relevant aspects of the learning
         material,  provision   of worked-out    maps    may  be    even dispensable.   However,     it cannot    be  ruled  out  that
         constructing a map from scratch may be a too demanding task for students inexperienced with concept mapping
         and may therefore hinder learning success.
                   The following specific research questions were addressed:
                   1.  Do learners who studied expert maps have better learning outcomes than learners who generated a
                       concept map from scratch and learners who did not engage in a follow-up activity?
                   2.  Do learners who corrected errors in an incorrect worked-out map have better learning outcomes
                       than learners who generated a concept map from scratch and learners who did not engage in a
                       follow-up activity?
                   3.  Is  there a  difference  in the  learning  outcomes      between learners   who   studied  expert   maps   and
                       learners who corrected errors in an incorrect worked-out map?
                   4.  Does   generating    a  concept  map   from  scratch  lead   to better learning   outcomes     than  doing  no
                       follow-up activity?

       Methods
        Sample and Design
                   Eighty university students (21 male, 59 female, mean age: 25.7 years) from different academic fields
         took  part in this  study.  On   average,  they  had  studied   for 6.7  semesters   (3.4 years).  The   participants    were
         randomly assigned to the four experimental conditions of a one-factorial design: Participants in the mapping
         group  (n  =  20)  constructed   a concept   map   from    scratch  as follow-up   activity for   learning   from  text. The
         participants in the correction group (n = 20) had to find and correct errors in an incorrect map as follow-up
         activity. Participants in the expert map group (n = 20) were asked to study a correct expert map. The control
         group (n = 20) did not engage in any follow-up activity for learning from text. Dependent variables were the
         learners' factual knowledge and comprehension in a posttest.

        Materials
        Mapping Software
                   The   participants in   the three  mapping    conditions     worked  with  the   easy   mapping    tool,  software
         especially developed for concept mapping (see http://www.cognitive-tools.de for more information). We chose
         the Easy Mapping Tool for this study because it is very easy to learn how to handle it. Learners in the mapping
         group constructed a concept map from scratch. Therefore, they were able to use all necessary functions of the
         Easy  Mapping    Tool:  constructing   and   moving   concept   nodes,   and  drawing   and  labeling    the links.  For  the
         correction group and the expert map group the range of functions was varied. Learners in the correction group
         only were able to manipulate the inscription of the concept nodes and the links, or to change the direction of the
         links. In the expert map group, participants were only able to look at the presented expert map, but could not
         manipulate it.

1-0
Learning materials
        Text  about ethical  and   biological   issues  in human   embryo  research.   The  learning   topic  on human
embryo research was presented in a complex learning text (2257 words). The text discussed whether and when
human   embryos   should   be   protected     against  research   endeavors.  The     interdisciplinary and    complex
characteristic of this text assured that it was challenging enough for advanced students from different fields. In
fact, earlier studies revealed that students on average had comparatively low prior knowledge about the content
domain (Nückles & Salhab, 2005). In addition, human embryo research is a domain that recently attracted much
attention in German media. Therefore learning about these contents should be motivating and interesting.
        Expert  map.  Participants    in the  expert  map  group  were  presented   an  expert  map   after reading  the
learning text. This concept map consisted of 46 concept nodes and 60 links. The participants were instructed to
examine the expert map carefully.
        Incorrect  map. Participants     in the correction  group  had to  correct  an incorrect   map  as  a follow-up
activity after reading the text. The map was essentially identical to the expert map. However, nine errors were
built in: Three links pointed in the wrong direction, three concept nodes were wrongly inscribed, and three links
were wrongly labeled. The participants were informed about the number of errors in the incorrect map and about
the types of errors that could occur.

Learning Assessment
        Factual knowledge test. Two types of learning outcome were tested. On the one hand we wanted to
know  how    much  factual knowledge      participants  acquired.  Therefore, we    employed    a  multiple-choice  test
consisting of ten items on ethical and biological issues on human embryo research (e.g., "Which statement about
the German stem cell law is true?"; maximum score: 10 points). This factual knowledge test was answered as a
pretest prior to reading the learning text and as a posttest after the learning task.
        Comprehension test. In order to assess learners' deep understanding and comprehension of the learning
contents, the posttest also included six open questions (e.g., "What are the advantages and disadvantages of
using embryonic   stem cells   and   of using adult  stem  cells, respectively?").  The   level of  comprehension   was
assessed using the SOLO-taxonomy ("Structure of Observed Learning Outcome") proposed by Biggs and Collis
(1982). According to the SOLO-taxonomy, each answer was differentiated into six levels of knowledge ranging
from 1 (= no central points, low level of understanding, incoherent) to 6 (= all central points, high level of
understanding, very coherent). Additionally, we rated the answers more differentiated on a Likert scale ranging
from 1 ("dimension not present") to 6 ("dimension clearly present") regarding three dimensions:
   a.   Main points: The extent to which important arguments were taken up.
   b.   Coherence: The extent to which learners produced a coherent answer.
   c.   Elaboration: The extent to which the answer was explicit and exact.

Procedure
        The   study was  conducted       in group  sessions  of 10-20  participants    in the faculty's computer    lab.
Learners in the three mapping groups were tested together; the control group was tested in separate sessions.
        After  answering   some    demographic    questions,  participants filled  in  the pretest  on  human    embryo
research. Then they were given the learning text about ethical and biological issues in human embryo research.
Participants were   instructed not    to underline   or take  notes  on the   text.   Learners   in the control   group
subsequently filled in the posttest.
        In the three mapping groups, reading the learning text was followed by a short introduction in concept
mapping as a learning strategy. Concept mapping was shortly described and the advantages of the method for
learning were specified. A short instruction informed the participants of their specific tasks (mapping, correcting
a map, or self-explaining an expert map, respectively) and gave a short tutorial on how to use the mapping
software Easy Mapping Tool. During the next 30 minutes, participants either constructed a concept map on their
own (mapping group), corrected an incorrect map (correction group), or studied the given expert map (expert
map group). Finally, the participants in the three mapping groups filled in the posttest.

Results
        An alpha-level of .05 was used for all statistical analyzes. As an effect size measure, we used partial                           2
­ qualifying values of about .01 as weak effect, values of about .06 as medium effect, and values of about .14 or
bigger as large effect (Cohen, 1988; pp. 285-287).
        Figure  1 shows    the pretest   scores in  the factual   knowledge  test  for the  experimental    groups. The
differences in prior factual knowledge about ethical and biological issues on human embryo research were not
significant, F < 1. On average, students' prior knowledge about human embryo research was rather small (M =
1.71, SD = 1.42).

Factual knowledge

                                                                                                                                              1-1
                  The factual knowledge in the posttest for the experimental groups is displayed in Figure 1. An ANOVA
         with the learners' factual knowledge in the posttest as dependent variable showed that the differences between
         the groups were not significant, F < 1. Descriptively the correction group scored best followed by the control
         group.  Surprisingly, the mapping   group and the  expert map    group  performed  worse   than  the control  group.
         However, the differences between the groups were marginal.

                                                           Factual knowledge

                                 Figure 1. Means (standard deviations in parentheses) of learners'
                         factual knowledge in the pretest and in the posttest for the experimental groups

                  Planned contrasts according to our specific research questions showed that against our expectations, the
         expert map group did not outperform the mapping group and the control group, F < 1. Also, the correction
         group did not score better than the mapping group and the control group, F < 1. The difference between the
         expert map group and the correction group also failed significance, F(1, 76) = 1.11, p > .05, as did the difference
         between the mapping group and the control group, F < 1. Thus, according to the factual knowledge test there
         were no differences between the experimental groups and our assumptions were not confirmed.

        Comprehension test
                  In the posttest, we also tested the learners' deep understanding and comprehension of the topic human
         embryo research. Figure 2 presents the learners' overall score in the comprehension test and the ratings of their
         answers in the comprehension test according to the identification of main points, coherence, and elaboration. In
         an ANOVA with the learners' overall score as dependent variable, the group differences were significant, F(3,
         76) = 3.61, p = .017,  2 = .13 (medium to large effect). A MANOVA with the learners' rating for main points,
         coherence and elaboration revealed that learners' answers differed with respect to the identification of main
         points, F(3, 76) = 4.19, p = .008,  2 = .14 (large effect). The groups did not differ with respect to the elaboration
         of their answers in the comprehension test (F < 1) and with respect to the coherence, F(3, 76) = 1.72, p > .05.
                  We assumed that the expert map group should outperform the mapping group and the control group. To
         test our hypothesis we contrasted the expert map group against the correction group and the mapping group
         using ANOVAs with the comprehension test scores (overall score, main points, coherence, and elaboration) as
         dependent  variables. In  accordance  to our assumption,  learners  who  studied  an   expert map showed    a better
         overall score of their answers in the comprehension test, F(1, 76) = 10.08, p = .002,      2 = .12 (medium to large
         effect). Also, our assumptions were asserted for the identification of main points, F(1, 76) = 10.68, p = .002,                                2
         = .12 (medium to large effect), and for the coherence of learners' answers to the comprehension test answers,
         F(1, 76) = 4.15, p = .045,  2 = .052 (medium effect). Though descriptively the expert map group also performed
         better according to elaboration of their comprehension test answers, the planned contrasts for these ratings were
         not significant, F < 1. Overall, we found a worked-out map effect for the comprehension test.
                  Our  second  hypothesis   was that  correcting errors  in incorrect maps  should   lead to  better learning
         outcomes than generating maps or engaging in no follow-up activity after reading the learning text. As Figure 2
         shows, learners in the correction group and in the mapping group performed very similar in the comprehension
         test. We contrasted   the correction group  with  the mapping   group  and   the control using  ANOVAs      with the
         comprehension test scores as dependent variables. We did not find a benefit of the correction task compared to
         the   mapping group   and  the control group  for the   overall score, F <   1.  Also, the correction task  did  not
         significantly differ from the mapping group and the control group with respect to the identification of main
         points (F < 1), elaboration (F < 1), or coherence, F(1, 76) = 2.58, p > .05. Thus, a correction task was not
         superior to generating a concept map from scratch and doing no follow-up activity for learning from text.

1-
         Figure 2 shows that while learners' factual knowledge was descriptively higher in the correction group
than in the expert map group (see Figure 1), their score in the comprehension test was lower. The difference in
the comprehension test in favor of the mapping group was significant, F(1, 76) = 8.13, p = .006,                                  2 = .10
(medium   effect). Also, the  identification of      main points  in the comprehension   test was   better  in  learners
studying worked-out expert maps than in learners correcting incorrect maps, F(1, 76) = 9.05, p = .004,          2 = .11
(medium effect). We found no significant differences between the expert map group and the correction group
with respect to coherence (F < 1) and elaboration (F < 1). Therefore, correcting errors in an incorrect map did
not have the effect of improving learning compared to studying correct expert maps. On the contrary, learning
was better supported by studying worked-out expert maps without errors.
         Finally, to test whether there is a need to support learners with worked-out maps, we also compared the
learning outcomes of learners generating a concept map from scratch with learners in the control group who did
not engage in any follow-up activity. Planned contrasts revealed that the mapping group and the control group
did not differ with respect to any of the comprehension measures (all F < 1). Thus, support measures are clearly
needed by learners.
         In order to compare the other conditions, we performed Tukey HSD post hoc tests regarding the overall
score in the comprehension test and the dimensions main points, coherence and elaboration. The mapping group
outperformed the correction group (overall score: p = .028; main points: p = .025), the mapping group (main
points: p = .025), and the control group (overall score: p = .047; main points: .035). No other difference reached
the level of statistical significance (all p > .05).

                                             Comprehension test

                         Figure 2. Means (standard deviations in parentheses) of learners'
                             comprehension test scores for the experimental groups

Discussion
         Studying  worked-out   expert  maps  without      errors may   be a successful  approach   to foster  learning
(Hauser et al, 2006; O'Donnell et al., 2002). According to the worked-example effect (Sweller & Cooper, 1985),
studying worked-out examples can be considered as a less load intensive learning activity than constructing
concept maps from scratch. Especially beginners using this learning strategy can easily become overwhelmed by
the demand to generate a concept map (Reader & Hammond, 1994). However, the mere study of a worked-out
solution can also  lead  to superficial processing     of the  learning  material. Chang  et al. (2002)  reported                     that
correcting errors in an incorrect concept map fostered text comprehension better than generating concept maps.
In this study, we  examined   whether   a correction     task can enhance  learning  with worked-out    concept                     maps
compared to studying expert maps. In summary, we found that: (a) studying worked-out expert maps fostered
text comprehension best and (b) learners correcting errors in incorrect worked-out concept maps did not perform
better than learners generating concept maps on their own or a control group that did not engage in any follow-
up activity for learning from text.
         Interestingly, we found no effect of the different mapping strategies on the gain of factual knowledge.
However,  as   expected, the groups  differed with     respect to their  comprehension  of   the topic human    embryo
research. Many studies have found that studying worked-out examples is superior compared to solving problems
(e.g., Atkinson et al., 2003; Renkl, 2005). Cognitive load theory explains this phenomenon with the fact that
working  memory    is overloaded by   the demand      of  the problem  solving task. Thus,   no  capacities are left                  for

                                                                                                                                             1-
         learning  and    building  schemata  (Sweller   & Cooper,    2005).  We    found  such a   worked-out  map  effect in  this
         study: the group learning by self-explaining worked-out expert maps performed best in the comprehension test.
         The identification   of    main points  was   especially   enhanced  compared     to our other  experimental    conditions.
         Following O'Donnell et al. (2002), reducing a learning topic to its main points is one of the important functions
         of concept mapping. Also, the coherence function of concept mapping was supported by studying a worked-out
         expert map.
                   Other than Chang et al. (2002), the group correcting errors in incorrect concept maps did not have a
         better result than learners generating concept maps on their own or learners who did not engage in a follow-up
         activity for text learning. Thus, our assumption that a correction task should especially foster the metacognitive
         function of concept mapping and therefore foster learning was not confirmed. A post-hoc analysis of learners'
         answers indicates that the correction group even learned incorrect knowledge from the incorrect worked-out
         maps. Learners in the correction group made the highest amount of mistakes in the comprehension test. The
         amount of mistakes in the comprehension test generally was quite small (control group: M = .05, SD = .22;
         mapping group: M = .15, SD = .37; correction group: M = .50, SD = .69; expert map group: M = .10, SD = .31).
         However, the differences between the amount of mistakes in the four groups was significant, F(3, 76) = 4.43, p
         = .01,   2 = .15 (large effect). A post-hoc Tukey HSD analysis revealed that learners in the correction group
         made more mistakes in the comprehension test than learners in the mapping group (p = .019) and learners in the
         expert map group (p = .019). The amount of mistakes did not differ between the expert map group, the mapping
         group and the control group (all p > .05).
                   The problems of learners in the correction group could have several reasons. Chang et al. (2002) found
         that learners who had learned with a correction task performed better than learners completing partially worked-
         out concept    maps.     However,   these authors  provided    the  learners   feedback  about  the   correctness of  their
         activities. In future studies, it would be interesting to take the possibility of providing feedback into account.
         Another reason for the unexpected result of the correction group could be that the learners' prior knowledge
         about  human     embryo    research was   not enough    to be  able to  detect  the mistakes in  the  map,  not even  after
         reading the learning text. Following Siegler (2002), learners may profit from learning with incorrect solutions by
         identifying and explaining the errors themselves and thus avoid these errors when solving problems on their
         own. However, as Große and Renkl (2007) argue, self-explaining errors in order to overcome them would only
         be  possible,  if learners  had enough    prior  knowledge.    As   the pretest showed,  prior  knowledge   about  human
         embryo research was quite small in this study. The assumption that this could have hindered learning with a
         correction task is supported by a closer look at the corrections the learners made in the incorrect concept maps:
         On average, learners only found 42% of the errors that were included in the map. Große and Renkl (2007)
         highlighted the errors in the examples they used in their studies. Future studies on learning by correcting errors
         in worked-out concept maps as a follow-up strategy for learning from text could also try to highlight the errors.
         Based   on   the prior   knowledge  learned   from the   text, this could   allow a  deeper  processing  of the presented
         concept map.
                   For instructors, the results of this study suggest that learners should rather study a worked-out expert
         map  than    correcting  errors in  an incorrect  concept   map.  However,     although  the employment     of worked-out
         concept maps is a promising method, they are often unavailable and laborious for instructors to construct. In
         addition,    instructional techniques  such   as  using worked-out      concept maps,   which  are  highly  effective with
         inexperienced     learners, can  lose  their  effectiveness with    more   experienced  learners  (cf. "expertise reversal
         effect", Kalyuga,   Ayres,   Chandler,    &  Sweller, 2003).   Thus,    in the long  term, learners  should be  trained to
         construct their own concept maps for learning. Therefore, it would be interesting to analyze how learners can be
         trained  to  effectively   generate concept   maps for   learning.  Especially  the  introduction  of  a fading procedure
         could be helpful for learners to use concept mapping for learning. This issue will be taken up in further studies.

       References
         Atkinson, R. K., Derry, S. J., Renkl, A., & Wortham, D. W. (2000). Learning from examples: Instructional
                   principles from the worked examples research. Review of Educational Research, 70, 181-214.
         Ausubel, D. P., Novak, J. D., & Hanesian, H. (1978). Educational psychology: A cognitive view (2nd Ed.). New
                   York, NY: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
         Biggs,   J., &   Collis, K. (1982).   Evaluating  the   quality of  learning:   The  SOLO    taxonomy.   New    York, NY:
                   Academic Press.
         Buzan, T., & Buzan B. (1995). The mind map book. London, UK: BBC Books.
         Chang, K.-E., Sung, Y.-T., & Chen, I.-D. (2002). The effect of concept mapping to enhance text comprehension
                   and summarization. Journal of Experimental Education, 71, 5-23.
         Chang,   K.-E.,   Sung,  Y.-T., &   Chen,   S.-F. (2001).   Learning    through computer-based    concept   mapping   with
                   scaffolding aid. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 17, 21-33.
         Cohen, J. (1988). Statistical power analysis for the behavioral sciences (2nd ed.). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

1-
Große,   C. S.,  &   Renkl,   A. (2007). Finding  and   fixing     errors in worked   examples:  Can  this foster learning
         outcomes? Learning and Instruction, 17, 612-634.
Hauser, S., Nückles, M., & Renkl, A. (2006). Supporting concept mapping for learning from text. In S. A.
         Barab,    K.  E. Hay,   &  D.  T. Hickey  (Eds.),   Proceedings     of the 7th International  Conference    of the
         Learning Sciences (pp. 243-249). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Hilbert, T. S.,    & Renkl,   A. (2008).   Concept mapping      as  a follow-up   strategy to learning   from texts: What
         characterizes good and poor mappers? Instructional Science, 36, 53-73.
Hilbert, T. S., Renkl, A., Kessler, S., & Reiss, K. (in press). Learning to prove in geometry: Learning from
         heuristic      examples     and      how      it    can      be     supported.    Learning      &     Instruction.
         doi:10.1016/j.learninstruc.2006.10.008.
Horton, P. B., McConney, A. A., Gallo, M., & Woods, A. L. (1993). An investigation of the effectiveness of
         concept mapping as an instructional tool. Science Education, 77, 95-111.
Jonassen,   D.  H.,   Beissner,  K., &   Yacci,  M.   (1993).   Structural    knowledge:   Techniques    for  representing,
         conveying, and acquiring structural knowledge. Hillsdale: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Kalyuga,    S., Ayres,    P., Chandler,  P.,  &  Sweller,    J. (2003).    The  Expertise  Reversal   Effect. Educational
         Psychologist, 38, 23-31.
Kintsch, W. (1998). Comprehension: A paradigm for cognition. Hillsdale: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Novak, J. D. (1990). The effect of concept mapping to enhance text comprehension and summarization. The
         Journal of Experimental Education, 71, 5-23.
Novak, J. D., & Gowin, D. B. (1984). Learning how to learn. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Nückles,  M.,   &    Salhab,  M.  (2005).   The role   of  personal    epistemology    and disciplinary  back-ground    on
         interpretation of controversial ethical issues. Paper presented at the 11th Biennial Conference of the
         European Association for Research on Learning and Instruction (EARLI), Nicosia, Cyprus.
O'Donnell,   A.    M., Dansereau,    D. F.,  &  Hall, R.  H.    (2002).   Knowledge    Maps   as Scaffolds   for Cognitive
         Processing. Educational Psychology Review, 14, 71-86.
Reader,  W.,    &  Hammond,      N.  (1994).  Computer-based       tools  to  support  learning  from hypertext:   concept
         mapping tools and beyond. Computers & Education, 22, 99-106.
Renkl, A. (1997). Learning from worked-out examples: A study on individual differences. Cognitive Science,
         21, 1-29.
Renkl, A. (2005). The worked-out-example principle in multimedia learning. In R. Mayer (Ed.), Cambridge
         Handbook of Multimedia Learning (pp. 229-246). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Rummel, N., & Spada, H. (2005). Learning to collaborate: An instructional approach to promoting collaborative
         problem-solving in computer-mediated settings. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 14, 201-241.
Siegler, R.     S. (2002).    Microgenetic    studies of   self-explanation.    In  N.  Granott,   &  J. Parziale   (Eds.),
         Microdevelopment.       Transition   processes   in development     and learning  (pp.  31-58). New   York,  NY:
         Cambridge University Press.
Sweller, J., & Cooper, G. A. (1985). The use of worked examples as a substitute for problem solving in learning
         algebra. Cognition & Instruction, 2, 59-89.
VanLehn, K. (1999). Rule-learning events in the acquisition of a complex skill: an evaluation of CASCADE.
         The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 8, 71-125.
Weaver,  C.  A.,   &   Kintsch,  W.  (1991).  Expository     text. In R.  Barr, M.  L. Kamil,   P. B. Mosenthal   &  P. D.
         Pearson     (Eds.),  Handbook     of research    in  teaching    (pp.  230-245).  New     York, NY:     Macmillan
         Publishing Company.
Weinstein, C. E., & Mayer, R. E. (1986). The teaching of learning strategies. In C. M. Wittrock, ed, Handbook
         of research in teaching, pp. 315-327. New York, NY: Macmillan Publishing Company.

                                                                                                                               1-
