                          Cognitive Convergence in Collaborative Learning

                       Stephanie D. Teasley (Co-Organizer), University of Michigan, School of Information,
                             1075 Beal Ave, Ann Arbor, MI, 48109-2112, USA, steasley@umich.edu
                      Frank Fischer (Co-Organizer), Armin Weinberger, Karsten Stegmann, LMU München,
                             Department of Psychology, Leopoldstrasse 13, 80802 Munich, Germany,
                 Email: frank.fischer@psy.lmu.de, armin.weinberger@psy.lmu.de, karsten.stegmann@psy.lmu.de
                 Pierre Dillenbourg, Ecole Polytechnique Federale de Lausanne (EPFL), School           of Computer and
                          Communication Sciences (CRAFT), EPFL-CRAFT CE 1 631 Station 1 CH-1015,
                                        Lausanne, Switzerland, pierre.dillenbourg@epfl.ch
                          Manu Kapur, National Institute of Education, Nanyang Technological University,
                                   1 Nanyang Walk, Singapore 637616, manu.kapur@nie.edu.sg
                                 Michelene Chi, University of Pittsburgh, LRDC, 3939 O'Hara St,
                                              Pittsburgh, PA, 15260, USA, chi@pitt.edu

                  Abstract: Collaborative learning, as both a pedagogical method and a cognitive mechanism
                  plays a prominent role in the Learning Sciences.        In this symposium we will use the term
                  "cognitive convergence" to encompass various concepts that have been used to explain the
                  important  processes   underlying    successful   collaboration,   such   as intersubjectivity,   co-
                  construction, knowledge convergence, common ground, joint problem space, and transactive
                  reasoning.    The goal   of the  symposium    is to contribute  to  a better  understanding    of  the
                  mechanisms    of  cognitive  convergence   and   to relate  cognitive  convergence     to individual
                  learning outcomes. We include studies that emphasize detailed analyses of the mechanisms,
                  provide ideas about how to conceptualize and measure convergence, and include qualitative
                  and quantitative measures of shared and converging learning outcomes. A special emphasis
                  will  be on   methodological    questions  about  how    to analyze   the   processes  of achieving
                  convergence and how to assess how convergence affects outcomes of collaborative learning.

       Symposium Overview
                  Collaborative learning, as both a pedagogical method and a cognitive mechanism plays a prominent
         role in the  Learning   Sciences.    Over the past  20    years, numerous    studies  have looked   at  the  process  of
         collaboration and provided evidence to address the question, "When are two heads better than one?" (Azmitia,
         1988).  In this symposium we will use the term cognitive convergence to encompass various concepts that have
         been used to explain the important processes underlying successful collaboration, such as intersubjectivity (Bell,
         Grossen, & Perret-Clermont, 1985), co-construction (Damon & Phelps, 1989), appropriation (Rogoff, 1990),
         common    ground  (Clark  &   Brennan,   1991), joint problem    space  (Teasley   &  Roschelle,   1993),  transactivity
         (Teasley, 1997),  and  knowledge     convergence   (Fischer  &   Mandl,  2005;  Jeong   &  Chi,   2007).   We   employ
         "cognitive   convergence"  to provide  a  construct with  which   to integrate  and   clarify the assortment    of terms
         previously used and, in doing so, provide a better framework for understanding how and when collaboration
         leads to individual learning.
                  We believe it is important to move our understanding of collaborative learning forward because despite
         the popularity of this paradigm, research examining converging cognitive processes during collaboration have
         not necessarily shown that these processes can lead to better individual outcomes nor guarantee that all group
         members will demonstrate the same learning outcomes.        For instance, studies from group decision making (e.g.,
         Schultz-Hardt,   Frey, Lüthgens,  &   Moscovici, 2000)    have   shown  that an  individual   adapting  to  other  group
         members might abandon their own more effective strategies to tackle the problem. In cases where a group has to
         include as many of the available knowledge resources as possible, it might be even good for the group level
         outcome   if the individuals  diverge with respect  to the   process of collaboration   (Schultz-Hardt    et al.,  2000).
         Research on team mental models indicates that different levels of shared knowledge are required for teams to
         perform optimally in different kinds of tasks (Klimoski & Mohammed, 1994). So far, there is little empirical
         evidence with respect to these relations in the context of learning. First, it is not clear how much sharing of
         knowledge is needed to collaboratively learn in different collaborative learning scenarios. Moreover, there is
         only little empirical evidence that learners' highly similar outcomes (i.e., a high amount of shared knowledge)
         are accompanied by good collaborative learning in terms of individual learning outcomes (Jeong & Chi, 1999),
         although there has been some effort in the learning sciences towards understanding the cognitive and social
         mechanisms    of  convergence  and   knowledge   sharing  in collaborative   learning  environments     (Barron,   2000;
         Roschelle  &  Teasley,  1995;  Stahl, 2006).  This  work   has   led to identifying   some    important interindividual

3-30
processes or mechanisms in collaborative scenarios, like coordination and convergent conceptual change, and
provides starting points for systematic empirical research.
         In contrast to the promising scope of theoretical approaches to phenomena of shared cognition (e.g.,
Resnick, Levine    & Teasley,   1993)   as  well as  to the  wealth   of empirical   evidence  from  studies    on  social
cognition (e.g., Thompson & Fine, 1999), evidence related to individual knowledge acquisition is rare. Main
goal of this symposium     is therefore  to  contribute to a better  understanding   of  the mechanisms      of cognitive
convergence, but moreover, to relate cognitive convergence to individual learning outcomes. In addition, a focus
of the  symposium    will  be  on  the   question   of  instructional interventions   and    their effect on    cognitive
convergence. We include studies that (a) emphasize detailed analyses of the mechanisms and (b) provide ideas
how to conceptualize and measure cognitive convergence. In all of the contributions, special emphasis will be
on methodological questions about how to analyze the processes of sharing and convergence and how to assess
convergence (or divergence) and shared knowledge as outcomes of collaborative learning.
         To address these issues the symposium includes the following papers:
         Paper 1 focuses on conditions and effects of mutual modelling during collaborative learning. One
main  finding from   these studies is   that  knowledge   of the learning   partners  is indeed  mutual,  i.e.  it can be
predicted from what A knows about B, what B knows about A. In addition, the studies included in paper 1 show
that design  aspects of the   collaboration   environment   (scripts and   awareness  tools)  can  substantially   change
mutual modelling.
         Paper 2 suggests a complex systems perspective to analyze emergent convergence in online discussion
groups.  The  authors   conceptualize    convergence    from  an  emergentist      conception of   group  collaboration
assuming that macro-level behaviors emerge from and constrain micro-level interactions of individual group
members.   A  specifically significant   finding  is that  groups converge     rather quickly   in  the first   phases of
interaction, which implies specific scaffolding strategies for online groups.
         Paper   3 conceptualizes   knowledge     convergence    from    a cognitive  perspective   and   analyzes   joint
explanations and co-constructions as main sources of cognitive convergence. An important finding is that co-
constructions and joint explanations in spite of their theoretically crucial role for collaboration are rather rare in
empirical data sets. The authors, however, identify situational characteristics under which these events occur
with an increased frequency. As these situational characteristics can be changed by the instructional design of
the collaboration environment, these findings suggest interventions to support co-construction.
         Like paper 3, Paper 4 provides a cognitive conceptualization and a methodology to assess knowledge
convergence.  It adds an   instructional focus   on  how   collaboration   scripts aiming at  stimulating controversial
discussions  might affect  convergence.     A main   finding of this  study is that  group members    strongly     diverge
during and share more knowledge after such kind of scripted collaboration.

Paper 1: How Do Co-Learners Know They Have Different Knowledge?

                                                 Pierre Dillenbourg

         There is something intrinsicly differential in knowing: "warm" cannot be learned without "cold." The
"stereoscopic" nature   of learning   is amplified   in  collaborative   learning.  Co-learners    naturally  come   with
different knowledge. Indeed, some methods, called macro-scripts, exploit natural differences within teams or
induce new ones. Through the collaboration, some differences will be tackled and might disappear, but new
differences will also appear.  Divergence/convergence of knowledge been tackled under different notions such
as socio-cognitive conflict (Doise & Mugny, 1984) or shared understanding (Roschelle & Teasley, 1995), which
can be seen respectively as the half-empty and half-full bottle. Of course, there is no full bottle, i.e. no state of
perfectly shared knowledge; it is only shared enough to fulfil the task (Clark & Schaeffer, 1989). What matters
is not the percentage of shared knowledge, but the dynamics of the overcoming differences and discovering new
ones. Obviously, this two-fold process requires that co-learners find out at some point that they have different
knowledge or viewpoints. Knowing what one's partner knows or does not know is what we refer to as "mutual
modelling." This term does not presume that learners maintain an explicit and accurate model of their partner
but that some representation of the partner is used, even rudimentary, on-demand and temporary.
         This contribution builds on five empirical studies on mutual modelling in dyads and triads. The mutual
model is assessed by asking to A what B feels (study 1), what B will do (study 2), with B has one (study 3) or
how much B knows about the domain (studies 4 & 5). The accuracy of this mutual model, hereafter referred to
as MM-accuracy, is assessed by comparing A's answers to either what B actually did (studies 1 &2) or B's score
at a knowledge test. We found that the accuracy of A's model of B was significantly correlated to the accuracy
of B's model of A (Sangin et al, 2007) in most cases. We interpreted this correlation as an indication that the
quality of mutual  modelling    depends  less  upon  some    individual  attitude  (some  people   would  pay   a  greater
attention to their partner) than to the quality of the team interactions.

                                                                                                                              3-3
                   In study 1, the independent variable "audio only" versus "audio+video" had no significant effect on
         MM-accuracy concerning       emotions. In study 5, the independent variable was the use of a JIGSAW script. We
         hypothesized   providing   students  with clearly   identified subsets of knowledge     would facilitate  the fact  of
         knowing who knows what. This effect was not confirmed. In the 3 other studies, the independent variable was
         the use of an awareness tool providing A with knowledge about B's viewpoint (study 2), location (study 3) or
         knowledge (study 4). The effect of the awareness tool on MM accuracy was partial in study 2 and significantly
         positive in study 4, but significantly negative in study 5.    Regarding the dependent variables, MM accuracy did
         not predict a higher team performance or learning gains in studies 3 and 5, but was positively related to pre-
         test/post-test gains   in study  4. In  this study, MM-accuracy     was   statistically mediating the effect   of   the
         independent variable (awareness tool) on the dependent variable (learning gains).
                   These  results  do not   converge  very well, namely   because  mutual modelling    interferes  with  other
         cognitive mechanisms such as information overload (displaying permanent information) or split-attention effect,
         as well as social mechanisms such as social comparison (knowing that my partner is more knowledgeable than
         me triggers    various reactions).  The study  of mutual modelling   is indeed complex     from the methodological
         viewpoint: asking A about what B knows introduces a bias since it triggers more modelling than what would
         naturally occur.  We   are  now  complementing    this approach  by using  two eye tracking   machines    in  order to
         model how A and B observe each other's actions.

        Paper 2: Convergence in Synchronous, Small-Group Discussions

                                                             Manu Kapur

                   In this presentation, I will report on a study that explores convergence in group discussions as an
         emergent behavior arising from theoretically-sound yet simple rules to model the collaborative, problem-solving
         interactions of its members (agents). Findings suggested that the organization of a group discussion into a
         convergent or a divergent regime (or attractor) was highly sensitive to the initial exchange between group
         members, including how inequities in participation evolved over time.
                   An emergentist conception of group collaboration (Arrow et al., 2000) necessitates an understanding of
         how macro-level behaviors emerge from and constrain micro-level interactions of individual agents.
         Understanding the "how," however, requires an understanding of how simple rules at the local level can
         sufficiently generate complex emergent behavior at the collective level (Bar-Yam, 2003). For example, consider
         the brain as a collection of neurons (agents). These neurons are complex themselves, but exhibit simple binary
         behavior in their synaptic interactions. This type of emergent behavior, when complexity at the individual-level
         results in simplicity at the collective-level, is called emergent simplicity (Bar-Yam, 2003). Further, these simple
         (binary) synaptic interactions between neurons collectively give rise to complex brain "behaviors"--memory,
         cognition, etc.--that cannot be seen in the behavior of individual neurons. This type of emergent behavior, when
         simplicity at the individual-level results in complexity at the collective-level, is called emergent complexity
         (Bar-Yam, 2003).
                   The distinction between emergent simplicity and complexity demonstrates that a change of scale
         (individual vs. collective level) can be accompanied with a change in the type (simplicity vs. complexity) of
         behavior. We do not necessarily have to seek complex explanations for complex behavior; complex collective
         behavior may very well be explained via simple, minimal information, e.g., utility function, decision rule, or
         heuristic, contained in local interactions. Repeated updating, interaction, and aggregation of local interactions
         can sufficiently generate the phenomenon from the "bottom up" (Kapur, Voiklis,          & Kinzer, 2007).
                   The concept of emergent simplicity was invoked to hypothesize a set of simple rules. Each interaction
         has an impact that:
            i.     moves the group towards a goal state, or
            ii.    moves the group away from a goal state, or
            iii.   maintains the status-quo (conceptualized as a "neutral impact").
         Then, convergence in group discussion was conceived as an emergent complexity arising from these simple-
         rule-based interactions. The set of simple rules were operationalized as a one-dimensional Markov walk (Ross,
         1996). Quantitative content analysis was then used to apply the Markov model to the discussions.      In my
         presentation, I will use discussion episodes to illustrate how the simple rules attempt to model the co-evolution
         of telic and intersubjective convergence in problem-solving groups.

        Research Context and Data Collection
                   Participants included sixty 11th-grade students from the science stream of a co-educational, English-
         medium high school in Ghaziabad, India. They were randomized into 20 triads and instructed to collaborate and
         solve well- and ill-structured problem scenarios in Newtonian Kinematics. Group members communicated with

3-3
one another only through synchronous, text-only chat. The 20 automatically-archived transcripts contained the
group discussions as well as their solutions, and formed the data used in our analyses.

Results and Discussion
         The study revealed novel insights into the process of collaboration. The first insight concerned the
differential impact of member contributions in a group discussion--high (low) quality contributions have a
greater positive (negative) impact on the eventual outcome when they come earlier than later in a discussion. A
corollary of this finding was that group discussions tended to organize themselves into convergence attractors
(with high or low fitness) fairly quickly. Second, temporal analysis of the evolution of participation inequity in
the group discussions suggested that participation levels also tended to get locked-in relatively early on in the
discussion. This was consistent with the convergence finding. Because a lock-in of participation levels also
implied a lock-in to the dominant members' proposals, high (low) quality contributions had a greater positive
(negative) impact on group performance (quality of solution produced by the group) when they came earlier
than later in a discussion. This is not to say that contributions made later in a discussion were not important.
Instead, once a discussion got locked in, it seemed to organize itself into self-perpetuating attractors (Bar-Yam,
2003), making it increasingly difficult for member contributions to make an impact commensurate with their
quality. Thus, both participation inequity and convergence analyses suggested a high sensitivity to the initial
exchange; both significantly predicting the eventual group performance. Sensitivity simulation analysis revealed
that eventual group performance could be statistically predicted based on what happened in the first 30-40% of a
discussion.
         These insights are significant. They bear important implications for scaffolding small-group
discussions to achieve optimal outcomes. For example, if one's interest is primarily in maximizing group
performance, the insight suggests a need for scaffolding early in the discussion as opposed to blanked
scaffolding of the entire discussion, since the impact of early interactional activity on eventual group
performance seems to be greater. Finally, the findings also underscore a methodological implication for paying
particular attention to the temporal aspects of interactional dynamics; studying the temporal evolution of
interactional patterns (convergence and participation inequity) can be insightful, presenting counterintuitive
departures from assumptions of linearity in the problem-solving process.

Paper 3: Co-Construction and Joint Explanations

                                                   Michelene Chi

         Knowledge    convergence  is  the process  by  which  two  or more  people  share mutual  understanding
through  social interactions  (Brown  & Campione,    1996;   Hutchins, 1991; Resnick,   Levine, &  Teasley,  1991;
Rogoff, 1998; Webb & Palinscar, 1996). There are three distinct but related aspects to consider in exploring the
concept of knowledge convergence.
         The first aspect is the process of convergence. That is, how do the processes of collaborating enable
knowledge convergence? The process of convergence is often studied in the context of grounding (Clark &
Brennan, 1991). When a contribution is made in dialogues, it needs to be grounded, meaning that the speaker
and/or the  listener need  to believe that her  partner understands her contribution and/or she  understands     her
partner's contribution. Understanding the processes of grounding involves describing what the collaborating
participants are actively doing, such as seeking evidence of understanding by asking questions or requesting
repairs (e.g., `did you mean this?'), or providing understanding by continued attention with acknowledgement.
However, analyzing the grounding processes may capture only local convergence; grounding itself may not
necessary lead to global convergence in terms of the speaker and listener's mental models (Chi, Siler & Jeong,
2004).
         A second aspect of knowledge convergence is the resulting outcome, sometimes referred to as mutual
understanding. One definition for this outcome is an increased similarity in the cognitive representations of the
group  members   (Roschelle,  1992).  For  example,  Roschelle (1992)  analyzed the  dialogues  of a pair  of  high
school students as they collaborated to learn the concepts of velocity and acceleration in physics. The outcome
of their collaborating  is convergence,    in the sense that the collaborating students' representations   became
increasingly similar. Alternatively, the outcome of the process of grounding is that contributions become part of
"common ground" or mutual knowledge (that is, an awareness of what others know, Clark & Brennan, 1991).
There are other definitions of "mutual", "joint", or "socially shared" understanding as outcomes, such as "team
mental models" (e.g., Cannon-Bowers, Salas, & Converse, 1993), "shared mental model" (Jeong & Chi, 2007),
"group mind" (e.g., Bar-Tal, 1990), or  "community memory" (Orr, 1990).
         A third aspect of the knowledge convergence concept is the source of convergence, which is related to
the process aspect of convergence.     Research that focuses on the process of convergence typically describes
many aspects of the process, whereas by source, we mean the parts of the processes that can be identified as the

                                                                                                                       3-33
         cause  or  origin  of the  convergent   outcome.   Researchers     have   assumed   that  the outcome    of   convergence
         (whether it is referred to as shared knowledge, mutual understanding or group mind) emerged as a result of
         group  interactions.  During   collaborative  interaction, it is assumed     that partners jointly  interpret a situation,
         coordinate their understandings, and come up with a solution to a problem together. The assumption is that as a
         result of such joint construction activities, convergence would arise.
                   Our work has been focusing on co-construction or joint explanation aspect of interactions, assuming that
         co-construction is responsible for convergence. We will discuss three ways that we have defined and coded co-
         construction, across three sets of data. The strictest definition requires coding of joint explanations that produce
         new knowledge that neither partner knew a priori. With such a strict definition, we found that the frequency of co-
         construction in general is typically low. Even with a low frequency, co-construction can be a powerful interaction
         process as it (by our definition) produces new knowledge that neither partner of the participating dyads knew.
         However,   we  will  also talk about a  unique  situation  under   which  the frequency   of  joint explanations  between
         collaborating partners is high, and how we can utilize such a situation for instruction. This is a situation in which
         dyads are actively observing videos of other dyads interacting in a learning dialogues.

        Paper 4: Knowledge Convergence: A Study on the Effects of Collaboration Scripts

                                        Frank Fischer, Armin Weinberger, & Karsten Stegmann

                   Do learners in CSCL environments converge with respect to their knowledge by learning together? It
         has been argued, that such a convergence could be seen as the very motor of collaborative learning (Roschelle,
         1992). However, studies show, that cognitive convergence in terms of sharing knowledge after collaboration is
         typically surprisingly  low  (Fischer  &  Mandl,   2005;   Jeong   &  Chi,  2006).  Moreover,   research   on  knowledge
         convergence currently suffers from a lack of systematic conceptualisation and thus, operationalization, of the
         convergence construct. We used the framework of Weinberger, Stegmann and Fischer (2007) to conceptualize
         knowledge convergence: Knowledge equivalence refers to learning partners are similar with regard to the extent
         of their individual knowledge. Prior knowledge equivalence alludes to learners in a group possessing a similar
         degree  of knowledge    regarding  a  specified  subject  prior  to collaborative  learning,  regardless   of the specific
         concepts constituting knowledge content. During collaboration, knowledge contribution equivalence represents
         how much and how heterogeneously learners participate in discourse. With regard to knowledge acquisition,
         outcome    knowledge   equivalence   of learners  allows   analyses   to  what    extend  two or    more learners  benefit
         similarly. Knowledge sharing is entailing that learners explicate their knowledge in contributing ideas to the
         discourse  and  that  other learners   integrate these   ideas   into their  own   lines  of reasoning.    Therefore, two
         complementary measurement approaches have been developed, namely the knowledge level approach and the
         transactivity approach    (cf. Weinberger,    Stegmann,    &    Fischer,  2007).   The   knowledge    level   approach to
         analyzing knowledge convergence processes proposes that individual contributions in which learners externalize
         knowledge be identified and compared and the extent of knowledge sharing subsequently determined. Shared
         prior knowledge refers to the knowledge of specific concepts that learners within a group have in common prior
         to collaborative learning. Knowledge sharing in discourse represents the share of similar concepts and ideas to
         discourse. Collaborative learners may acquire shared outcome knowledge, i.e. individual learners of one group
         possess   knowledge   on  the  same  specific  concepts    after collaboration.   The  transactivity  approach    suggests
         analyzing the degree to which learners refer and build on others' knowledge contributions (Teasley, 1997).
                   Scripting.  We   applied this   conceptualization   to   re-analyze  data   from   an experimental    study  on
         collaboration  scripts  (Weinberger,    Ertl, Fischer  &   Mandl,     2005).  Collaboration     scripts  are  instructional
         interventions that specify and cluster learning activities, organize them in roles and assign and sequence these
         roles in groups (Kollar, Fischer & Hesse, 2006). In this study, a "social" script was implemented into a CSCL
         case discussion environment aiming at enhancing the divergence in discourse (by assigning the roles of analysts
         and critics with additional prompts) and learning outcomes. The results of this study had shown that indeed the
         script increased   learning outcomes.   However,   knowledge     convergence      has not been  systematically   analyzed
         with respect to these data. It is therefore unclear, to what extent learning partners really assumed the opposing
         roles and brought in diverging ideas and standpoints, and to what extent they benefited to a similar extent, and
         shared knowledge after collaboration.
                   Research Questions. We are going to examine the research questions (RQ1) to what extent the social
         script influences knowledge equivalence, knowledge sharing, and transactivity during collaborative learning and
         (RQ2)   to   what  extent  the social  script  supported   outcome     knowledge      equivalence   and  shared   outcome
         knowledge.

        Methods
                   In  this study, learners (N=48)     were to  learn    to  apply  a  psychological   theory    by analyzing  and
         discussing   three problem  cases  via  a web-based   discussion    board.   The  subjects   were   randomly  assigned to

3-3
groups of three, which were in turn randomly assigned to one of two experimental conditions (with vs. without
social script). Post hoc, a comparison between real and nominal groups (as used by Fischer & Mandl, 2005 and
Jeong  &    Chi, 2006)     was performed    by  randomly     assigning   all participants  to nominal    groups   of three,
comprising   participants   who  had   experienced     the same    collaborative  learning  environment,    but who     had
collaborated with other participants. We varied the between-subject factor "social script" (with vs. without) and
independently compared real to nominal groups as within-subject factor in order to account for the fact that
learners were both members of real groups as well as members of nominal groups. Furthermore, we controlled
for prior knowledge equivalence as well as shared prior knowledge. All results reported in the following are
based on testing of hypotheses with ANOVA and t-test procedures.
          Assessing knowledge convergence. The assessment of the convergence measures bases on analyses of
the knowledge pre-test, the online discussion of cases, and the knowledge post-test. First, learners' written texts
were  segmented   into  propositional  units   consisting  of concept-case    relations (87%   inter-rater agreement).   In
assessing application-oriented knowledge, we coded how the concepts from theory were adequately related to
different   problem  case   information.   (1) Knowledge     equivalence.    To  measure   knowledge     equivalence,   the
coefficient of variation has been calculated. The advantage of this measure is that it is normalized and therefore
circumvents the production of an arithmetical artefact. This measure was calculated for the (a) prior knowledge
equivalence (pre-test), the (b) knowledge contribution equivalence (discourse), and the (c) outcome knowledge
equivalence (post-test). High knowledge equivalence scores may indicate either knowledge convergence or the
"convergence of ignorance", i.e. that learners equally do not know how to apply specific concepts. (2) Assessing
shared knowledge.     To   determine,  to  what degree    learners know    the   same concepts, the  amount    of pairs  of
learners that applied the same concept were computed. This was performed for the (a) shared prior knowledge
(pre-test), the  (b) sharing   knowledge    (discourse),   and  the   (c) shared    outcome   knowledge    (post-test). (3)
Assessing transactivity. The segments derived from the discourse analyses were coded with respect to different
social modes of co-construction (cf. Weinberger & Fischer, 2006). Inter-rater reliability regarding the analysis
of the social modes of co-construction amounted to         = .81, measured with Cohen's Kappa.

Results and Conclusions
          The study aimed to investigate the effects of a social script on knowledge convergence in computer-
supported   collaborative   learning. The   model   study  revealed   that   the knowledge    convergence    measures   are
sensitive to script effects as well as to comparisons of real vs. nominal groups. Results regarding RQ 1 (process
convergence) indicate that the social script could support knowledge divergence processes, i.e. learners with the
script contribute their ideas to a different extent and contribute different and possibly complementary concepts
to the discussion. Members of small groups with the script contributed more divergently than learners without
the script (knowledge contribution equivalence). In comparison, these groups also did not focus on the same
concepts    and  were  more    dissimilar  with regard    to  knowledge    sharing.   With  respect  to  RQ   2 (outcome
convergence),    there  is evidence   that scripted learners   shared    more  knowledge    subsequent   to   collaborative
learning  than  learners   without the social   script (shared outcome     knowledge).    As  assumed,   the  social script
facilitated knowledge      divergence  processes  and   shared  outcome      knowledge   (De  Lisi  &   Goldbeck,    1999).
However, the script did not affect outcome knowledge equivalence, with one or two learners having acquired
substantially   more  knowledge    individually  than   their learning    partners. Moreover,   knowledge     sharing   and
shared outcome knowledge seem to be strongly connected to learning together in real groups, as opposed to
learning within the same learning environment. Real groups, however, demonstrated lower outcome knowledge
equivalence in comparison to nominal groups. This last result supports the notion that learners within small
groups can   benefit   from  collaborative  learning   to  substantially  different degrees   (Webb,  et al., 1986),  even
though the results further indicate that social interaction of collaborative learners results in more shared outcome
knowledge than exposure to the same learning environment and material.
          In summary, the approach applied in the current study seems to be feasible in encouraging divergence
during the   processes   of  collaborative  learning   with   scripts in  order  to increase  the  probability  of   shared
knowledge following collaboration. Learners construct shared knowledge through social interaction in which
they critically argue together based on divergent knowledge, rather than because they are provided with the
same learning material.

Discussant
                                                  Stephanie Teasley

References
Introduction
Azmitia,    M.  (1988).  Peer  interaction  and  problem     solving:  When    are  two   heads better   than one?   Child
          Development, 59, 87-96

                                                                                                                              3-3
         Barron, B. (2000). Achieving Coordination in Collaborative Problem-Solving Groups. Journal of the Learning
                  Sciences, 9, 403-436.
         Bell, N., Grossen, M., & Perret-Clermont, A., -N. (1985).     Sociocognitive conflict and intellectual growth.  In
                  M. W. Berkowitz (Ed.), Peer Conflict and Psychological Growth (pp. 41-54). San Francisco: Jossey
                  Bass.
         Clark, H., & Brennan, S. (1991). Grounding in communication.          In L. B. Resnick, J. Levine, & S. D. Teasley
                  (Eds.), Perspectives on socially shared cognition (pp. 127-149).  Washington, DC: APA.
         Damon, W., & Phelps, E., (1989).     Strategic uses of peer interaction in children's education. In T. Berndt & G.
                  Ladd (Eds.), Peer Relationships in Child Development (pp. 114-147).     New York: Wiley.
         Fisher, F., & Mandl,  (2005).
         Jeong, H. & Chi, M. T. H. (1999). Constructing shared knowledge during collaboration and learning. Paper
                  presented at the AERA Annual Meeting, Montreal, Canada.
         Klimoski, R. & Mohammed, S. (1994). Team mental model: construct or metaphor. Journal of Management,
                  20(2), 403-437.
         Resnick, L.  B., Levine,  J.  M., &  Teasley, S. D.   (Eds.). (1993). Perspectives on   socially shared   cognition.
                  Washington: American Psychological Association.
         Rogoff, B. (1990). Apprenticeship in thinking.   New York: Oxford University Press.
         Roschelle,  J. (1992). Learning   by   collaborating: Convergent  conceptual  change.   Journal   of the  Learning
                  Sciences, 2, 235-276.
         Roschelle, J., & Teasley, S. D. (1995).  The construction of shared knowledge in collaborative problem solving.
                  In C.  O'Malley  (Ed.),  Computer    Supported  Collaborative   Learning  (pp. 69-97).   Berlin: Springer-
                  Verlag.
         Schulz-Hardt, S., Frey, D., Lüthgens, C. & Moscovici, S. (2000). Biased information search in group decision
                  making. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 78(4), 655-669.
         Stahl, G. (2006). Group cognition: Computer support for building collaborative knowledge. Cambridge, MA:
                  MIT Press.
         Teasley, S. D., & Roschelle, J. (1993).   Constructing a joint problem space: The computer as a tool for sharing
                  knowledge.    In S.  P.  Lajoie & S. D.  Derry  (Eds.),  Computers  as  Cognitive  Tools   (pp.  229-258).
                  Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
         Teasley, S. D. (1997).   Talking about reasoning: How important is the peer in peer collaborations?        In L. B.
                  Resnick,  R.  Saljo, &   C. Pontecorvo, B.   Burge   (Eds.), Discourse, Tools, and Reasoning:     Situated
                  Cognition and Technologically Supported Environments. (pp. 361-384).      Berlin: Springer-Verlag).
         Thompson, L. & Fine, G.A. (2000). Socially shared cognition, affect, and behavior: A review and integration.
                  Personality and Social Psychology Review, (3)4, 278-302.

        Paper 1
         Clark, H.H. & Schaefer, F.E. (1989). Contributing to discourse. Cognitive Science, 13, 259­294.
         Doise, W. & Mugny, G. (1984). The social development of the intellect. Oxford: Pergamon Press.
         Roschelle, J. & Teasley S.D. (1995). The construction of shared knowledge in collaborative problem solving. In
                  C.E.  O'Malley   (Ed),  Computer-Supported    Collaborative   Learning. (pp. 69-197).    Berlin: Springer-
                  Verlag
         Sangin, M., Nova, N., Molinari, G., Jermann, P., & Dillenbourg, P. (2007). Modelling is mutual. Proceedings of
                  the CSCL 2007 Conference, pp. 621-628. Rutgers University, NJ, USA.

        Paper 2
         Arrow, H., McGrath, J. E., & Berdahl, J. L. (2000). Small groups as complex systems: Formation, coordination,
                  development, and adaptation. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
         Barron, B. (2003). When smart groups fail. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 12(3), 307-359.
         Bar-Yam, Y. (2003). Dynamics of complex systems. New York: Perseus Publishing
         Cohen, E. G., Lotan, R. A., Abram, P. L., Scarloss, B. A., & Schultz, S. E. (2002). Can groups learn? Teachers
                  College Record, 104(6), 1045-1068.
         Fischer, F., & Mandl, H. (2005). Knowledge convergence in computer-supported collaborative learning: The
                  role of external representation tools. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 14(3), 405-441.
         Kapur, M., Voiklis, J., & Kinzer, C. (2007). Sensitivities to early exchange in synchronous computer-supported
                  collaborative        learning      (CSCL)          groups.       Computers         and          Education,
                  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2007.04.007
         Ross, S. M. (1996). Stochastic processes. New York: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

        Paper 3

3-3
Bar-Tal, D. (1990). Group beliefs: A conception for analyzing group structure, processes, and behavior. New
       York: Springer-Verlag.
Brown, A. L., & Campione, J. C. (1996). Guided discovery in a community of learners. In K. McGilly (Ed.),
       Classroom lessons: Integrating cognitive theory and classroom practices (pp. 3-21). Cambridge, MA:
       The MIT Press.
Cannon-Bowers, J. A., Salas, E., & Converse, S. (1993). Shared mental models in expert team decision making.
       In J. J. Castellan (Eds.), Current  issues in individual   and  group  decision making. Hillsdale,  NJ:
       Erlbaum.
Clark, H. H., & Brennan, S. E. (1991). Grounding in communication. In L. B. Resnick, J. M. Levine & S. D.
       Teasley (Eds.), Perspectives on socially shared cognition (pp. 127-149). Washington, DC: American
       Psychological Association.
Clark, H. H. and D. Wilkes-Gibbs (1986). Referring as a collaborative process. Cognition, 22, 1-39.
Hutchins, E. (1991). The social organization of distributed cognition. In L. B. Resnick, J. M. Levine and S. D.
       Teasley (Eds.), Perspectives on socially shared cognition. Washington, D. C., American Psychological
       Association.
Jeong, H. & Chi, M.T.H. (2007). Knowledge convergence during collaborative learning.    Instructional Science,
       35, 287-315.
Orr, J. E. (1990). Sharing knowledge, celebrating identity: War stories and community memory among service
       technicians. In D. S. Middelton & D. Edwards (Eds.), Collective remembering: Memory in society.
       London: Sage.
Resnick, L. B., Levine, J. M., & Teasley, S. D. (1991). Perspectives on socially shared cognition. Washington,
       DC: American Psychological Association.
Rogoff, B. (1998). Cognition as a collaborative process. In W. Damon (Ed.), Handbook of Child Psychology
       (pp. 679-744). New York: Wiley.
Roschelle, J. (1992). Learning by collaborating: Convergent conceptual change. The Journal of the Learning
       Sciences, 2(3), 235-276.
Webb, N. M., & Palinscar, A. S. (1996). Group processes in the classroom. In D. C. Berliner & R. C. Calfee
       (Eds.), Handbook of Educational Psychology. New York: Simon & Schuster Macmillan.

Paper 4
Jeong, H. & Chi, M.T.H. (2007). Knowledge convergence during collaborative learning.    Instructional Science,
       35, 287-315.
Fischer, F., & Mandl, H. (2005). Knowledge convergence in computer-supported collaborative learning: The
       role of external representation tools. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 14(3), 405-441.
Resnick, L. B., Levine, J. M., & Teasley, S. D. (1991). Perspectives on socially shared cognition. Washington,
       DC: American Psychological Association.
Teasley, S. (1997). Talking about reasoning: How important is the peer in peer collaboration? In L. B. Resnick,
       R.   Säljö, C. Pontecorvo  & B.  Burge (Eds.),     Discourse, tools and reasoning: Essays    on situated
       cognition (pp. 361-384). Berlin: Springer.
Weinberger, A., &   Fischer, F. (2006). A framework       to analyze argumentative knowledge   construction in
       computer-supported collaborative learning. Computers & Education, 46, 71-95.
Weinberger, A., Stegmann, K. & Fischer, F. (2007). Knowledge convergence in collaborative learning: concepts
       and assessment. Learning and instruction, 17, 416-426.

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) and the National Science Foundation (NSF)
for their support on projects included in this symposium.

                                                                                                                  3-3
