                  Playing to learn game design skills in a game context

               James Paul Gee, Elisabeth Hayes, Arizona State University, Mary Lou Fulton College of Education,
                          Division of Curriculum & Instruction, PO Box 871011, Tempe, AZ 87101
                                       Email: James.Gee@asu.edu, Elisabeth.Hayes@asu.edu
                        Robert J. Torres, New York University, 82 Washington Square East, New York,
                                                  NY 10003, robjtorres@nyu.edu
                   Ivan Alex Games, Kurt Squire, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 225 North Mills Street
                                                    Madison, Wisconsin 53706
                                       Email: alex.games@gmail.com, kurt.squire@gmail.com
                            Katie Salen, Parsons School of Design, 2 West 13th Street, New York,
                                                  NY 10003, katie@gamelab.com

                 Abstract: This   interactive  session  presents  early research  findings resulting  from  a  game
                 simulation currently called Gamestar Mechanic through which 70 middle and high school-age
                 players learn to design video games. Gamestar Mechanic is an RPG (Role-Playing Game)
                 style online game through which players "take on" the behaviors characteristic of professional
                 game   designers (e.g.,  designing  games, accounting   for variability  change   within a game's
                 system, critiquing games). Reflecting on and practicing design can lead, we believe, to skills
                 that are crucial for success in the modern, high-tech, global world. Game design is but a start
                 in learning to think of complex interactions among variables, people, and technology, but it is
                 also a  domain   that can  help  others reflect on complex   interactions among      systems. Early
                 findings are showing that the pedagogical design of Gamestar Mechanic has the potential to
                 help  participants  develop  understanding  of   technical concepts    particular to game  design,
                 systems-thinking skills, and other behaviors associated with the domain.

       Overview: Gamestar Mechanic and the emerging games and learning field
                 This  session  will   be devoted   to GameStar   Mechanic,  a    video game  whose    core game     mechanic
         involves designing games. It is an RPG (Role-Playing Game) style online game where middle and high school-
         age players learn the fundamentals of game design by playing roles as "game mechanics" charged with the
         making and "modding" (modifying) of games. The game is being developed and tested in a collaborative project
         between the game company Gamelab in New York (http://www.gamelab.com/) and the Games, Learning, and
         Society Program at the University of Wisconsin, Madison (http://website.education.wisc.edu/gls/). It is being
         funded   through   the      MacArthur      Foundation's    new     Digital   Media     and    Learning      Initiative
         (http://www.digitallearning.macfound.org/). The project holds out a great deal of importance for educational
         reform, especially in the new push for innovation, creativity, and systems thinking (Friedman 2006). However,
         such a project may seem odd to people not familiar with current work on games and learning (Gee 2003, 2007)
         and its relation to design-based learning (Kolodner, 2002)
                 Some   years  ago,  the  New  London    Group   (1996), in its manifesto  on  multiple   literacies and new
         literacies argued that "design" ought to be seen as the center of learning for young people in the modern world.
         We live in a world in which complex systems interact in often dangerous ways. We humans intervene in the
         world by understanding natural systems as if they were designed so that we can leverage them for our own
         (good or bad) purposes. We also design complex systems that interact with designed and natural systems in
         complex ways. Policy decisions and civic participation in the modern world need to rely on "design thinking"
         that focuses on intra- and    inter-system relationships and   patterns, as well  as the  intended and   unintended
         consequences of local actions within a complex system (witness the intersections of religion, culture, language,
         industry, economy, and politics in the Iraqi War and the disaster to which simplistic linear thinking has led). The
         New London Group stressed, as well, the importance of seeing language and literacy as systems that humans
         don't just accept and passively use, but design in practice moment by moment through decisions and choices,
         hopefully based on deep understanding of the communicative resources (the "design grammar") constituted by
         different styles of language.
                 Gamestar Mechanic is a game designed to teach young people about game design, with the emphasis
         on design, not programming. Game design inherently involves building, assessing, and transforming systems
         that involve game mechanics and human interactions with technology and other humans. The goal is not to
         entice young people into game design as a career, though the game will introduce them to aspects of what such a
         career would involve. The goal is to help young people--gamers and nongamers--learn what it is like to think
         about design and to think like a designer (Salen & Zimmerman, 2003). Game design is, for many young people
         today, a highly motivating domain within which to first think about design.

3-3
          Game design involves a rich array of knowledge and skills. Knowing how to put together a successful
game    involves   system-based   thinking,    iterative critical  problem     solving, art and     aesthetics,  writing  and
storytelling, interactive design, game logic and rules, and computer skills. The designer must also be a socio-
technical engineer, thinking about how people will interact with the game and how the game will shape both
individual, competitive, or collaborative social interaction.
          Designers must use complex and technical linguistic and symbolic elements from a variety of domains,
at a variety of different levels, and for a variety of different purposes. They must explicate and defend design
ideas, describe design issues and player interactions at a meta-level, create and test hypotheses, and reflect on
the impact of their games as a distinctive form of media in relation to other media. And each of these involves a
melding    of technological,    social, communicational,       and artistic concerns,   in  the framework       of a form   of
scientific thinking in the broad sense of the term (e.g., hypothesis and theory testing, reflection and revision
based   on evidence,  etc.). Learners    are   making  and   thinking  about    designed complex      interactive  systems, a
characteristic activity in both the media and in science today.
          One of our key goals for GameStar Mechanic is to intervene in the so-called "fourth-grade slump" and
"eighth-grade cliff", the phenomena whereby many children who pass early reading tests cannot read to learn as
the complexity of language increases through the later grades. We believe that these phenomena are caused by
young people's lack of early preparation for and facility with "academic language", the sorts of non-vernacular
school-based language associated with the content areas in school (Gee, 2004). GameStar Mechanic is an ideal
environment    in  which   young    people   can  learn  and    practice--in   situated  practices  as   part   of a learning
community--forms of specialist, technical, and academic language that pay off in school success.
          Reflecting on and practicing design in these terms can lead, we believe, to skills that are crucial for
success in the modern, high-tech, global world. We live in a world replete with interacting systems--natural and
designed--that     create complex   risks, such  as  science,   market,  state, and  demographic      systems   interacting to
affect  global environmental     change.   Game   design  is   but a start  in learning to  think  of complex      interactions
among   variables,   people,    and  technology,     but it  is  also  a   domain   where   eventually,    through    "gamed
simulations",  designers   can   help   others reflect on   issues  of social  change   and complex      interactions among
systems.
          At the same time, game and gaming are a truly global phenomenon. Young people all over the world--
whether   from  rich or   poor  countries--play   games     if they  have   any access  to  them   at all. People   today are
familiar with playing in multiplayer settings--like World of WarCraft--with people from all over the world. It
is possible   that we can    use games,    gaming,   and  game     design   as bridge  with which     to form   international
collaborations for world-wide creativity and innovation, as well as the spread of tech-savvy identities across the
globe in the service of far more uniform development across countries and regions than we have today.
          It should be mentioned here, as well, that games are a truly multicultural phenomenon in the United
States. For example, African-Americans are among the largest demographic of game players and this holds true
for  many      different   game     genres     (http://gotmaddgamez.blogspot.com/2005/08/blacks-more-likely-to-be-
hardcore.html;     http://findarticles.com/p/articles/mi_m0PJQ/is_15_2/ai_n6131152).            People     have  argued   that
video games are, for some young people, a route to IT and STEM skills, if these young people think about them
strategically and involve themselves with "modding" (modifying and making games). GameStar Mechanic is all
about modding and one of its goals is to ensure that minority boys and girls get the opportunity to engage with
games in a way that leads to IT and STEM possibilities.

Epistemic games
          The approach to learning built into the Gamestar Mechanic project is one that has been advocated for
by  the Games,     Learning,  and  Society   Group   at  the   University   of Wisconsin-Madison.      One    version of  this
approach can be seen in David Williamson Shaffer's "epistemic games" or "professional practice simulations"
(Shaffer,  2007).  Another   such   approach     can be  seen   in James    Paul Gee's   work   on    "games    and  authentic
professionalism"    (Gee,  2007)  or    Kurt Squire's  (2006)   work   with    young people  "modding"      (modifying)   the
complex game Civilization.
          In "epistemic games", learners use game technologies to take on the identities and practices associated
with some professional domain, whether this domain be urban planning, architecture, journalism, and so forth,
or, in the case of Gamestar Mechanic, game design itself. The purpose is not professional training, however;
rather, it is for young people to be immersed in a distinctive domain of knowledge and skills that can transfer to
school and, more importantly, life.
          In such games, learners do things that have meaning to them and to society. Such games are knowledge
games.  They   are  meant    to teach   learners both  how   to navigate    complex    linguistic, cognitive,   and  symbolic
domains and to innovate. Both of these goals involve becoming part a group--a "community of practice"--with
a  common     repertoire  of knowledge     about  problems     in  the world    and  a shared   set of   skills to  enact this
knowledge.

                                                                                                                                   3-3
                  To illustrate such an "epistemic game", consider Madison 2200, a computer-based simulation in which
         high school participants work ("role play") as urban planners to redesign a local downtown pedestrian mall
         (think of a more accurate and local Sim City), developed by David Shaffer and his participants at the University
         of Wisconsin-Madison.       Urban   planners  develop    and use   plans   that meet the   social,  economic,   and physical
         needs of communities. Urban planning requires deep understanding of both social and scientific issues and it
         requires the  use   of sophisticated   technologies   to  solve  complex    problems,  including    geographic  information
         systems (GIS) that make it possible for planners to ask creative "what if" questions and get feedback to inform
         their work.
                  In  such   an  epistemic  game,   participants   don't  just use   a game-like    technology  to  engage   in urban
         planning, they are provided with a rich set of additional curricular materials and activities. For instance, they
         receive a project directive from the mayor, addressed to them as city planners, directing them to create a detailed
         re-design of the local pedestrian mall. They receive, as well, an information packet including a city budget plan
         and  letters from   concerned   citizens   about issues  such   as crime,   revenue, jobs,   waste, traffic,  and affordable
         housing. They watch video featuring interviews with people about the street's redevelopment and they conduct a
         site assessment. They work in teams and their emerging understandings are guided by adults with knowledge
         about learning, about the specific skills urban planning recruits, and about ways to leverage those skills for the
         development of school-based language and thinking skills.
                  Gamestar Mechanic is an epistemic game of a very distinctive and innovative sort, one that speaks
         quite directly to the issues of being tech-savvy in the modern world and of media literacy that we discussed
         above. But the work on epistemic games also brings forward two important features that any games for learning
         must have: first, learning stems not from the game in and of itself, but from the learning system (forms of social
         participations  and   interaction, curricular  materials,   teaching-learning   relationships  among    masters   and  peers)
         into which   the  game   is   placed;  second,   good   learning games     need  to be integrated   with   "communities    of
         practice" or "affinity groups" (Gee, 2004) where learners can participate in developing a common set of high
         standards and engage in collaborative reflection and production.

       Learners as producers of knowledge
                  Gamestar      Mechanic    is part of larger  movement     today   that stresses young    people  as  producers,   not
         consumers    of knowledge     and  media    (Jenkins  2006).   Thanks    to modern   digital  technologies,   young    people
         today--if they are willing to put in the effort--can produce media (video, machinima, music, animation, graphic
         arts, modded games, blogs, wikis, and so forth) at a professional level. They can join robust communities or
         affinity groups where people's status is determined by their skills and often their ability to help, teach, and
         collaborate, not their age, race, gender, or school success.
                  Such    production    often   leads  young   people    today   to  become   "tech-savvy",    by   which  we   mean
         technologically skilled, unintimated by technical and technological matters, and able to integrate technology into
         artistic or social concerns. In turn, such tech-savvy identities are crucial for success in the modern world. A real
         issue arises though of the social distribution of production skills and tech-savvy identities among young people
         today. Are all children getting these opportunities or only the more privileged ones? How does gender work in
         this respect? What if young people today pick up tech-savvy skills and identities primarily out of school? What
         if schools do not, for the most part, offer kids tech-savvy identities and skills?
                  Gamestar      Mechanic    can be  viewed    as a game   about   "modding",    as  a tool  meant   to engage   young
         people with a "modding" attitude. "Modding" is the term gamers use for the practice of using the software by
         which games are made--software today is very often readily available when one buys a game--to modify a
         game, sometimes in small ways and sometimes in major ways, major enough to constitute a wholly different
         game.  For   example,   young   people   at  MIT,    under  the  direction  of  Henry  Jenkins,    made  a game   about    the
         American Revolution from the software with which the Dungeon and Dragons game Neverwinter Nights was
         made. Modding is a quintessential tool that can lead a young person to take on a strong identity as a producer
         and  a tech-savvy     individual,  almost  always    today  as  part of  a  collaborative  effort  among   a  community    of
         modders and players.
                  From the little evidence that has so far been collected about the matter, modding at the highest levels--
         though   not in   its more  modest    forms--is   very   probably    strongly   associated with   a relatively  small  set of
         privileged   young    people, often   males.  Gamestar    Mechanic    is meant   to spread   the  modding    attitude and  its
         attendant  skills and   values. It  is meant   to lead   to young    people   transferring the modding     attitude to other
         technologies and settings.
                  The Games, Learning, and Society Group at the University of Wisconsin-Madison has advocated a
         productive approach to media literacy that is epitomized in modding and the modding attitude to technologies.
         Kurt   Squire   has   shown   that even    quite  young   children--children     from  poor   communities     and   who    are
         unaffiliated  with    school--can  become     active modders    of a  game    like Civilization,  a game   that requires   the
         modder to think deeply about culture, history, and geography (Squire, 2006).

3-30
Research Design
        This Gamestar Mechanic research project employs a design-based research program (Brown, 1992;
Collins, 1992), which is an iterative approach to research allowing for flexibility to adapt or redesign research
procedures during the course of the research program. This approach attempts to investigate an intervention
through a particular theoretical lens with an intent to make further claims about theory (Barab, 2006; Barab &
Squire, 2004).   In our  case,   the work   on  situated learning (Gee,  2004;   Lave &    Wenger,   1991)  frames   the
theoretical framework to which we wish to further contribute. Pioneered (Collins, Joseph, & Bielaczyc, 2004)
by Brown   (1992)   and  Collins   (1992),  design-based   research  treats as fundamental     the problem  of context
(Hoadley, 2004) and entails both "engineering" (Cobb, Confrey, diSessa, Lehrer, & Schauble, 2003) particular
forms of learning and, in a systematic and iterative fashion, studying those forms of learning within the very
context defined as the means for supporting them. In this way, design-based research ideally results in greater
understanding   of  the  design   elements   of  a  learning  ecology and   constitutes a  means     of addressing   the
complexity that is especially characteristic of educational settings. Our intent, as is the nature of design-based
research projects, is to investigate the possibilities of Gamestar Mechanic as an educational intervention for the
explicit purposes of educational improvement. Research for Gamestar Mechanic began in early 2007 and will
continue through 2009.

Sample
        Starting in January 2007, Gamestar Mechanic has been tested in six "workshop" settings. Workshop
participants have   ranged    in  ages   9  to  16,  and  have  included    gender-balanced    samples   from  varying
socioeconomic     backgrounds.    In  all, about   70 middle   and  high  school   participants  have   participated in
workshops    in various  sites,  including  Madison,     Wisconsin, New   York   City and     Minneapolis, Minnesota.
Workshops ranged from 16 two hour-long sessions over the span of several weeks to more intensive week-long
sessions totaling 20 hours. Using Gamestar Mechanic as a central mediating game tool, the workshops were
designed to immerse participants in the epistemic domain of game design, asking participants to engage in and
take on behaviors particular to game designers. Specifically, the following nine goals have defined the design of
the workshops:
    1.  To teach basic game design principles using Gamestar Mechanic as the primary learning platform.
    2.  To use activities that make up the Gamestar Mechanic experience--indeed, that are endemic to the
        domain of game design--as the basis for the workshop: making games, sharing games, writing game
        labels, conducting game reviews, doing game design challenges and playing challenges.
    3.  To   instantiate the   domain  of   game   design where   participants in  a highly   social and  collaborative
        environment iteratively design and critique games.
    4.  To   continue   to refine  assessment   tools for  the project, including  strategies  for documentation   and
        evaluation of the kinds of thinking and creating encouraged and supported by Gamestar Mechanic.
    5.  To define core exercises and structures for a Gamestar Mechanic curriculum in a facilitated setting.
    6.  To test new features of the build, including levels and parameter modification.
    7.  To document participants' use of Gamestar Mechanic in a facilitated context.
    8.  To gather information on participants' pre-workshop and post- workshop understandings of how games
        work as designed systems.
    9.  To see if participants can learn to think critically about their design choices and to see games as a
        system of designed choices.

Assessment and data collection tools
        Thus far, nine assessment and data collection strategies have been used in this study. They include (1)
games   designed  by  participants;  (2)   written game  description  participants create  for their games;   (3) video
recording of  all workshop     meetings;   (4) pre  and  post assessment  sessions   with  each participant;  (5) game
reviews where participants in writing decompose and critique the design of their own games and the games of
other participants in the workshops; (6) writing prompts; (7) think-aloud protocols (Ericsson & Simon, 1984,
1993); (8) video screen captures taken as participatns design games; (9) field notes.

Research questions
The following research questions have driven the collection of data:

1.  Does  participation    in Gamestar     Mechanic   workshops   enable participants   to acquire   and  use technical
    language specific to game design?
2.  Are  participants   able  to demonstrate    understanding  of a  game   as a system    of interacting elements?  Is
    Gamestar Mechanic able to help participant's develop systems-thinking skills?
3.  Are participants able to take on and exhibit the behaviors of game designers?

                                                                                                                           3-3
        Preliminary Findings
        1. Does participation in Gamestar Mechanic workshops enable participants to acquire and
        use technical language specific to game design?
                   The highly iterative nature of design-based research has allowed us to modify the design of workshops
         from one to the next. In one of the early workshops, our interest in allowing participants to openly explore
         designing games with the software, led us to wait a few weeks before introducing core game design concepts,
         such as the design of rules, goals and core mechanics. While participants were able to complete assignments that
         demonstrated understanding of core mechanics, for example, they did not demonstrate facility with the use of
         technical terms. That is, they did not use the technical language particular to game design unless prompted. In
         contrast, during a  subsequent     workshop,  participants  were introduced   to a  framework    of  technical terms  as
         functional tools for engaging with and talking about game design, early in the workshop. This framework not
         only highlighted technical terms, but drew systematic relationships between the terms. Enabling participants to
         develop an understanding of a game as a system of interacting elements has been a driving focus of this project.
         Hence, early in the workshop participants were introduced to a set of five design concepts (rules, space, core
         mechanics,   components   and  goals)    as discreet elements  that, taken together,  create  the   design of  a game's
         system. While the use of these pedagogical strategies have yet to be analyzed further, participants have begun to
         show encouraging results. Post-assessment results have indicated that workshops have enabled participants to
         demonstrate facility with technical language, not in terms of memorized vocabulary and set definitions, but as
         functional language   within  the  professional  practice   of game  design.  During   pre   and post   assessments,  for
         example, participants were asked to explain what a game a designer does. A response given by one participant
         (below), which was typical of responses given by other participants, indicates a level of acquisition of technical
         terms specific to the domain of game design:

         A participant's post-assessment response to "What do game designers do?":

                   Game designers design and edit games. They set up a system of core mechanics, rules, space
                   and objects of the game.

         This is in contrast to his pre-assessment response, which was more general:

                   They lay out the groundwork, design, plot, and other things necessary for a game to work.
                   They help with the game programming process. They are the head of a team of designers and
                   developers.

         While we   are only   in the first of two   phases of research,  data is  showing  that the  highly  situated  nature of
         learning  in Gamestar    Mechanic     seems  to enable  participants  to  acquire  and  apply    complex   game  design
         concepts and technical language particular to the domain.

        2. Are participants able to demonstrate understanding of a game as a system of interacting
        elements? Is Gamestar Mechanic able to help participant's develop systems-thinking skills?
                   Data collected  is also  showing   promising  results  in  participants' abilities to  conceive  of  games  as
         systems of interacting elements. One workshop used daily morning reflections to assess participant progress.
         Morning reflections consisted of prompts to which participants gave written responses. One prompt asked: If
         you were to think of a game as elements that make up a system, how would you describe those elements and
         their interactions? One participant (who we will call John) responded:

                   A set of rules is set to keep the interactions with the space, goal, and components logical and
                   more difficult. The  components      are   placed in  the  space to create  strategic  solutions  in
                   finishing a goal. The core mechanics are actions within the space and components to help
                   achieve a goal. A goal is a way to complete a level or game that has specific rules to make the
                   game harder.   The space    is the environment,   in which  all the other elements     of the system
                   coincide.

         A different participant (who we will call Patrick) responded:

                   The elements are space, goal, core mechanics, and rules. By changing an element, such as the
                   core mechanics, it will change all other elements such as the goal. For example, if the core
                   mechanics were changed from killing to jumping then the goal would have to change from
                   killing all the enemies to jumping to the end of the level.

3-3
          In John's response, he draws significant connections between the various elements of a game system
(e.g., "A   set of  rules  is set to keep   the interactions with   the space,  goal, and  components     logical and more
difficult"), making clear that he is able to exhibit systems-thinking skills. Patrick's response shows clearly the
level  of sophistication   that   participants  began  to achieve   by  the middle    of a workshop.   In  the  case of   this
participant, he was not only able to analyze the structure of a game using technical terms, but he was able to
contextualize his response using a game example, demonstrating his mastery over what Gee (2003) calls the
design grammar of a game. While these participants' responses are only typical of approximately 30 percent of
responses within a particular sample of 15 workshop participants, this type of response represents the potential
this game platform offers in enabling users to develop systems-thinking skills. Moreover, it allows us moving
forward to consider the types of scaffolding that may be required to support more participants in reaching these
high levels of understanding.

3. Are participants able to take on and exhibit the behaviors of game designers?
          A    core design    goal   of   Gamestar  Mechanic     is to  enable   a "metagame."     By  this    we mean    the
instantiation of a larger community in which participants share and critique each others' games as part of an
emerging    community      of   practice. Players  engage  in such   critique   based on   a  set of "good  game"    criteria
established by the community. In this way, players elicit feedback on their designs as well as offer feedback to
others. This    metagame      aspect of   the game   has  demonstrated    significant  potential  as  the vast  majority   of
participants have demonstrated the ability to fruitfully iterate and improve their game designs based on peer
feedback. Playing, designing, eliciting feedback and critiquing games are behaviors we define as core to the
practices of professional game designers. Data from this first phase of testing has demonstrated that Gamestar
Mechanic is indeed able encourage these behaviors among most participants. Post-assessment interviews, for
example, have recorded participants uttering statements like, "I feel more like a game designer now," and "I
want   to   change   what     I said  about   game   designers   [during    the pre-assessment     interview]."   Moreover,
participants' use of technical language related to game design (discussed above) also point to the potential of
Gamestar     Mechanic's    ability   to facilitate the kind   of language   uses   characteristic  of game     designers. As
pedagogical tool, Gamestar Mechanic attempts to activate a community of practice by imbedding into the tool's
design the structures that typically support and define the domain of game design (e.g., iteratively designing
games, accounting for variability change within a game's system's elements, critiquing games, etc.). Overall, we
are encouraged thus far by the results of our first phase of testing.

Design of Interactive Session
This interactive session will consist of a condensed version of a game design workshop. A three-part structure
will be used to facilitate this session:

   I.     Introduction to Gamestar Mechanic and Overview of Research Methods and Findings (45 min)
   II.    Enacting a Gamestar Mechanic Metagame (30 min)
                a.  Participants iterate through two game design cycles
                b.  Teams present their game to other teams and a vote is cast for the best game.
   III.   Discussion and Question and Answer Session (15 min)

References
Barab, S. (2006). Design-based research: A methodological toolkit for the learning scientist. In R. K. Sawyer
          (Ed.), The Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University
          Press.
Barab,  S.,  &    Squire,  K.   (2004).   Design-based  research:   Putting a   stake in  the ground   The  Journal  of   the
          Learning Sciences, 13(1), 1-14.
Brown,    A.   L.  (1992). Design    experiments:   Theoretical  and    methodological    challenges  in  creating complex
          interventions. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 2, 141-178.
Cobb,   P.,  Confrey,  J., diSessa,     A., Lehrer, R.,  & Schauble,    L.  (2003).   Design  experiments   in  educational
          research. Educational Researcher, 32(1), 9-13.
Collins, A. (1992). Toward a design science in education. Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
Collins, A., Joseph, D., & Bielaczyc, K. (2004). Design research: Theoretical and methodological issues. The
          Journal of the Learning Sciences, 13(1), 15-42.
Ericsson, K. A., & Simon, H. A. (1984, 1993). Protocol analysis: Verbal reports as data. Cambridge, MA: MIT
          Press.
Friedman, T. (2005). The world is flat: A brief history of the twenty-first century. New York: Farrar, Straus and
          Giroux.
Gee,   J.   P.  (2003).    What   video     games   have  to  teach    us  about   learning   and    literacy. New    York:
          Palgrave/Macmillan.

                                                                                                                                 3-33
        Gee, J. P. (2004). Situated language and learning: A critique of traditional schooling. New York: Routledge.
        Gee, J. P. (2007). Good video games + good learning: Collected essays on video games, learning, and literacy.
                New York: Peter Lang.
        Hoadley, C. M. (2004). Methodological alignment in design-based research. Educational Psychologist, 39(4),
                203-212.
        Jenkins, H. (2006). Convergence culture: Where old and new media collide. New York: New York University
                Press.
        Jessup, E. (2005). Design-based learning and the participation of women in IT. Frontiers: A Journal of Women
                Studies. 26.1: 141-147
        Kolodner, J. L. (2002). Facilitating the learning of design practices: Lessons learned from inquiry into science
                education. Journal of Industrial Teacher Education, 39.3.
        Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. New York: Cambridge
                University Press.
        New  London Group.  (1996).  A  Pedagogy of multiliteracies: Designing  social futures. Harvard Educational
                Review 66.1: 60-92.
        Salen, K. & Zimmerman E. (2003). Rules of play: Game design fundamentals. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
        Shaffer, D. W. (2007). How computer games help children learn. New York: Palgrave/Macmillan.
        Squire, K. (2006). From content to context: Videogames as designed experience. Educational Researcher 35.8:
                19-29

3-3
