    Online/onsite activity in elementary and secondary classrooms
                     using advanced collaborative technologies
            Fernand Gervais, Laval University, Québec, QC, Canada, fernand.gervais@fse.ulaval.ca
                 Eugène Bordage, Laval University, Québec, QC, Canada, radon@sympatico.ca
                   Thérèse Laferrière, Laval University, Québec, QC, Canada, tlaf@fse.ulaval.ca

        Abstract: This research paper examines coconstruction of knowledge in three different school
        contexts.    Systematic interaction  analyses  were    conducted  in over twenty  elementary     and
        secondary classrooms. An array of descriptive statistics was produced, including a number of
        significant differences. The verbal face-to-face context, in which no collaborative technologies
        were used, revealed to be the one where less coconstruction was observed.          Coconstruction
        was    often limited to the expression  of  opinions.   Explanation  was  present but  justification
        almost absent.

Introduction
        Contemporary perspectives focus a great deal on social interaction in the classroom (Sawyer, 2005). In
our modern    era, collaborative  tools or   technologies are  bound   to play a  major   role in  supporting  social
interaction for learning and knowledge building purposes. A new approach regarding social interaction has to be
built in the classroom when a teacher engages students in a hybrid mode of learning (onsite/online), one that
provides direct and interactive access to information, and opportunities for cooperative/collaborative work in the
classroom or between classrooms. The coconstruction of knowledge occurring in such a context is of a great
interest (Bransford, Brown, and Cocking, 1999) from a research point of view. It becomes even more interesting
when various forms of coconstruction can be compared as the teacher can provide a variety of situations, with or
without advanced technologies. The goal here is to compare coconstruction in three different school contexts,
including two that could not have existed without the use of collaborative tools, namely an electronic forum and
a videoconferencing system.

Conceptual framework
        Vygotsky's    social  constructivist theory (1978),    Brown's   learning community    concept    (1997) and
Scardamalia   and  Bereiter's   knowledge  building  principles  (2003)   provided solid  foundations    for teachers
interested in  the classroom-based   learning/knowledge    community     model as  a way  to   enhance   the learning
environment they create for students. Social interaction for learning or knowledge building purposes are at the
core of their views. Our main research assumption was that the interaction between the learner and knowledge,
scaffolded  by  teachers or  students,  is the most   critical one. Higher-thinking   and social   skills have   been
associated with advanced uses of collaborative technologies in the classroom. Recent studies include Lamon,
Reeve, and Scardamalia (2001) and Hopson, Knezek, and Simms (2002). Cooperative and collaborative learning
strategies can be applied to engage students in conversations with one another. What is learned is then not only
about what students read but what is said to one another about what they read (Pence, 1993).       Analyses of online
conversations,  using  socio-cognitive  discourse  analysis methods,   have   contributed to   the understanding  of
participation in classroom-based learning communities (Breuleux, Bracewell, & Renaud, 1995), and ways of
fostering it.  We  asked ourselves   the question:  In which   context is social  interaction  for learning  purposes
favored in most substantive ways?

Methodology
        Three distinct learning contexts were differentiated: 1) a face-to-face context in which the teacher was
vocal about the learning community concept but was not using Internet-based collaborative technologies; 2) an
hybrid context in which the teacher did not talk explicitly about the learning community concept but provided
opportunities for students to use a videoconferencing system (iVisit) for collaborative activity, and 3) an hybrid
context in which the teacher did not talk also explicitly about the learning community concept but provided
opportunities  for students  to use an  electronic forum,  namely   Knowledge     Forum,  for  collaborative inquiry.
Participants were from different elementary and secondary classrooms, urban and rural (Quebec, Canada). Over
twenty classrooms participated in the study. Direct observation was made in context-one classrooms whereas
context-two and context-three classrooms were observed through recorded videos or transcripts of the electronic
forums. The    procedure of  data saturation  was  applied. Interactions  were  analyzed  under    three dimensions:
linguistic (Searle's and Vanderveken's       typology, 1985), sociocognitive (Brown's and Renshaw's collective
line of arguments, 2000) and socioemotional (Bales' interaction analysis system, 1950). Descriptive statistics
methods and qualitative analysis were applied.

                                                                                                                         3-3
      Results
                 Data analysis showed that coconstruction of knowledge was more evident in Knowledge Forum than in
       the two other contexts. This was observed, among others, by the presence of type-three sequences (collective
       knowledge),     but especially  by    many  type-two   sequences   (exchanged     knowledge)    where   coconstruction,
       although less marked than in type-three sequences, was present. The verbal face-to-face context (context one)
       revealed to be the one in which less coconstruction was observed. This fact seems to be reflective of a high
       frequency of type-one sequences (transmission of information by the teacher).            As for context two, in which
       iVisit was used, the results showed greater closeness to the verbal face-to-face context (context one) than to
       context three (the context where there was use of Knowledge Forum). All contexts considered, explanation was
       present (6,93%) but justification was almost absent (0,17%). Consensual elements accounted for 9,23% of all
       elements. Most units of analysis were codified as expression of an opinion or of an information followed by an
       individual agreement or an opinion accompanied by total or partial disagreement (expressed by yes, but...), and
       sometimes followed by an agreement.

      Discussion of results
                 In all three  contexts  coconstruction  between    teacher  and students  and   student-student(s)   remained
       negligible, although more explicit in context three (written interaction on Knowledge Forum). Wherever there
       was coconstruction it was often limited to the expression of opinions without much disagreement or negotiation
       of consensus.    The   justifications a disagreement   should  have   brought were    almost  nonexistent   in all three
       contexts. The    formulated    hypotheses   that  could   have given   rise  to   discussions   were  rare. Therefore,
       coconstruction   revealed   to be  more  a juxtaposition  of elements  than  real coconstruction  of  knowledge.    The
       results provided    us with opportunities  to raise a  number  of  explanatory   factors for such  low-level   forms  of
       coconstruction: the nature of the activity, the factors that led one of the contexts to favor more coconstruction of
       knowledge, the absence of a socioconstructive culture in most classrooms observed, and temporal constraints.
       However,   socioconstructivism     remains  a sensible  approach,  one  that  has the  potential to  take the  learning
       environment     out of its  narrow corridors  when  it comes   to the transmission    of knowledge   as pointed    by an
       official Quebec Ministry of Education document. We saw instances of a rich learning context within which
       meaning was negotiated and ways of understanding emerged and evolved but they seemed to be too rare. This
       study demonstrates the importance of pedagogy over technology but also to advanced pedagogies supported by
       advanced collaborative technologies that support written classroom discourse. It also justifies the position that in
       a  world  where  information   is  more  and  more  abundant   and accessible,  coconstruction   through  platforms   of
       discussion and exchanges in the classroom is unavoidable.

      References
       Bales, R. F. (1950). Interaction process analysis. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
       Bransford,   J. D., Brown,   A. L.,   & Cocking,  R.  R.  (1999). How  people   learn:   Brain, mind, experience,   and
                 school. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
       Breuleux, A., Bracewell, R.J., & Renaud, P. (1995). Cooperation, sharing, and support between specialists in
                 producing technical documentation. Technical Communication, 18, 155-160.
       Brown, A. (1997).      Transforming schools into communities of thinking and learning about serious matters.
                 American Psychologist, 52(4), 399-413.
       Brown, R. A. J., & Renshaw, P. D. (2000). Collective argumentation: A sociocultural approach to reframing
                 classroom teaching and learning. In H. Cowie and G. Aalswoort (Eds), Social interaction in learning
                 and instruction: The meaning of discourse for the construction of knowledge (pp.52-66). Amsterdam:
                 Pergamon.
       Hopson, M., Simms, R., & Knezek G. (2002). Using a technology-enriched environment to improve higher-
                 order thinking skills. Journal of Research on Computing in Education, 34(2), 109.
       Lamon, M., Reeve, R., Scardamalia, M. (2001, April) Mapping learning and the growth of knowledge in a knowledge
                 building  community.    Paper presented at  the annual  conference  of  the American   Educational   Research
                 Association. Seattle, WA. [On-line]. Available: http://csile.oise.utoronto.ca/lamon/mapping.html
       Pence, H.E. (1993) Combining Cooperative Learning and Multimedia in General Chemistry. Education, 113(3),
                 375-380.
       Sawyer, K. (Ed.) (2005). The Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences. New York: Cambridge U. Press.
       Searle, J., & Vanderveken, D. (1985). Foundations of illocutionary logic. Cambridge, England: Cambridge U.
                 Press
       Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (2003). Knowledge building. In Encyclopedia of Education (2nd ed., pp. 1370-
                 1373). New York: Macmillan Reference, USA.
       Vygotsky, L. S.     (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher psychological processes. Cambridge, MA:
                 Harvard University Press.

3-3
