           Principle-Based Design to Foster Adaptive Use of Technology for
                                        Building Community Knowledge
                        Huang-Yao Hong, National Chengchi University, Taiwan, hyhong@nccu.edu.tw
                    Marlene Scardamalia, University of Toronto, Canada, mscardamalia@kf.oise.utoronto.ca
                           Richard Messina, University of Toronto, Canada, rmessina@oise.utoronto.ca
                            Chewlee Teo, University of Toronto, Canada, chewlee@kf.oise.utoronto.ca

                  Abstract.   Principle-based    pedagogical   and   technological  designs  were  used   to support
                  knowledge   building     in a  grade  5-6  class.  Pedagogical    designs focused   on   collective
                  responsibility for knowledge advancement. Technological designs focused on provision of a
                  public space for generating and continually improving ideas with (a) social-network-analysis
                  tools to analyze and support community processes, and (b) vocabulary-analyzer and semantic-
                  analysis  tools to analyze   and support  conceptual   growth. The  tools were   used by   teachers,
                  students, and   researchers.  Multi-level content    analyses revealed patterns  of reflective  and
                  adaptive use of the technology to support sustained knowledge building.

                  Knowledge building is a social process with focus on the production and continual improvement of
        ideas  of value to  a community     (Scardamalia   & Bereiter,   2003). Principle-based  design implies   theoretically
        guided design work, to be contrasted with classroom work defined by pre-specified procedures, clear scripts and
        rules, or componential tasks (see, e.g., Dick & Carey, 1990; Gagne, Wagers & Briggs, 1992, Mager, 1975;
        Merrill, 1983) or any highly-structured, ritualistic learning activities that represent fixed rather than improvable
        classroom procedures. Knowledge-building principles represent ideals and design challenges that set the stage
        for the community's work in "design mode" (Bereiter & Scardamalia, 2003), with the principles themselves
        serving as objects of discourse for continual improvement. All members of the community are encouraged to go
        "beyond   best  practice,"   as is evident in   adaptive and   opportunistic patterns of   interaction with   focus  on
        innovation and increasingly effective educational means that unfold as work proceeds (see Hong & Sullivan,
        2008, for a theoretical review).
                  Twelve knowledge building principles inform this work:
        Real Ideas, Authentic Problems. Ideas are viewed as conceptual artifacts (Bereiter, 2002) that are as real as
        things touched  and   felt.  Knowledge   problems   arise   from efforts to  understand  the  world  and  the  ideas of
        collaborators, leading to problems of understanding that are quite different from textbook problems and puzzles.
        Community Knowledge, Collective Responsibility. Contributions to shared, top-level goals of the organization
        are prized and rewarded as much as individual achievements. Team members produce ideas of value to others
        and share responsibility for the overall advancement of knowledge in the community.
        Idea Diversity is as essential to knowledge advancement as biodiversity is to the success of an ecosystem.
        Improvable Ideas.    Participants view all ideas as improvable; they work to improve the quality, coherence, and
        utility of ideas in their shared knowledge spaces
        Epistemic Agency. Participants deal with the full range of knowledge problems (goals, motivation, evaluation,
        long-range planning, etc.), including knowledge problems normally left to teachers or managers.
        Democratizing Knowledge. All participants are contributors to the shared goals of the community and take pride
        in knowledge advances achieved by the group.
        Symmetric Knowledge Advance. Expertise is distributed within and between communities and team members,
        with knowledge exchange reflecting a to-give-knowledge-is-to-get-knowledge framework for interactions.
        Pervasive  Knowledge      Building.   Knowledge    building is not confined  to particular occasions   or subjects   but
        pervades mental life--in and out of school and across contexts.
        Constructive Uses Of Authoritative Sources. To know a discipline is to be in touch with its present state and
        growing edge. This requires understanding of authoritative sources as well as a critical stance toward them.
        Knowledge Building Discourse. Community knowledge is refined and transformed through discursive practices
        that have the advancement of knowledge as their explicit and primary goal.
        Concurrent, Embedded, Transformative Assessment. Assessment is used to identify problems as work proceeds,
        to engage  in  self-directed assessment    that is more  fine-tuned  and  rigorous  than external assessment,   and  to
        ensure that the community's work will exceed the expectations of external assessors.
        Rise Above. Participants work toward more inclusive principles and higher-level formulations of problems to
        transcend oversimplifications and move beyond current best practices.
                  These principles (see Scardamalia, 2002) are indicated in italics throughout the text to convey the ways
        and extent to which a principle-based approach to design underlies this research.

1-
         The   technology    used    to support   this research   is  Knowledge    Forum--a     multimedia     community
knowledge space (Scardamalia, 2003; 2004).        Participants contribute their ideas in the form of notes to "views"
(i.e., virtual spaces for collaborative discourse among community members). Participants are able to co-author
notes; build-on,  reference,    and annotate  the work   of  others; set problem   fields and  keywords    for   notes; and
create "rise-aboves"    that bring  greater coherence    to  the contents of the  knowledge    space. Reading,      linking,
referencing,  editing,   rise-above  etc. operations     are recorded    automatically  in  the   database,   and   can  be
summarized statistically by means of an Analytic Toolkit (Burtis, 2002).          Technology designs--in line with the
overarching commitment to continual improvement--allow for opportunistic planning of classroom work that is
under guidance of teachers and students (Zhang, Scardamalia, Reeve, & Messina, 2006).
         New analytic tools built into Knowledge Forum and based on its log files have been developed to help assess
and support knowledge building.     In this paper we discuss three of these tools: the Social Network Analysis Tool, the
Vocabulary Analyzer, and the Semantic Overlap Tool. The Social Network Analysis Tool represents social dynamics
of the community, showing which members of the community are building on to the work of others or, in contrast, are
not communicating or are isolated from others. This tool also shows the number of notes an individual contributes and
interactions such   as  building-on, linking, referencing,   rising-above and,  more   generally,  efforts to establish  an
integrated network of ideas. The Vocabulary Analyzer is designed to trace a member's vocabulary growth and unique
vocabulary contributions over time. It also provides indication of individual and community knowledge advances
based on vocabulary level, using various dictionaries or discipline-based resources as benchmarks. The Semantic
Overlap Tool   is designed   to  compare  key  terms   extracted  from any  two   sets of notes or  texts  and   to identify
overlapping words in those two sets of notes or texts. Thus overlap between terms entered early or late into the
knowledge spaces or between student notes and discipline-based or curricular resources can easily be determined. The
technology design challenge related to these tools is to continually improve Knowledge Forum as a knowledge-
building environment and, in turn, to support users in continually improving their knowledge building practices. The
pedagogical challenge is related to the many questions surrounding how such tools can be effectively integrated into
the classroom. Issues include: To what extent can tools be integrated into student work in ways that foster rather than
defeat knowledge building? Can these tools help with both formative and summative assessment? Is it possible to
identify patterns of use that support increasingly high levels of knowledge advancement? Through principle-based
pedagogical and technical designs we begin to address these questions and to identify ways in which they can help
transform classroom practices.

Method
         The study was conducted in a science class at the Institute for Child Study, University of Toronto,
Canada, in the spring semester, 2006. The students were engaged in a course of study titled "integrated studies"
and the theme to be explored was decided by the class--"human body system." The goal was to gain a deeper
understanding, from an interdisciplinary perspective, of the human body as a system composed of many inter-
related sub-systems. There were two major initiatives: the internal body as a system, e.g., studying how the
brain, nerves, blood and cells work together (this phase covered the first half of the semester); and the physical
body as a system, e.g. studying how the head, hands, legs, knees and feet coordinate to enable long jumps (this
phase covered the second half of the semester). Through these two initiatives, students studied human body
system  from  both   a  biological   perspective  and  a physical  perspective.   Participants  were  22   fifth and    sixth
graders (10 girls and 12 boys) and had been engaged in knowledge building for five or six years depending on
their grade  level. The   teacher   was also  an  experienced    knowledge-building    practitioner with   seven-years   of
experience with knowledge-building pedagogy and technology.
         Research   Framework       and Procedures.    This  study   employed   a within-subject   design,  with    the first
inquiry phase  and   the  first week  of  the second   inquiry   phase providing   baseline  data.  Analytic tools were
introduced between weeks 2-4 of the second inquiry phase, first by demonstrating basic functions to students
then encouraging students to use them, but without specific instruction as to how to use the tools. Figure 1
illustrates each tool. The students were also encouraged but not required to record reflections regarding use of
the tools in a portfolio view (see below).
         Pedagogical Designs for Tool Use. The purpose of employing a principle-based design was to enable
students to advance their knowledge through adaptive and opportunistic use of assessment tools. This is quite
different from computer-based assessment in which the student is presented with a result, rather than requesting
information, with the evaluator or tool seemingly having greater understanding or control of the work than the
student (cf., Conole & Warburton, 2005; Thelwall, 2000).
         Knowledge Forum scaffolds are designed to support epistemic agency--to give students themselves
greater awareness of their performance by giving them means to guide their own knowledge processes. The
tools are customizable and allow students to tag information and address matters important to their ongoing
work.  To    facilitate reflective  and  constructive  use   of  new   analytic tools,  with  emphasis     on  community
knowledge building, the teacher and researchers co-designed scaffolds to be used by students to address the
following questions: (1) What information from the tool did you find useful and how will this information affect

                                                                                                                                 1-
         your knowledge building? (2) What is your idea improvement this week? (3) What is your individual plan to
         advance your knowledge in class next time? (4) How will you contribute knowledge to the class community?

                            a. Social Network Analysis Tool: social dynamics of a community

           b. Vocabulary Analyzer: profile of one person's      c. Semantic Overlap Tool: shared ideas/key terms
                        vocabulary growth                                      between two sets of notes

           Figure 1. Three analytic tools in Knowledge Forum used to inform and evaluate community dynamics and
                                                    conceptual growth.

                 Data Source  and Analysis.  The main   data  source    was students' discourse in Knowledge      Forum
         analyzed via multi-level content analyses (Miles & Huberman, 1994, Ch. 5-6) using multiple-grain sizes for
         "unit of analysis." The goal was to systematically address the following questions, as illustrated in Figure 2:
         what was being investigated (exploration), how was it investigated (description), and why (explanation)?

                                           Figure 2. Multi-level content analyses.

                 The purpose of using multi-level content analyses with multiple-grain sizes for the unit of analysis was
         to increase the overall validity of analysis (Hogenraad, McKenzie & Peladeau, 2003) and to avoid problems in
         previous studies showing lack of theoretical coherence and choice of unit of analysis (see de Wever, Schellens,
         Valcke, van Keer, in press, for a review). The    first-order content analysis used key-terms   extracted from
         students' notes for the unit of analysis (see Ch4 in Berelson, 1952; Zolotkova & Teplovs, 2006). First, all key
         terms within each student's notes in the database were extracted using the Semantic Tool. Then, two researchers
         read each student's notes and extracted misspelled key terms not picked up by the tool. All automatically and
         manually extracted key terms formed the key-term set. Two researchers, both with science teaching background

1-
and  knowledge      of the database    content    independently    analyzed   this set  of key  terms   and  removed    those
unrelated to the field of inquiry (i.e. unrelated to biological concepts in phase 1--e.g., cells, blood--and physical
concepts   in phase    2--e.g., momentum      and  kinetic    energy). Thirty  irrelevant  key  terms   were  removed     from
further analysis. Inter-rater agreement was 0.95, differences resolved by discussion.
           Key terms   and  keywords     are  frequently  used  to produce    subject   indices for articles or  books  or  to
facilitate search.  They   are  also  used  for  knowledge    representation   (e.g.,  tag clouds,  see Hassan-Montero      &
Herrero-Solana, 2006; semantic or propositional representations, see Anderson, 2000; and knowledge or concept
maps,  see    Novak,   1998).  Figure  3 shows    how    key  terms can  represent    community     knowledge    in students'
knowledge spaces. In the oval to the left, overlapping that on the right, there are six key terms (cells, bones,
nerves, blood, gene, DNA) These convey the full scope of student A's key-term contributions.               The frequency of
use of each of the six key terms (nine times) represents the intensity of key-term use by student A. Four of the
six key terms are in the middle or shared area, overlapping terms used by student B. The frequency of use of
these four shared key-term contributions for Students A and B is 16. Thus the intensity of key-term use in the
shared space is 16. To illustrate interactions between Student A's unique and shared contributions, contributions
to the shared space are represented as a percentage of the total number of key-term contributions (four out of six
or 66.7%) and as a percentage of total instances (16 times over 9 times, which is 1.78).                T-tests were used to
compare    unique   and   shared   contributions  in  phases   one  and  two  of   the  work  reported  in   the study.   The
knowledge     building  principle  idea   diversity   can  be  seen in  the   full  set of unique   and   shared   terms, and
symmetric knowledge advances in changes over time.

                       Figure 3. An example of use of key terms for knowledge representation.

           The second-order content analysis used passages from students' notes, with the unit of analysis focused
on a descriptive analysis of student collective responsibility for community knowledge and epistemic agency. For
this analysis,   an open-coding    method     related  to grounded     theory (Strauss   &  Corbin,  1990,   chapter  5)  was
adopted. Two researchers independently coded student notes (inter-rater agreement =.84; differences resolved
by discussion). Eight themes, emerged from the open coding, and were then combined into three general aspects
of knowledge     building:    (1)  self-initiated questioning   and    theorizing   (including  question-    and  hypothesis-
generation and theorizing); (2) self-directed knowledge-advancing activities (including designing or conducting
experiments, providing or gathering evidence, finding references or solutions to questions, and planning and
monitoring    ongoing   processes):   and  (3)  self-assessment    (including  reflecting  on   what was   learned,  on   what
remains    to be learned,  and     on how    to  advance   understanding).    These   measures   most   directly   tapped   the
following knowledge building principles, respectively: real ideas, authentic problems involving constructive use
of authoritative resources; improvable ideas; and rise above. The quantified qualitative results were then further
analyzed   statically  (Chi,   1997),  by   means     of  repeated  measures,    to determine    if  there   were  significant
differences between the two phases of the reported study.
           The third-order  content   analysis    used  students'  responses  to   questions  (identified  with  scaffolds, as
described  above)   as  a unit  of analysis  to  assess  rise above and  metacognitive     components     of their work.  The
evaluation of each response was based on the method suggested by Rourke and Anderson (2004) that highlights the
importance    of developing     a  theoretically  valid  protocol. In  this particular   analysis,  the knowledge    building
principle of rise above and Brown et el.'s (Brown, Bransford, Ferrara, & Campione, 1983) conceptual definition of
metacognition    provided   the   theoretical  basis,  along  with  the  overall   intent  of "concurrent,   embedded,    and
transformative assessment." Using the protocol, two researchers independently evaluated all responses and then
put them into three pre-defined categories (yes, no, not applicable). Descriptive statistics were applied to calculate
percentage for each category. Inter-rater agreement was calculated to be 0.91. Differences resolved by discussion.

                                                                                                                                   1-
       Results and Discussion
        Key-term use
                   The students' knowledge spaces were analyzed to identify the personal conceptual content. In terms of
         the mean number of key terms each student contributed, no significant difference was observed between the two
         phases (t=2.065, df=21, P>.05). On average, each student generated 40.10 key terms (SD=17.74) in phase 1 and
         33.27 key terms (SD=11.35) in phase 2. However, in terms of the mean frequency of key-term use by each
         student,  there was  a  significant  difference between     the two  phases   (t=-2.483,   df=21,   P<.05), with   mean
         frequency of key-term use 78.41 (SD=38.74) in phase 1 and 100.14 (SD=40.11) in phase 2.
                   In terms of the mean number of key terms shared in the community knowledge space, there was no
         significant difference between the two phases (t=-0.617, df=21, P>.05; with M=29.10, SD=12.55, in phase 1 and
         M=20.64, SD=9.35, in phase 2). However, in terms of the mean frequency of use of shared key terms in the
         community   knowledge    space,  there  was  a  significant difference   between     the two  phases (t=-7.686,    df=21,
         P<.001), with the second phase (M=324.36, SD=68.0) having a higher value than the first phase (M=203.77,
         SD=63.77),  suggesting   advances    toward  democratizing   knowledge     and,   in turn, more  pervasive     knowledge
         building across phases and contexts. The findings suggest designs had a positive impact on guiding students to
         pursue more integrative, depth-oriented knowledge building in phase 2. Table 1 summarizes the results.
                   Analyses  comparing    the two  phases  in  terms of  individual  unique    contributions  to the community
         knowledge   space  and  impact of   the community    knowledge   space   on individual    development   (e.g., symmetric
         knowledge advances) were conducted. Results showed a significant difference between the two phases (t=-6.207,
         df=21, P<.001): the mean percentage in phase 2 (M=93.3%, SD=6.0%) is higher than that in phase 1 (M=73.2%,
         SD=12.5%). This suggests that students contributed more key terms to the community knowledge space in phase 2.
         In terms of the latter, the results also showed a marginally significant difference between the two phases (t=-1.976,
         df=21, P<.10)   in that phase  2 has  a higher  ratio (M=3.68,   SD=1.41)   than   phase   1  (M=2.97,  SD=1.05).   This
         indicates that  shared  key terms are   more likely  to be  repeatedly   used (e.g., elaborated  or  referred  to) in   the
         community   knowledge    space in phase   2. Table  2 summarizes     the results. Overall, this finding  indicates  more
         frequent revisiting (e.g., working on, building on, referencing, etc), of key concepts/ideas.   These patterns suggest
         that students were engaged in increasingly effective knowledge building discourse as their work proceeded.

                            Table 1: Comparisons of key-term use between Phase 1 and Phase 2 (N=22).

                                                                  Phase 1                     Phase 2
           Key-term contributions                              M           SD               M          SD               t values
         Unique key-term contributions
           Number of unique key-terms                          40.10      16.74            33.27       11.35            2.065
           Frequency of use of unique key-terms               78.41       38.74          100.14        40.11            -2.483*
         Shared key-term contributions
           Number of shared key-terms                          29.1       12.55            30.64       9.35             -0.617
           Frequency of use of shared key-terms              203.77       63.77          324.36        68.02         -7.686***
         * p<.05 ***p<.001

          Table 2. Comparisons: idea diversity and symmetric knowledge advances between Phase 1 and Phase 2 (N=22)
                        Ratio of shared key-term use                       Phase 1                  Phase 2
                         over unique key-term use                        M         SD             M       SD            t values
         Number of shared key-terms divided by number of
          unique key-terms                                            73.2%       12.5%        93.3%     6.0%        -6.207***
         Frequency of use of shared key-terms divided by
         frequency of use of unique key-terms                            2.97     1.05            3.68   1.41           -1.976*
         * p<.10 ***p<.001

                   Overall, findings  regarding   key-term  use  revealed  that   students  used   sophisticated biological    and
         physical concepts throughout their work, as reflected in key terms extracted--cell, blood cell, white cell, B-cell,
         beta cell, T-cell, embryonic stem cell, etc.--in phase 1; and friction, kinetic energy, linear, acute angle, degree,
         momentum in phase 2. One student commented, after using the Semantic Overlap Tool to compare his key
         terms with Grade 6 curriculum guideline, "What I learned from the [Semantic] tool is that I have written some
         really sophisticated words but the curriculum doesn't have it" (by JW).

1-
         Using key terms to represent knowledge has its limitations. One potential limitation may be related to
deficiencies in capturing process-oriented community knowledge. Ryle (1949) argues that "knowing-that" and
"knowing-how" are two essential kinds of knowledge. Corresponding to the concept of community knowledge,
knowing-that may refer to the key ideas, concepts or problems collectively used or explored by the community.
Knowing-how may refer to the process through which members arrive at deeper understanding of these ideas.
As long as these ideas are recorded in a community database, key terms are a useful tool in representing them.
However, they may not be useful in capturing process-oriented knowledge, e.g., how certain key concepts are
actually deepened over time in a community. More importantly, knowledge representation by key terms does
not capture "promising"   ideas. Experts possess    a strong sense  of what  is   promising   (or problematic)    at the
cutting edge of their expertise--a form of creative expertise that might well extend their work and is evident in
refinements or re-designs that better address problems. To supplement these deficiencies, more in-depth content
analyses were conducted.

Collective responsibility for community knowledge and epistemic agency.
         Content analyses explored how students assume increasingly high levels of collective responsibility for
community knowledge and epistemic agency. To start it was found there were no significant difference between
the two phases in terms of students' overall knowledge building process, as indicated by the total number of
passages coded (t=.662, df=21, P>.05; with M=13.55, SD=6.221 in phase 1, and M=11.64, SD=4.63 in phase 2).
Supporting  data (weekly   videotaped classroom      observations)  confirmed     that students  were    motivated   and
diligent in pursuit of their knowledge works in both phases.
         However, when looking in detail at the three general aspects of knowledge-building--i.e., self-initiated
questioning  and  theorizing,  self-directed knowledge-advancing      activities, and     self-assessment--a  repeated
measures test indicated that there is an overall significant difference between the two phases (Wilk's  = 0.22,
F=22.51, p  = .000, 2=.78).   Specifically,  it was found  that there  were  significant   differences in   self-initiated
questioning and theorizing and in self-assessment. In terms of self-initiated questioning and theorizing, it was
found that there were significantly more problems and hypotheses generated in phase 1 (F(1,21)=34.13, P=.000;
M=13.55,  2=.62)    than  in phase 2  (M=11.64);     in terms  of  self-assessment,    it was  found   that there  were
significantly more frequent assessment activities occurred in phase 2 (F(1,21)=17.60, p=.000; M=5.00, 2=.46)
than in phase 1 (M=1.232). One thing to note is that the tools can be used to analyze any activity occurring in the
database. So tool support not only enabled students to reflect on their inquiry in phase 2 but, as suggested by the
following after-the-fact reflection on phase 1, to consider change over time. For example, after using the Social
Network Analysis tool, a student wrote the following note, "I have figured out that in the old view people have
read each others notes more times but I haven't connected with one person as many times as the new view."
         Tool-use seems   to  have  changed     the dynamics    of knowledge    building    from  problem-generation
(breadth of inquiry) in phase 1 to greater depth, reflectivity, and self-assessment in phase 2. Results in Table 3
show three aspects of knowledge-building that support this interpretation.

             Table 3: Shift in knowledge-building dynamics between Phase 1 and Phase 2           (N=22)

         Knowledge-building dynamics                    Phase 1              Phase 2                   F
                                                     Mean      SD       Mean        SD            Values          2
 Self-initiated questioning and theorizing            8.09    4.01       3.09      2.22           4.713***      0.62
 Self-directed knowledge-advancing activities         4.23    2.49       3.55      2.13            1.024        0.00
 Self-assessment                                      1.23    1.66       5.00      3.10           -4.763***     0.46
  ***p<.001

Rise above and metacognitive work supported by use of analytic tools
         The  third-order content  analysis  investigated  the  relationship between      the changing   nature of   the
knowledge-building dynamics and students' reflection with tool use. This particular analysis was conducted for
phase 2 only as tools were not available in phase 1. This was done by analyzing students' responses to the four
questions built into scaffold designs. The total number of reflections recorded in students' notes, using scaffolds
as described above to capture this activity, was 143 (M=6.5; SD=2.81). However, students did not always record
their thoughts after using the tools, so the actual reflective activity was likely higher than indicated. Table 4
shows the descriptive statistics, using a pre-determined protocol (cf. Brown, Bransford, Ferrara, & Campione,
1983) as evaluative criteria. First, 92.3% of the responses clearly indicated students' awareness that the tools
provided useful feedback to their work. Students mentioned that they (1) became aware of the level of their use
of advanced vocabulary (e.g., "The vocabulary [tool]...is good because you can see what you have typed that is
advanced and misspelled!" Example 1, by AW), (2) became aware of opportunistic collaborations (e.g., "I really
like the network tool. i really enjoy finding out who i have connected with or talked to and who i should talk to

                                                                                                                              1-
         more, to find out their theories." Example 2, by AW), and (3) became aware of how the key terms used in their
         notes overlapped with those of others' (e.g., "...the [Semantic] tool can be helpful if you what to know how
         many words that you and some one else shared." Example 3, by GW) and with those covered (or not covered)
         by the curriculum guideline (e.g., "What I learned from the [Semantic Overlap] tool is that I have written some
         really sophisticated words  but the curriculum   doesn't have   it." (Example 4, by  JW).  Together, the data   also
         showed that there was a strong sense of community facilitated by use of the Social Network Analysis Tool and
         the Semantic Overlap Tool (see above Examples 2-3).
                  Second, it was found 90.7% of responses clearly demonstrated that students were able to constructively
         evaluate their knowledge work for further idea improvement (e.g., "I figured out that putting your legs forward
         and swinging your body over your legs help a lot." Example 5, by JF). Moreover, some of these responses
         demonstrated that students were able to monitor other students' knowledge progress by contrasting each other's
         ideas (e.g., "My idea for improvement early this week was: PUSH KNEES TO 45 DEGREE ANGLE. I tested it
         out and  it really didn't work, although  with   M.C.,  who's  long  jump I  have studied  many  times,  it   worked
         perfectly." Example 6, by AH).
                  Third, 98.3% of responses demonstrated that students identified and conducted feasible plans to advance
         their own knowledge relevant to the long-jump work that they were engaged in (e.g., "I am going to get more
         interested other people's theory." Example 7, by GD; "[S]ince my [previous] idea worked i will swing my arms up
         next time and tuck [myself] into a ball in the air." Examples 8, by PJ; "My new plans are to try to get more height.
         And when i did my jump i will try to keep my legs together for the whole jump. Cause on my jump i put my legs
         together for just the end. And not the whole jump so i don't know if it is better or not." Example 9, by CW).
                  Finally, it was found that 96.6% of responses demonstrated that students were able to generate and
         conduct feasible plans for the purpose of advancing community knowledge (e.g., "My plan to give knowledge to
         the class is first i'm going to look at my data from my third jump. Then i'm going to write about it in Knowledge
         Form so people won't have to try it again because I tried it." Example 10, by JW; "I will share this information
         by showing how far i got when i swung    my arms up and then i will show how far i got when i tucked into a ball
         and swung my arms." Example 11, by PJ).
                  Tool use seems related to students' awareness (see, Examples 2-3) and actions (see, Example 7) in
         relation to  community    knowledge   building.  However,    our design   does   not allow us   to identify   causal
         relationships and there was no control group, so there is no way to determine to what extent students' enhanced
         performance   was  due to  experience   rather than tool  use.  Nonetheless,  students in  the present  study  have
         approximately 5 years of knowledge building experience and the issue was whether their experience could be
         extended  beyond   previously   demonstrated   capabilities. Findings  suggest  extension  of  socio-metacognitive
         capacity by allowing students to rise above--to reach a higher vantage point for the achievement of collective
         goals. For example, they were better able to reflect on their role in relation to others through use of the Social
         Network Tool and on their contributions in relation to idea generation and refinement by themselves and others
         through use of the Vocabulary Analyzer and Semantic Overlap Tool.

         Table 4: Number of reflective responses and percent effective implementation for knowledge-building (N=143).

                                                                         Number of Reflective    Percent Effective
           Reflective Practice (Questions--Q 1-4--respectively)          Responses               Implementation
           Awareness (Q1)                                                          26                     92.3%
           Evaluating/Monitoring (Q2)                                              43                     90.7%
           Planning--enhancing personal knowledge (Q3)                             39                     98.3%
           Planning--contributing to community knowledge      (Q4)                 30                     96.6%
           Note: Number = the total number of reflective response in each      "reflective practice" category; percentage
           = the percent of responses demonstrating effective tool use to support knowledge building.

       Summary and Conclusions
                  Principle-based   designs to foster   adaptive use  of technology   for building  community    knowledge
         enabled pursuit of community knowledge as reflected in (1) increasingly focused and sustained key-term use for
         the community as a whole and, in parallel, increases in individual contributions (key terms) to the community;
         (2) increases in reflective activity; and (3) self-direction of work reflected in sophisticated tool use. Overall, the
         principle-based approach   provided   a flexible design  framework    to inform  community    progress, not   simply
         individual knowledge work.

       References
         Anderson, J. R. (2000). Cognitive psychology and its implications (5th ed.). New York: Worth.
         Bereiter, C. (2002). Education and mind in the knowledge age. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

1-0
Bereiter, C., &    Scardamalia,   M.    (2003).  Learning to    work creatively  with  knowledge.      In  E. D.  Corte, L.
          Verschaffel, N. Entwistle & J. v. Merrienboer (Eds.), Unravelling basic components and dimensions of
          powerful learning environments (pp. 55-68). Oxford, UK: Elsevier Science
Berelson, B. (1952). Content analysis in communication research. New York: Hafner Publishing Company.
Brown,    A.  L., Bransford,   J. D.,   Ferrara, R.  A., &   Campione,    J.  C. (1983).   Learning,    remembering,   and
          understanding.    In J. H.  Flavell &   E. M.  Markman     (Eds.),  Handbook     of child  psychology   (4th ed.),
          cognitive development, Vol. 3. (pp. 77-166). New York: : Wiley.
Burtis, J. (2002). Analytic Toolkit for Knowledge Forum (Version 4.0). Toronto, ON: Institute for Knowledge
          Innovation and Technology, Ontario Institute for Studies in Educatin/University of Toronto.
Chi, M. T. H. (1997). Quantifying qualitative analyses of verbal data: A practical guide. The Journal of the
          Learning Sciences, 6(3), 271-315.
Conole,   G., &   Warburton,      B. (2005).  A   review  of  computer-assisted      assessment.    Research  in  Learning
          Technology, 13(1), 17-31.
Dick, W. & Cary, L. (1990), The Systematic Design of Instruction (3rd Ed.). New York: Harper Collins.
Gagne, R. M., Briggs, L. J. & Wagner, W. W. (1992). Principles of Instructional Design (4th Ed.). New York:
          Holt, Reihhart, and Winston Inc.
Hassan-Montero,     Y.,  &   Herrero-Solana,     V.  (2006).  Improving   tag-clouds   as  visual    information   retrieval
          interfaces. Paper presented at the International Conference on Multidisciplinary Informatin Sciences
          and Technologies (InSciT), Merida, Spain.
Hogenraad, R., McKenzie, D. P., & Peladeau, N. (2003). Force and influence in content anaysis: The production
          of new social knowledge. Quality & Quantity, 221-238.
Hong, H. Y., & Sullivan, F. R. (2008). An idea-centered, principle-based design approach to support learning
          as knowledge creation. Full paper accepted for presentation at the 2008 International Conference of
          Learning Sciences (ICLS). Utrecht: Netherlands.
Mager, R. (1975). Preparing Instructional Objectives (2nd Ed.). Belmont, CA: Lake Publishing Co.
Merrill,  M.D. (1983).    Component     Display  Theory.  In  C. Reigeluth    (ed.), Instructional   Design   Theories and
          Models (pp. 143-174). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum Associates.
Miles, M. B., & Huberman, A. M. (1994). Qualitative data analysis: An expanded sourcebook Thousand Oaks,
          CA: SAGE.
Novak, J. D. (1998). Learning, Creating, and Using Knowledge: Concept Maps as Facilitative Tools in Schools
          and Corporations. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Palincsar, A. S., & Brown, A. L. (1984). Reciprocal teaching of comprehension-fostering and comprehension-
          monitoring activities. Cognition and Instruction, 1(2), 117-175.
Rourke, L., & Anderson, T. (2004). Validity in quantitative content analysis. Educational Technology, Research
          & Development, 52(1), 5-18.
Ryle, G. (1949). The Concept of Mind London: Hutchinson.
Scardamalia,  M.   (2002).  Collective   cognitive   responsibility  for the advancement      of  knowledge.   In B. Smith
          (Ed.), Liberal education in a knowledge society (pp. 67-98). Chicago: Open Court.
Scardamalia, M. (2003). Knowledge building environments: Extending the limits of the possible in education
          and knowledge     work.    In A. DiStefano,    K.  E. Rudestam     &   R.  Silverman     (Eds.), Encyclopedia  of
          distributed learning (pp. 269-272). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Scardamalia, M. (2004). CSILE/Knowledge Forum®. In A. Kovalchick & K. Dawson (Eds.), Education and
          technology: An encyclopedia (pp. 183-192). Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO, Inc.
Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (2003). Knowledge building. In Encyclopedia of Education (pp. 1370-1373).
          New York: Macmillan Reference, USA.
Strauss, A. L., & Corbin, J. (1990). Basics of qualitative research: Grounded theory procedures and techniques.
          Newbury Park, CA: Sage Publications.
Thelwall, M. (2000). Computer-based assessment: A versatile educational tool. Computer & Education, 34, 37-49.
Zhang, J., Scardamalia, M., Reeve, R., & Messina, R. (2006). Collective cognitive responsibility in knowledge
          building communities. Paper presented at the annual conference of AERA. San Francisco, CA.
Zolotkova, K., & Teplovs, C. (2006). Using pre-compiled keyword lists for keyword extraction in Knowledge
          Forum. Paper presented at the annual Knowledge Building Summer Institute, Toronto, Canada.

Acknowledgments
We extend special thanks to the students, teachers, and principal of the Institute of Child Study, University of
Toronto,  for their  creative  work   and  for   the research   opportunities enabled   by    it. This research  was   made
possible  through  the   generous    support  of the Social  Sciences    and Humanities    Research    Council  of Canada
through   an  Initiative in the   New   Economy   grant  titled "Beyond   best   practice: research-based     innovation in
learning and knowledge work."

                                                                                                                                1-1
