Analyzing and Presenting Interaction Data: A Teacher, Student and
                                         Researcher Perspective
                              Wouter van Diggelen, Jeroen Janssen & Maarten Overdijk
          Research Centre Learning in Interaction, Utrecht University, Heidelberglaan 1, 3584CS Utrecht
                       Email: w.vandiggelen@uu.nl, j.j.h.h.Janssen@uu.nl, m.overdijk@uu.nl

           Abstract:   Students'   actions   within   a CSCL-environment         can  be  recorded   and   stored   as
           interaction data. This data can be accessed and analyzed automatically. Teachers, students and
           researchers   may   benefit from    these    analyses.  It  gives teachers    and  students   immediate
           feedback    about  performance    indicators  and  it  can  help  researchers   to identify  meaningful
           patterns in the interaction data. In the symposium we focus on these three groups of users ­
           the teacher, the student and the researcher ­ and explore three issues: 1) how can we extract
           meaningful    information   from  the interaction     data, 2) how    can this  information   be used    in
           practice, and 3) how should this information be presented to the user?

Introduction
           Computer Supported Collaborative Learning (CSCL) refers to those situations where the interactions
between the students are mediated by computer tools. Students' ongoing actions within these tools are recorded
and stored in log files as interaction data. The availability of this data offers new opportunities for support: the
data   can be  accessed   and   analyzed   automatically.     It may   provide   teachers,   students   and researchers    with
valuable insights about students' performance. In the symposium we will address three issues with regard to this
kind   of support:  1)   how  can  we  extract  appropriate   information    from    the interaction  data, 2) how     can this
information    be  used, and   3) how    should  this information      be presented  to  the  user? We   make    a  distinction
between three types of users: teachers, students, and researchers.
           The first presentation focuses on the teacher as the user of interaction data. It presents a study where
teachers   were    asked what  kind  of  information    they  needed      about  students' performance     when   they  would
moderate   an   electronic    discussion (e-discussion).   These    requirements     where   used   for the  development    of
awareness tools that provide the teachers with feedback about the group processes. In the second presentation,
two  awareness     tools are  discussed  that  students   used    during   their collaborative  activity.   This  presentation
addresses how awareness of group process ­ degree of participation and agreement ­ affects the performance of
the  students.  Finally,  the  third   presentation     takes the  perspective    of  the  researcher    and  describes    how
researchers can identify and represent meaningful patterns of interactions from interaction data.
           The three presentations differ with regard to the intended users but have three themes in common that
will be highlighted in the symposium.
     -     A first theme refers to the relation between the user and the nature of feedback. In the case of teachers and
           students, the results of the analyses act as a form of immediate feedback. This feedback informs those
           user groups about students' performance in the CSCL-environment. As such, this support may function as
           a form of awareness (Dourish & Belloti, 1992). It may help students to collaborate more effectively and
           efficiently. For teachers the support enables them to moderate an e-discussion. In the case of researchers,
           the support helps them to identify and represent meaningful patterns of interactions.
     -     A second theme that is visible in the three presentations concerns the question which data should be
           analyzed and presented to the users. A CSCL-environments `produces' large quantities of data: some
           parts of this data may be relevant to some users, while other parts may be irrelevant. Which data should
           be analyzed and what kind of information should be presented is an educational issue rather than a
           technical one. To answer these questions the presenters examine what kind of problems the users face
           and what kind of information they need to address these problems. The second presentation by Janssen
           et al., for example,   discusses   feedback   about    social  aspects  of the    collaboration  because    research
           indicates that students often have difficulties collaborating productively (Salomon & Globerson, 1989).
     -     A final theme concerns the issue of visualization. As stated before, large quantities of data are available
           for analysis. The interpretation of these analyses is a cognitively demanding task. Visualizations can
           make the analyses more accessible because "it is possible to have a far more complex concept structure
           represented externally in a visual display than can be held in visual and verbal working memories"
           (Ware, 2005, p. 29).

           Each presenter    addresses   the three  themes    from the    perspective of   a specific group  of   users. They
present   the  choices   that they made    with  regard   to  the  analysis  and   presentation   of    interaction data.  The

                                                                                                                                  3-3
         participants of the  symposium     will have   the  opportunity to discuss  the  consequences  of  these  choices  for
         research and practice.

       Presentation 1: Supporting e-moderation of synchronous discussions:
       Awareness tools for teachers (1)

                                   Christa S. C. Asterhan, Rakheli Hever & Baruch B. Schwarz
                                   School of Education, Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Israel

                 Collective   argumentation     can be  a powerful  means   for learning and  development   (e.g., Schwarz  &
         Asterhan, in press). However, high-quality argumentation is not easily elicited in learning settings. Therefore,
         argumentative design (Andriessen & Schwarz, in press), i.e. the design of a learning environment that may lead
         to productive argumentation, is an important yet complicated precondition. One way to facilitate productive
         argumentation   is to  provide    students with   a synchronous,   graphic  based  CSCL-environment       that enables
         students to co-construct an argumentative discussion map, such as Digalo (see a/o Schwarz & De Groot, 2007).
         Research from classroom discussions, on the other hand, identifies the teacher as an important mediator for
         productive student argumentation (e.g., Yackel, 2002). However, teacher moderation of synchronous e-discus-
         sions is highly complex: The dynamic flow of simultaneously posted (and sometimes overlapping) contributions
         may quickly   fill up the computer     screen. It  means  that the teacher  has tremendous  difficulties  reading  the
         contributions, understanding their interweaving, and evaluating how to intervene in relation to such a flow. This
         may  explain  why    teachers' attitudes   towards  on-line  moderation    are often negative  and  they  may    leave
         discussants without substantive interventions (Gil, Schwartz & Asterhan, 2007). These difficulties are expected
         to increase when teachers are required to monitor and moderate several small group discussions at once.
                 We will describe a system that aims to support teachers and tutors in their on-line moderation practices,
         by, among others, providing them with tailored awareness tools. In addition to describing the nature of these
         awareness indicators   we    will also present   research on teachers'  preferences  concerning the presentation   of
         interaction data and discussions features that may facilitate their on-line moderation practices.

        A system for moderating e-discussions
                 The aim of the ARGUNAUT project (www.argunaut.org) is to develop a computerized system that
         supports moderators in their endeavor to increase the quality of argumentative e-discussions. The most salient
         features of ARGUNAUT's Moderator's Interface are: (a) awareness tools that provide immediate representations
         of aspects of e-discussions; (b) pre-defined alerting rules; (c) a remote control intervention panel from which the
         moderator can send textual comments and images to targeted students or the whole group in a variety of ways;
         and (d) tools  for  off-line reflection (see  Figure  1). These  aids  are envisioned  to help the teacher     monitor,
         evaluate and direct the discussion without disrupting the flow of the on-going collective argumentation.

                       Figure 1. The ARGUNAUT Moderator's Interface at its current state of development.

                 The design of the tools is based on a user-centered design approach, involving teachers, tutors and
         (high school and university) student discussants. Currently, the system supports moderation of e-discussions
         within two different platforms, but the system could also be relevant for other synchronous discussion tools as

3-3
well, particularly   graphical  tools. One  of   the currently supported   platforms    is Digalo    (see figure  5),   who
provides its users with a shared workspace based on a concept-mapping interface. The tool enables synchronous,
textual talk through mediation of geometrical shapes that represent different dialogical moves.

Awareness tools
         The    term awareness   is defined   as "an  understanding   of the activities   of the others   which   provides
context for your own activity" (Dourish & Belloti, 1992). A great variety of tools for e-discussion are available
today, many of which offer awareness features for participants or moderators. Awareness feedback is based on
various properties of the discussion, such as social interaction patterns, participation, temporal stages and text
analysis. Yet, a systematic integration and combination of structural, process-oriented, and textual aspects has
only recently been discussed in initiatives such as the Interaction Analysis project in the European Kaleidoscope
network.    The awareness   tools that  are developed   for  the ARGUNAUT       system     are  derived   from  structural,
process-oriented   and  textual elements   of Digalo   discussion maps.   The   structural   elements    are  the direct or
computable attributes of each shape or arrow object (such as type, creator, and number of characters) and any
combination   using  these  attributes as  building  blocks. The  process-oriented   elements    are    comprised    of user
actions on the discussion objects, and sequences thereof (stressing the dimension of time and the process of
discussion rather than the end product). The textual elements are the text contributions typed within each shape.
         We address several levels and methods of processing these elements. The lower levels are those of
simple statistics (e.g. average text length, distribution of contribution types, and the like) or the use of statistical
relationships   between elements    as relatively simple  composite    indicators  (e.g.,  using    the ratio between    the
number of connectors and the number of shapes as a measure of connectivity). The higher levels may involve
more complex units, combining several types of elements (e.g., a cluster of shapes with certain characteristics, a
sequence of actions indicative of a certain phenomenon) and/or the use of artificial intelligence methods and
intensive input from pedagogical researchers (e.g., machine-learning classifications, query by example, search
for pre-defined patterns). We refer to previous publications on these issues (e.g., Hever, et al., 2007).

Table 1: Interaction data indicators for on-line moderation, as indicated by experienced teachers (N=14).

    Source category                                      Details and possible indicators
Presence                    Who is online, who has been active for the last [time interval], who is lurking.
Participation               Number     of  contributions  per    discussant, by    the  different    discussion   ontology
                            categories.
Responsiveness              The extent of interpersonal interaction and responsiveness to each other. For example:
                            social network diagrams, numerical indicators of connectivity on discussion map-level,
                            frequency   of  questions  shapes  within  a map,   or indicators    of  dialogicity  based   on
                            machine learning classifications
Quality of reasoning:       Whether discussants use reasoned arguments as opposed to simple claims (based on
shape-level                 machine learning classifications)
Quality of reasoning:       Whether the group considered multiple perspectives. For example: ratio of supporting
discussion map-level        and opposing links, map-level classifications based on content analyses
Impact of                   Identification  of   contributions   that   were  neglected      (i.e.,  without   links)    and
contributions               contributions that catalyzed or opened up the discussion (i.e., with many links).
Textual length              Identification of particularly long contributions

What type of interaction data do teachers need?
         As a first step, we gathered data on teachers' needs with regards to the different sources of information
that could aid them in the moderation process. A total of fourteen teachers who had experience with conducting
and/or moderating    Digalo    discussions, participated in   one or  more   of the    following    three data    collection
activities: (1) Questionnaires   in which   they  were  asked  to rate   and rank  predefined    sources   of  information
according to the extent according to which they considered each one of them as helpful in supporting on-line
moderation of Digalo discussions; (2) Evaluation of screen shots of possible awareness indicators for on-line
moderation;   and  (3) Identification  of  interaction and   discussion  features  that would    require  on-line    teacher
intervention, based on two actual discussion maps.
         The combined results of these three different data collection activities led us to identify seven different
categories of information sources that were recurrently mentioned by the teachers to be potentially helpful in
supporting on-line moderation. They are presented in Table 1, together with a short description of how these
features can be operationalized into awareness indicators. Most of these features are currently implemented in
the Moderator's    Interface of   the  ARGUNAUT        system  as  automatically   detected    and   up-dated   awareness
visualizations  for  moderators.  Currently   the system   has   been implemented      in  different locations    in Israel,
Colombia,    Great  Britain  and  Germany.    We  will  present  preliminary  findings     from  research    with the   first

                                                                                                                                 3-3
         integrated versions of the system in both actual and simulated learning settings. This research focuses mainly on
         how teachers evaluate and appropriate the different ARGUNAUT features during e-moderation practices.

       Presentation 2: Visualization of Collaboration and Coordination: Two Tools for
       Students

                                 Jeroen Janssen, Gijsbert Erkens, Paul Kirschner & Gellof Kanselaar
                           Research Centre Learning in Interaction, Utrecht University, The Netherlands

                    The research  on   the effectiveness    of computer-supported      collaborative   learning (CSCL)   and   the
         processes that take place during CSCL, demonstrate that the collaboration in CSCL environments is not always
         free of problems. These include for example, lack of awareness of group members' activities, communication
         and coordination problems, and lack of quality discussions. The central issue in this contribution is how and
         why visualizations of the collaborative process affect group members' collaboration in CSCL environments. In
         order to tackle this issue, two different visualizations were developed. The effects of these visualizations were
         examined in two studies by giving one group of students access to the visualization, while the other group of
         students   was not   given access  to  the visualization. The    two    visualizations were implemented   in   the VCRI
         environment    (Virtual Collaborative    Research     Institute, Broeken,   Jaspers,   &  Erkens,  2006). Both     studies
         employed 16 to 18-year old participants in the fifth year of pre-university secondary education. Both studies
        were carried out in the domain of history.

        Study 1: Visualizing Participation
                    Study 1 describes the effects of the Participation tool (see Figure 2), which visualizes group members'
         relative contributions to the online discussion through the Chat tool of the VCRI environment. When working in
         CSCL   environments,    it is often   difficult to  determine    what   other group  members    are doing  and  whether
         everyone is contributing equally to the group task (Kreijns, 2004). The Participation tool gives an impression of
         the number of messages sent by each group member and the relative length of these messages. The tool thus
         gives feedback about group members' participation during the collaboration (e.g., is there equal participation in
         our group?) and allows them to compare themselves to other group members. This may raise their awareness
         about the manner in which they are collaborating and may stimulate group discussions about the collaborative
         process.

                                                                                         Distance from center indicates
                                                                                         relative number of messages
         Size of sphere indicates                                                        sent
         relative length of messages
         sent

                                                    Figure 2. The Participation tool.

                    To examine the effects of the Participation tool, 17 groups of students (N = 52) were given access to
         the Participation tool while working in the VCRI environment, while 5 groups (N = 17) were not given access to
         the  tool. We  hypothesized   that  giving  group   members      access to the  Participation tool would  increase  their
         awareness of the group processes and activities taking place during their collaboration. This assumption was
         partly confirmed: group members with access to the Participation tool reported they knew better when another
         group member was taking a free ride. The Participation tool therefore enabled students to determine free riding
         behavior more easily. Additionally, the Participation tool was found to have an effect on participation: students
         who had the option to inspect the Participation tool had higher participation rates. Furthermore, the intensity
         with which the Participation tool was used by students was found to have an effect on equality of participation:
         more  equal    participation  was   found  in   groups  that  used    the  tool more   often. Content   analyses   of the
         collaboration protocols furthermore showed that students who could use the Participation tool engaged more in
         coordination and regulation of social activities: they typed more statements that addressed the planning of their
         collaboration.  This  indicates   that visualizing    participation stimulates   group   members    to  devote effort  to
         coordinating   their collaboration. Finally,    we expected  that   through   stimulating participation and  equality  of
         participation, raising awareness, and facilitating coordination group performance would increase. To test this
         assumption,    we examined    the  quality  of  the products     made   by the  participating groups.  No  effect  of the
         Participation tool on the quality of group products was found, however.

3-3
Study 2: Visualizing Agreement and Discussion among Group Members
         A visualization called Shared Space was the focus of Study 2. The Shared Space visualizes the amount
of agreement   or  discussion during  group  members'     chat conversations   (see Figure  3). To  do   so, the Shared
Space analyzes all messages that students type in the Chat tool of the VCRI environment. The Shared Space
uses discourse  markers    (Erkens,  1997; Schiffrin,   1987)  to  determine   the  communicative    function    of each
message.  Based    on this analysis,  the Shared    Space moves    the current  chat topic  to  the  left if it contains
indications of disagreement   (e.g.,  denials,  negative  evaluations) or to   the right if it  contains  indications of
agreement (e.g., confirmations, positive evaluations). Thus, the Shared Space gives feedback about the types of
discussions group members are conducting (e.g., critical discussions or consensual discussions) and may raise
their awareness about conversational strategies. Furthermore, by raising group members' awareness, groups may
be stimulated to discuss how well their group is functioning and how the group process may be improved.
         We examined the effects of the Shared Space by giving 20 groups of students (N = 59) access to chat-
tool with Shared Space visualization, while 20 other groups (N = 58) had access to the regular chat-tool of the
VCRI    environment.   Content   analyses  of   the  collaboration   protocols  show   the  Shared   Space    facilitated
coordination of the collaborative process. Students with access to the Shared Space were less busy exchanging
information and typed fewer messages aimed at reaching and maintaining mutual understanding. This indicates
that for these students it may have been easier to understand their group members' contributions. In other words,
the process of negotiation of meaning was facilitated. Furthermore, the Shared Space was found to have an
effect on exploratory group norm perception. This indicates that groups that had access to the Shared Space
perceived their discussions   as more  critical    and constructive  than did   groups without   access   to the Shared
Space.  Additionally,  students  with access    to the Shared  Space   reported more   positive  group   behavior   (e.g.,
helping behavior, positive group atmosphere) and more effective group task strategies than students without
access to the Shared Space. In other words, they perceived their collaboration as more positive and effective.
Lastly, we  hypothesized   that  by  stimulating   students to adopt   exploratory  group   norms   and   by decreasing
communication problems, the Shared Space would also increase group performance. This hypothesis was partly
confirmed as groups with access to the Shared Space only outperformed groups without access on one part of
the group task (out of a total of three parts).

                                                                                       Development of discussion

                                                                                       Movement to the right
Movement to the left                                                                   indicates discussion
indicates discussion

                                                Figure 3. Shared Space.

Conclusion
         The results of the two studies show that analyzing the collaborative process in CSCL environments and
visualizing the subsequent    information  for   students can  be   beneficial. Students    use the information     these
visualizations provide to raise their awareness about group members' activities in the environment. Furthermore,
students use   the visualizations to  coordinate    the  process  of online  collaboration:    they use   them   to start
discussions about the collaborative process itself and to facilitate the process of negotiation of meaning.

Presentation 3: Analysis and presentation of interaction data: A researcher
perspective (2)

                   Kristine Lund, ICAR laboratory, CNRS, University of Lyon, Lyon, France
     Wouter van Diggelen , Research Centre Learning in Interaction, Utrecht University, The Netherlands
            Gregory Dyke, G2I / RIM, École Nationale Supérieure des Mines de St. Etienne, France
        Maarten Overdijk, Research Centre Learning in Interaction, Utrecht University, The Netherlands
Jean-Jacques Girardot, Annie Corbel, G2I / RIM, École Nationale Supérieure des Mines de St. Etienne, France

                                                                                                                             3-3
                   CSCL environments record and store their actions as interaction log files (e.g. Börner, Hazlewood &
         Lin, 2002). Researchers have access to an extensive data set that focuses on the activities students carry out.
         Researchers   have   to make   several  choices how    to  access   the data  set. For example,      a choice  must   be made
         whether   to record  private   unshared  tool  use, in  addition  to  recording    actions that  are   carried out   within the
         collaborative tool. From the researcher's point of view, this choice is guided by the research agenda. A research
         question concerning the role of private notes in cooperative text writing goes unanswered if the private space is
         not recorded.   On   the other  hand,   many   research questions    focus   specifically  on   the  collaborative   processes
         (Lund, Rossetti, Metz, 2007; Overdijk & van Diggelen, 2008). The interaction log files contain events (private
         or shared) that occurred within the environment of the tools; they contain the textual and graphical contributions
         of  the students  as well   as the  separate   chronological   actions   that  the students    performed.    These   extensive
         interaction log files -- on which analytical choices have already been performed -- form the semi-raw material
         on which researchers do their analyses. The first problem is extracting relevant interpretable data from these
         interaction log files; this implies translating the data into a readable and understandable format. Secondly, it
         does not follow that such an initial transformation automatically produces results. One of the goals of analyses
         of CSCL situations is to identify patterns of specific actions and interactions, perhaps associated with particular
         tool uses, and to relate them to learning outcomes or to the quality of student's productions (e.g. Lund, Molinar,
         Séjouné & Baker, 2007). If we can successfully relate a particular pattern to a desired outcome, then we can
         attempt to bring about the pattern in question (Ronteltap, Goodyear & Bartoluzzi, 2004).               However, identifying
         such patterns in interaction log files that are so extensive and diverse is not self-evident.
                   In what  follows   we  present  an   analytical tool called   TATIANA     (Trace   Analysis   Tool   for   Interaction
         ANAlysts)    that supports   researchers  in   the  analysis   of interaction   log  files obtained     from   various   CSCL
         situations. We then present the general principle and show for two specific cases how TATIANA can analyze and
         visualize patterns   of  individual student  actions   and relate   them  to  patterns of  collective   student   interactions.
         Hereby we open up the way to correlating patterns with outcomes. Finally we conclude and discuss further
         work.

       TATIANA (Trace Analysis Tool for Interaction ANAlysts)
                   TATIANA    (Dyke   et al.,  2007)    attempts to  help    researchers    represent   their data in   ways   that  are
         meaningful to them. We call these representations replayables. For video this simply entails opening it with a
         media   player. For   interaction   log files, TATIANA     supports   the  creation   of   different   forms   of replayables:
         ExcelTM-like tables in which each row corresponds to an event and visualizations in which each event is shown
         as a graphical object. Researchers describe how each event will be represented (fields of a row, appearance of a
         graphical object) through the use of filters, allowing them to select only the relevant facets of the data and
         represent them    in an  understandable   form.    TATIANA     also treats  categorization   and    annotation    as being  the
         creation of a new replayable. TATIANA allows replayables to be synchronized: navigating to a certain timestamp
         in  the video   will  highlight   the   corresponding   event     (row  for   tabular  replayables,    graphical     object for
         visualizations); selecting an event in visualization will highlight the corresponding row in the table and navigate
         the video to the timestamp of that event. Finally, TATIANA allows replayables to be combined to create new
         replayables, for example importing a categorization into an existing visualization or combining aspects of two
         visualizations to create a new visualization which is better suited to the researcher's current needs.

        Visualizing the different facets of student actions and interactions: the general case
                   A  microanalysis   of  the  collaborative   learning  process    begins  with    the  identification  of   individual
         actions within a given interaction between students. However, the interpretation of the form and content of these
         individual actions is undertaken by the analyst in the context of the interaction between students. Indeed, verbal
         interactions in a face-to-face discussion are often described by local principles of turn taking and adjacency
         (Sacks, Schegloff & Jefferson, 1978). The coherence of a discussion is based on the assumption that each act is
         an appropriate response to a previous act (Littlejohn, 2002) and meaningful patterns are searched for on that
         basis. However, the timely order of actions within a CSCL environment is often hidden - for different reasons -
         of which the following two are examples:
             1.    The actions of one student in a particular collaborative tool may overlap in time with the actions of
                   another student in another tool (e.g. one student types in a chat, while another enters text into a shared
                   text editor);
             2.    Students can both act separately within the shared environment of a single collaborative tool (e.g. write
                   simultaneously    in different parts  of  a shared   text  editor, or construct    different  argument     sequences
                   simultaneously in different areas of an argument grapher).

                   Visualizing   various  graphical  representations    of   situations  like the   ones  mentioned     above   enables
         researchers  to  display  the  relationship   between   actions   for   which  adjacency     is not    immediately   apparent.
         Researchers   thus   create a  logical  representation    that reflects  meaningful    student    actions  and    interactions.

3-30
TATIANA   proposes    a general  visualization of  such  graphical representations        called an  interaction score  of
actions (based on the notion of a musical score) where different facets and sub-facets of a participant's action
(participant's name, tool, particular use of tool, type of action, etc.) can be displayed in relation to time and in
part, automatically   generated  and  then merged,   based on research  goals.         In the next   section, we illustrate
representations that fall into the two categories presented above; others are possible.

Two specific cases
         The example shown in Figure 4 illustrates overlapping student and teacher actions. The x-axis shows
time in the form of intervention numbers and the y-axis shows the participant and the tool he or she used. The
legend lists the uses observed for each tool. We see that student A chats from intervention 0 to 10 during which
she introduces herself in the text editor. She takes notes in the chat around intervention 40 and participates in
dialogue periodically throughout most of the interaction.   During this time, student B participates with student A
in the chat and the text editor, but also carries out other actions (e.g. writes a synthesis in the text editor). It's
possible to pinpoint areas of interaction during simultaneous use of a particular tool, but also across different
shared tools (notes in chat for Student A and synthesis in text editor for Student B). The researcher may now ask
how content is treated during those times.

                            Figure 4. Overlapping actions of two students and a teacher.

         Figure 5 shows how students can act separately within the shared environment of a single tool. The x-
axis of the right-hand figure shows time; the y-axis of the same figure illustrates the quadrants (Q1, Q2, Q3) of
an argument graph tool in which students constructed elements. The quadrants and students' constructions can
be seen to the left. Taking student A, we see he begins constructing in Q1 with box 8, then moves to Q3 to
construct box    12, goes back   to Q1 to  construct box 15 and  so  forth.       The  researcher  may now    consider the
relations between boxes (possible interactions between students) and examine argumentative content.

        Figure 5. Argumentative sequences constructed by three students within an argumentative tool.

Conclusions and further work
         We have shown how the researcher can be assisted in analyzing complex interaction log files, issued
from  CSCL    situations,   with the  help of  TATIANA   (Trace  Analysis         Tool  for Interaction ANAlysts).     We
introduced   the notion  of interaction scores  of actions -- based  on the        concept    of a musical    score -- that
illustrate how different facets of students' actions move though time during a given interaction. We illustrated
with two examples how the researcher is thus assisted in identifying patterns of individual action and group
interaction. Further  work  will augment   the types  of corpora analyzed         with TATIANA    in order to  explore the
possible visualizations of different facets of student actions and interactions.

Endnotes
(1)  The material in the paper by Asterhan et al. is based on work supported by the EC -funded ARGUNAUT project (IST-
     2005-027728). The ARGUNAUT project is a collaborative R&D project involving many individuals who, due to space
     limitations, could not be mentioned in this paper (see www.argunaut.org.il).
(2)  The material in the paper by Lund et al. is based on work supported by the EC -funded LEAD project (IST-2005-028027).

                                                                                                                              3-3
       References
         Andriessen,   J. E. B.,  &   Schwarz,  B.  B.  (in  press). Argumentative       Design.  In A-N.   Perret-Clermont   and N.
                  Muller-Mirza (Eds.). Argumentation and Education ­ Contributions in Argumentation, Communicative
                  Interactions and Education. Advanced Series in Learning and Instruction, Elsevier.
         Asterhan, C.  S.   C., Schwarz,   B.   B., &   Gil, J.  (under review).   E-moderation      of synchronous   argumentative
                  dialogue: First findings from multiple sources.
         Börner, K., Hazlewood, W.R., & Lin, S.M. (2002). Visualizing the Spatial and Temporal Distribution of User
                  Interaction Data Collected in Three-Dimensional Virtual Worlds. First International Symposium on
                  Collaborative     Information     Visualization    Environments        (CIVE   2002),  London,    UK.   Retrieved
                  November 17, 2007 from http://vw.indiana.edu/cive02/004_borner_VisSpatialTemporal.pdf
         Broeken, M., Jaspers, J., & Erkens, G. (2006). Virtual Collaborative Research Institute (VCRI). Version 2.3.
                  Utrecht, The Netherlands: Utrecht University.
         Dourish,  P., &   Belotti, V.  (1992).  Awareness      and  Coordination     in Shared   Workspaces.   Proceedings   of  the
                  Conference on Computer-Supported Cooperative Work (pp.107-114).
         Dyke, G., Girardot, J.-J., Lund, K., & Corbel, A. (2007). Analysing face to face computer-mediated interactions.
                  EARLI    (European    Association   for  Research,   Learning    and   Instruction),  12th Biennial  International
                  Conference,     University  of    Szeged,  Eötvös    Lorand   University,    Hungarian     Academy   of Sciences.
                  Budapest, Hungary. August 28-September 1, 2007.
         Erkens,  G.   (1997).  Coöperatief   probleemoplossen       met  computers      in het  onderwijs:   Het  modellering   van
                  coöperatieve dialogen voor de ontwikkeling van intelligente onderwijssystemen [Cooperative problem
                  solving    with computers     in  education:   Modelling      cooperative    dialogues  for  the  development   of
                  intelligent educational systems]. Unpublished PhD. thesis, Utrecht University, The Netherlands.
         Gil, J., Schwarz, B. B., & Asterhan C. S. C. (2007). Intuitive moderation styles and beliefs of teachers in CSCL-
                  based argumentation. In: C. A. Chinn, G. Erkens, & S. Puntambekar (Eds), The Computer Supported
                  Collaborative Learning (CSCL) Conference 2007 Vol. 8.
         Hever, R., De Groot, R., de Laat, M., Harrer, A., Hoppe, U., McLaren, B. M., & Scheuer, O. (2007). Combining
                  structural,   process-oriented    and textual  elements    to generate    awareness   indicators for  graphical e-
                  discussions.    In:  C. A.  Chinn,    G.   Erkens,    & S.    Puntambekar      (Eds),  The   Computer   Supported
                  Collaborative Learning (CSCL) Conference 2007, Vol. 8.
         Kreijns,  K.  (2004).    Sociable  CSCL     environments:     Social   affordances,    sociability, and   social presence.
                  Unpublished PhD thesis, Open Universiteit, Heerlen, The Netherlands.
         Littlejohn, S. (2002). Theories of Human Communication. Albuquerque: Wadsworth.
         Lund, K., Rossetti,    C., &  Metz,  S.   (2007).   Do  internal factors   of   cooperation  influence computer-mediated
                  distance   activity? In: C.   A.  Chinn,   G.  Erkens,  &  S.    Puntambekar    (Eds), The   Computer   Supported
                  Collaborative Learning (CSCL) Conference 2007 Vol. 8.
         Lund, K., Molinari, G., Séjourné, A., & Baker, M.J. (2007). How do argumentation diagrams compare when
                  student   pairs use  them  as  a  means    for debate   or as a   tool  for representing   debate?". International
                  Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning. 2, 273­295
         Overdijk, M.,    &  Van  Diggelen,   W. (in    Press).  Appropriation     of  a graphical   shared  workspace: Organizing
                  principles and their application. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning.
         Ronteltap, F., Goodyear, P., & Bartoluzzi, S. (2004). A Pattern Language as an Instrument in Designing for
                  Productive    Learning   Conversations.    In  L.  Cantoni  &    C.  McLoughlin    (Eds.), Proceedings  of  World
                  Conference on Educational Multimedia, Hypermedia and Telecommunications 2004 (pp. 4271-4276).
                  Chesapeake, VA: AACE.
         Sacks, H., Schegloff, E. A., & Jefferson, G, 1978. A simplest systematics for the organization of turn-taking in
                  conversation. In: J. Schenkein (Ed.), Studies in the Organization of Conversational Interaction (pp. 7­
                  55). Academic Press, New York. (First published 1974, Language 50: 696­735).
         Salomon, G., & Globerson, T. (1989). When teams do not function the way they ought to. International Journal
                  of Educational Research, 13, 89-99.
         Schiffrin, D. (1987). Discourse markers. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
         Schwarz, B. B., & Asterhan, C. S. C. (in press). Argumentation and Reasoning. To appear in: K. Littleton, C.
                  Wood, & J. Kleine Staarman (Eds). Elsevier Handbook of Educational Psychology: New Perspectives
                  on Learning and Teaching. Elsevier.
         Schwarz,  B.  B.,   &   De   Groot,  R.   (2007).   Argumentation      in a   changing   world.  International  Journal  of
                  Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 2(2-3), 297-313.
         Ware, C.  (2005).    Visual   queries: The   foundation    of  visual  thinking.   In S.  O.   Tergan &   T.  Keller (Eds.),
                  Knowledge     and   information   visualization:   Searching     for synergies  (Vol.  3426,  pp. 27-35).   Berlin:
                  Springer-Verlag Berlin.
         Yackel, E. (2002). What we can learn from analyzing the teacher's role in collective argumentation. Journal of
                  Mathematical Behavior, 21, 423-440.

3-3
