                          Exploring changes in network structures
                                        during online discussions
              Tarja-Riitta Hurme, University of Oulu, Department of Educational Sciences and Teacher Education,
                  Research Unit for Educational Technology, PO BOX 2000, Fin-90014 University of Oulu &
                        University of Turku, Centre for Learning Research, Educational Technology Unit,
                                                    Fin-20014 University of Turku
                        Koen Veermans, Tuire Palonen, University of Turku, Centre for Learning Research,
                                  Educational Technology Unit, Fin-20014 University of Turku
                 Sanna Järvelä, University of Oulu, Department of Educational Sciences and Teacher Education,
                   Research Unit for Educational Technology, PO BOX 2000, Fin-90014 University of Oulu
              Email: tarja-riitta.hurme@oulu.fi, koen.veermans@utu.fi, tuire.palonen@utu.fi, sanna.jarvela@oulu.fi

                 Abstract:    The aim   of  this  study  was   to examine    and  model  changes     in  communication
                 network structures during online discussions in a virtual course at the university level. Two
                 small groups of Finnish students (N=46) from different universities attended a national virtual
                 course concerning a specific topic in the history of science. The course assignment consisted
                 of participating into seven different discussion topics using Optima, an asynchronous learning
                 environment.    The  discussions   were   used   to examine   communication       networks   during the
                 course. Social network analysis techniques were used to explore communication networks and
                 changes in these networks at structural and dyadic levels in four discrete time points with the
                 effects  of  degree,  reciprocity, transitivity  and  3-cycles   modeled   by    using  the conditional
                 method   of   moments.    The   results of the   study   suggest  that during     a virtual  course the
                 participants tend to form subgroups and hierarchical structures as in the same way as any other
                 social community.

       Aim and theoretical background
                 Research    of online  learning  has   focused   on  the   organizational, technical,   social and  motivational
         factors that facilitate learning and more recently also on changes in interaction processes (Hewitt, 2005). One
         reason is to learn more about how and why the discussions die out, and if this can be attributed to the way that
         participants work in networked environments. It could be that they relay most of their attention on new notes,
         ignore older notes and after reading formulate one or more replies which indicates that they are using a single-
         pass strategy (e.g. Hewitt, 2005, 2003). This paper presents a social network analysis method using the Siena
         program to examine changes over time in communication networks at structural and dyadic levels during an
         online course. Siena software (Simulation Investigation for Empirical Network Analysis, v.3; Snijders, Steglich,
         Schweinberger   &   Huisman,  2007)   is part  of the  StOCNET     program  suite   (http://stat.gamma.rug.nl/stocnet/).
         Siena has been mainly used in examining the changes in friendship networks within the field social sciences (e.g.
         Van de Bunt, Duijn & Snijders, 1999; van Duijn, Zeggelink, Huisman, Stokman & Wasseur, 2003) but here it
         will be used to examine changes in communication structures in a networked learning environment.
                 In Hewitt's (2005, 2003) studies changes in networked discussions were examined with a computer
         simulation that mimicked the general behavior patterns of students' participation using exploratory modeling.
         Exploratory modeling     is  commonly    used   to  examine    how    complex   phenomena       develop  out  of simple
         interactions in decentralized systems (Resnick & Wilensky, 1998). In Hewitt's studies, the computer simulation
         was used to predict how many computer notes could be included in one thread when the size of the threads
         varied. On the basis of the estimation results he suggested that single-pass strategies, which the students used,
         could be used to explain why the discussions die out in online learning (Hewitt, 2005, 2003). An alternative way
         to explore changes in networked interaction is to focus on the changes at structural and dyadic levels by using an
         actor-oriented model   (Snijders,  2001,  2005).   In  the  model,  actor orientation    means  that the changes  in  an
         individual's connections to other participants can be dependant on the network structure and on attributes by
         observed covariates (Snijders, 2005).
                 There    are several  reasons    why    taking   a  social network   perspective     in examining    changes  in
         communication networks might unfold important information about network discussions. It gives for instance
         information about the strength of the connections in a communication network; connections that need to become
         strong enough   before participants  feel  encouraged    to take   an extra effort    to build  and maintain a  learning
         community. Second, the contact among participants needs to be supported by tutors to provide opportunities for
         the participants to    share their knowledge      and   experiences   in  order    to promote    group   interaction (cf.
         Haythorntwaite, 2000). It also gives information about reciprocal interaction, something that recent research in
         online learning has shown to be important for successful discussions. It means that in order to have successful

1-
discussions, it is important that the participants do not only send their own explicitly formed thoughts to the
discussion forum but also to reply to messages sent by others (Arvaja, Rausku-Puttonen, Häkkinen & Eteläpelto,
2003). There is evidence that the groups of students who are engaged in a collaborative knowledge building
process ask questions   and  help   to develop  each other's thinking  further. Reciprocal   interaction   has been
considered to be a vitally important part of making the cognitive processes shared at a social level (Resnick,
Levine & Teasley, 1993).

Method
Participants and working conditions
        The participants  of the study  were  46 students (age  20-50) from six  different  universities throughout
Finland. The participants were attending a specific course on the history of science. The participants were divided
into two groups by a course organizer on the basis of their last names. During the course there were two main
activities. Participants worked on writing an essay individually, and in addition to this task, they were required to
participate in seven discussion topics in collaboration with their peers. The individual essay and discussions were
not directly linked, but the students were encouraged to learn collaboratively and construct knowledge together.
The course had three tutors, a male tutor who was responsible for technical guidance. Two female tutors were
facilitators in group discussions; tutor 1 worked with group B and tutor 2 worked with group A.
        The discussions took place in Optima, an asynchronous learning environment. The learning environment
contained altogether nine discussion areas, two of them were general discussion areas in which the participants
were able to ask questions about course requirements and ask for technical support. Further, there were seven
separate group discussion areas, one area for one discussion topic for both groups. The first discussion forum
consisted of the first week discussion where the participants told something about their scientific background and
why they attended   the course. During   the following five weeks  the students had   five  discussions on different
themes concerning the specific issues in the history of science. These five discussion forum data were used in the
analysis. In the seventh week discussion, the participants got feedback from the tutors and they evaluated their own
performance in  the  course. Thus,  for examining  the patterns of interaction  and  for exploring  the  changes of
communication networks in time, the five discussion topics concerning history of science were included to the
analysis. These five discussion topics were thematically separated from each other.

Data collection
        For the both groups, group A and group B, the analysis took into account the five discussion topics
concerning the history of science. The discussion forum data consist of the participants' 852 posted computer
notes; 496 notes were contributed by the members in group A and group B's discussion forum data consisted of
356 posted computer notes. In addition, the following attributive data of individuals were collected from the
participants' messages during the first discussion. The individual attributes were gender (male, female), position
in the virtual course (student, tutor), university (the university the student were attending), and status in the
individual's university (master student, graduate student, researcher/lecturer, professor).
        The discussion forum data was examined separately in the two small groups, group A and group B. The
unit of the analysis was a computer note, a message contributed to the learning environment by a participant.
The discussion threads were used in examining the patterns of interaction during the course. As a thread we
mean a set of computer notes with the opening message which starts a new discussion topic and the computer
notes written as a reply. The opening message was considered to be at level 1. The computer note that replied to
the opening message was considered to be at level 2. Further, a message that replied to the level 2 computer note
was situated to the level 3. The opening messages were not calculated in the communication matrices but they
were taken into account when calculating the total amount of sent (outgoing) and received messages.

Data analysis
        In  the data analysis,  the patterns of network  interaction were examined     by   using multidimensional
scaling (MDS) and by calculating basic social network analysis measures (Scott, 1991; Wasserman & Faust,
1994). The data was analysed with Ucinet (Borgatti, Everett & Freeman, 2002). In order to get a more detailed
picture what kinds of changes there were in communication networks in time, the social network analysis with
Siena program (Snijders, Steglich, Schweinberger & Huisman, 2007) were performed.

Multidimensional Scaling, MDS
The basic idea behind multidimensional scaling (MDS) is that of using the concepts of space and distance to
map relational data. In this study, the relational data consists of the posted computer notes, the sent and received
messages among participants. Multidimensional scaling is an attempt to convert graphic measures into metric
measures (Wasserman and Faust, 1994; Scott, 1991). The goodness of each multidimensional scaling map can
be measured by a value of stress, where a greater value means a poorer model. The value is, however, dependent
on the data: the number of actors and the scales of measures. Analyses were performed on a symmetric matrix.

                                                                                                                        1-
         The symmetry was produced by summing up the received and sent messages. In this way both halves of the
         matrix became similar.

        Social network analysis measures
                  The  relational   structures  can  be  used  to    describe  social phenomena        where  interactions   between
         participants are  observed.  The   patterns of  interaction   are examined     first in  order to  clarify with   whom    the
         students worked and how many replies they sent and received. To obtain a more detailed picture of the features
         of interaction in the communication networks the following measures of the social network analysis (Scott, 1991;
         Wasserman & Faust, 1994) were used: sent message, sent reply, received reply, sent to others, received from
         others and a betweenness value indicating the position of the student pair in the communication network. A
         detailed description of the measures is given as follows.

            1.)   Sent message is the number of computer notes the participant sent to the other participants.
            2.)   Sent   reply (out-degree  value   in  directed  asymmetric     matrix) is   the number    of  computer    notes  the
                  participant sent as a reply to the other participants.
            3.)   Received reply (in-degree value in directed asymmetric matrix), shows the number of computer notes
                  the other participants sent as a reply to the participant.
            4.)   Sent to others (out-degree value in a dichotomized matrix) is the number of other participants to whom
                  the participant sent a reply.
            5.)   Received   from   others  (in-degree   value    in a   dichotomized    matrix)  shows     from how      many  other
                  participants the participant has received a reply.
            6.)   Betweenness      shows   how    often  a   network     actor's  position    is  strategically  important    in   the
                  communication      structure, i.e.   how    central  the  network     position   is.  Interactions    between   two
                  nonadjacent actors (i.e. actors who are not directly interacting) depend on the other actors who lie in
                  the paths between the two. A participant has a high betweenness value if (s)he lies between two actors
                  in the network who are not directly connected to each other, given that the shortest distance between
                  two actors in the network is used to calculate the betweenness (Freeman, 1979; Wasserman & Faust,
                  1994).

        Modelling the changes of communication network structure in time with Siena
                  In order to analyse the changes in network discussions during a virtual university course, the statistical
         estimation  for the  changes   in social  networks   with   the actor-oriented  model    was   performed   (Snijders  2001,
         2005). Actor orientation means that an individual whose outgoing ties are changing in the network can depend
         on the network structure and on attributes by observed covariates. Thus, it is allowed that the probabilities of the
         relational changes depend on the entire network structure (Snijders, 2005).
                  The basic idea behind statistical modeling of social networks is that it uses the network structure as
         given at the first time point in order to model the changes in network structure. In addition, it is assumed that
         network processes are in dynamic state and there is unobserved network evolution going on between numbers of
         discrete time points (Snijders, 2005). In this study of the network structure, the first discussion is used as a
         starting point in modeling the changes at tie level in two different time points (time point 1 and time point2, time
         point 2 and time point 3, etc). Also the following measures average degree, mutuality index and transitivity
         index are calculated (Snijders, 2005). The mutuality index was defined as the fraction of ties reciprocated. The
         transitivity index is the number of transitive triplets divided by the number of potentially transitive triplets.
                  In the modeling, the objective function effects on the network variable were outdegree, reciprocity,
         transitive triplets and  3-cycles. Transitive   triplets are  formed    when   for example    Jaakko   sends   a  message to
         Tuomo and Pirjo. Then Tuomo sends a message to Pirjo, but they don't have a reciprocal tie, meaning that
         although   Tuomo    sent a message  to   Pirjo she  does  not   reply to the message.    The   3-cycles are    formed  when
         Jaakko sends    a message   to Tuomo   who     sends the  message    to Pirjo, and   she sends   a message     to Jaakko. In
         addition to these structural effects, the effects of four covariates, gender (male, female), position in the virtual
         course (student, tutor), university (the university the student were attending), and status in the university (master
         student, graduate student, researcher/lecturer, professor) were examined.

       Results
                  In the results section, we focus on the patterns of interaction in communication networks formed by the
         participants during   the  online virtual course   with  the  MDS-maps.    Then      we  present the   results of the social
         network analysis measures in order to take a deeper look how often and with how many others the participants
         were working    with. After  that  we  present  the  results  concerning  the   changes   in  time  in the communication
         networks.

1-
MDS
         The patterns of interaction among the two groups are displayed as MDS-maps in Figure 1. For the
group A the stress value was .045 and group B's stress value was .024 which indicates a good model.
             Group A                                                            Group B

                                                                                           Tutor 1

                                        Tutor 3

                                                                                                 Tutor 3

                   Tutor 2
                                           Tutor 1

                          Figure 1. The communication networks in a virtual course.

         In the figure 1, it can be seen that there were altogether three tutors, of which one tutor was responsible
in technical issues (tutor 3) there a two other tutors were responsible in contextual tutoring. Tutors have been
marked on the map, and other balls indicate students. In the group A, there are 3 tutors and 21 students, and in
the group B there two tutors and 25 students. Comparing the MDS- maps, it seems that the group A's network is
more loose that group B's. There is one isolated student in the communication network in group A. In Group B,
the isolated participant is the tutor 3 who responsibility was to focus on tutoring in technical issues. He has sent
messages  to the discussion forum only if needed  because     in the Optima learning environment  there was a
specific discussion forum for the technical problems.

Participants' activity during the online course
         The communication networks can be also examined with the social network analysis measures, for
example sent messages and the amount of sent and received replies. Another interesting viewpoint is to explore
how many other participants the students or tutors sent replies to, and from how many other participants the
students or tutors received a reply. Also the betweenness value shows, how central the participant's position in
the communication network is. The results of the participants' activity in online discussions are presented in the
Table 1.

Table 1: Group's and tutors' activity during online course.

               Sent messages     Sent replies         Receivedreplies  Sent toothers Receivedfrom othersBetweenness
Participants     M       S.D.     M      S.D.         M      S.D.     M     S.D.     M    S.D.      M     S.D.
Group A        20,96    22,58    13,7   18,58    13,83       14,43   6,48   4,93    6,56   4,61   4,14    7,32
Tutor            4,67    4,73    4,67    4,73    3,66        3,79      3    2,65    3,5    1,53   0,03    0,05

Group B        16,38    16,87   13,24   13,85         12     13,33     7    3,79    6,43   4,23   3,28    7,31
Tutor            6       8,45     3      4,24         16     22,62    1,5   2,12    7,5    10,6   0,625   0,88

                                                                                                                       1-
                 To   get  an  overview,   the average    (M) and   standard deviation  (S.D.)  of the social network  analysis
         measures, were calculated for students and tutors in both groups (see Table 1). In general, the activity among
         participants varied  a lot, although  the  participation   in both  groups was   quite similar. In the communication
         networks, there   were   central participants whose     betweenness  values  were high.   There were also participants
         whose betwenneess value was close or equal to zero. These participants did not have a central position in the
         network. In addition, the tutors were not so active during the course, which can be seen in their sent message
         values being low. This can be explained by the students' way of working with tutors. It may be that they do not
         send so many replies to the tutor for clarification questions and thus it is likely that the tutors do not get replies.
         In addition, it may be that the content of the tutors' message were meant to facilitate the whole group, although
         it has been written as a reply to one student's message. In addition, in group A the tutor 2 had to suddenly give
         up the tutoring because of her other duties at the university, and the tutor 1 had to take a responsibility also for
         the group A. In the Table 2, the results of the basic social network analysis measures are used to provide a
         detailed picture of how the students considered as "stereotypical" cases participated into discussions.

         Table: 2. Students' different profiles in communication network.

                    Sent messages
                    (replies +
         Group      opening                               Received                              Received
         and Id     comments)             Sent            replies          Sent to others       from          Betweenness
                                          replies                                               others
         A3                 40                 36              25                 11                13             12,60
         A5                 35                 15              43                   7               16             13,05
         A8                 104                87              52                 19                17             32,55
         B3                 16                 16                1                10                 1              0,47
         B7                  5                 0                 3                  0                3               0
         B20                31                 31              15                 11                 3              1,15
         B21                85                 67              64                 18                19             34,27

                 A    student  in group   A with   id  8, (later  student A8) has   been  an active participant in the group's
         discussions and sent altogether 104 messages (Table 2). Student A8 has sent replies to 19 other participants of
         whom only two did not replied. In addition, student A8 has sent 87 replies and got 52 replies. This students'
         position in the communication network is central which can be seen in the high betweenness ­value. Student A5
         was active in starting the discussions and (s)he participated quite actively throughout the course, as was student
         A3, although (s)he did not sent as many opening comments to the discussion.
                 Student B21 sent messages to almost all other participants, only four other participants did not send any
         messages to him. Student B21 has the highest betweenness value indicating that (s)he had a strategically central
         position in the communication network. Student B3 is in opposite situation because (s)he sent only replies to the
         other participants and received replies from only one participant. It may be that student B3 is just sending as
         many messages as possible to make sure that (s)he passes the course. Another interesting case is student B20,
         who did not send any opening comments but (s)he sent, on average, three replies to 11 other participants and 5
         recipients have sent 15 replies to him/her. Student B7's way of participating indicates a goal to pass the course
         with minimum work by starting 5 different threads after which (s)he had withdrawn from the discussions.
                 To sum up, these results showed that there were different kinds of participation among group A and
         group B. In group A, there were many students who sent opening comments and participated actively into the
         discussions. On   the  contrary,  in  group  B,  there   were only  few  students   who sent  opening  comments  and
         maintained the discussion by sending replies to others.

        Changes in time at structural and dyadic levels
                 In   this section,  a more detailed   picture   concerning  the changes  in communication    networks will be
         provided. First, we present a general view of what kind of changes there were during the interaction at dyadic
         level. Secondly, we present the results concerning the ongoing ties (sent messages) after which the model of
         changes is provided. The dyadic level changes are presented in Table 1.

         Table 3. An overview of the structure of networked discussion in groups A and B.

1-
Time                       T0                           T1                      T2                      T3                   T4
Group                A          B                 A          B            A           B        A               B          A          B
Average degree      2.27      2.09                1.35       2.09        1.73       2.36       1.27         1.64        2.27       2.36
Mutualityindex      0.40      0.17                0.15       0.29        0.23       0.29       0.23         0.17        0.43       0.26
Transivityindex                                   0.07       0.4         0.28       0.27       0.09         0.05        0.16       0.28

          The results in Table 3 shows that in group A and group B the average degree, starting at virtually nil, is
changes from 1.3 up to a value of about 2.4 indicating that the participants sent in maximum three messages.
The mutuality index is a quite low at almost 0.45. The transitivity index is also varying a lot, being quite low at
0.4. The  time point   3 can   be          considered   as a critical point   in   both groups because      the   average  degree    and
transitivity index decrease when the discussion topic changes. It may be that the subject is not familiar with the
students,  which,   in turn,  decreased           their activity.  Another     explanation   could      be that   because   the    online
discussions were not designed to support the individual course assignment, it may be that the participants had to
focus on their essays before the deadline. The changes in ties between different time points are presented in
Table 4.

Table 4: Change frequencies Nhk(m) for the periods tm -tm+1.

Changes in ties,                                                 Period of observation m  >0,3@
Nhk(m)                         0 (t0 ­ t1)                       1 (t1 - t2)                2 (t2 ­ t3)                 3(t3 ­ t4)
                              A                   B            A              B            A             B             A             B
0 to 0                       620                  430         630            426         633            429          619           426
0 to 1                       23                   30           37            34           24            25             50           44
1 to 0                       47                   30           27            28           36            41             24           28
1 to 1                       12                   16           8             18            9            11             9             8

          The change counts (0 to 1, 1 to 0) are indicated in Table 2 Table 2 which shows that there are similar
tendencies in the groups. The total number of changes between consecutive observation moments in group A is
70 and in group it is 60 in the first period. In the further periods the amount of changes varied from 60 to 74 and
in group   B from   62  to  72  in         all further  periods.  At  the    first time point, in    group  A,    there  were 23    new
communication ties formed and 47 ties broken, in group B there were 30 new and broken ties. Comparing the
last time point, it can  be  seen          that  there are more   new    ties than   broken  ties. It   may    be that during   the  last
discussion the students have been trying to increase their participation in discussions in order to pass the course.
On the other hand, the topic may have been easier for them to participate in if they have been able to use their
former knowledge and experiences in discussion.
          To get a detailed picture what kinds of changes there were in group A's and group B's communication
networks,   we modeled     with Siena           how    much  the  amount     of  sent message   were     different,  was    there  more
reciprocity  during discussions            and  did the communication        network    have hierarchy     indicating   that there   are
participants who  had    a more   strategically         important  position     in  the network    than    the others.  The  estimated
results are presented in Table 5.

Table 5: Estimated changes in communication networks in group A and group B.

                                                              Period of observation m  >0,3@
Estimated
changes in
communication              0 (t0 ­ t1)                       1 (t1 ­ t2)                 2 (t2 ­ t3)                   3 (t3 ­ t4)
networks                A                   B              A             B            A              B             A               B
Outdegree              -2.57               -2.09        -2.38         -1.76          -3.03         -2.45          -1.98         -2.47
                    (0.29)*       (0.21)*              (0.21)*     (0.19)*          (0.39)*     (0.57)*           (0.17)*     (0.48)*
Reciprocity            1.42                0.99         1.63          0.96           2.72          1.19           1.63          0.83
                    (0.56)*       (0.44)*              (0.43)*     (0.37)*          (0.59)*     (0.41)*           (0.35)*     (0.38)*
Transitive             0.06                0.27         0.51          0.17           0.61          -0.00          0.43          0.02
triplets             (0.29)       (0.13)*              (0.12)*        (0.11)        (0.20)*     (0.21)            (0.16)*     (0.14)
3-cycles               -0.41               0.45         -0.90         0.00           1.63          0.24           -0.42         0.53
                     (1.00)                (0.35)      (0.42)*        (0.29)        (0.70)*     (0.51)            (0.49)      (0.29)
*Statistically significant at p<.05 level.

                                                                                                                                             1-
                   The results in Table 5 show that the amount of sent messages varied a lot in different time periods. For
         both groups, the outdegree values are negative and statistically significant at .05 level. Further, reciprocity is
         positive and statistically significant (p < .05). These two estimates indicated that the tendency is not to make
         new communication ties but the participants continue the discussions with the same students, which, in turn,
         increased reciprocity.
                   In group A, the first two time point indicated that the amount of transitive triplets are increasing, which
         indicates that the discussion paths become longer and the closeness among participants increases. In other words
         the participants tended to participate in discussions with those from whom they received replies in different
         discussion areas. At the time points 2 and 3, the 3-cycle effect is statistically significant at .05 level. Thus it can
         be interpreted that there is a moment of hierarchy in the communication network. Thus, the participants' activity
         is unevenly distributed, and the same participants are active in many discussions at the same time. At other time
         points the participation is more evenly distributed and some active participants are involved in every discussion
         topic.
                   In the first two time periods, it can be seen that, in group B, the amount of transitive triplets increased.
         This  can be  considered   as  an  increase in closeness   within  the   communication    network.   In  other words,  the
         participants have a tendency to send comments to those participants from whom they had received replies in
         different discussions. The results also show that in group B there are not many 3-cycles which indicates that
         there is a hierarchy in the discussions. The participation is unevenly distributed among the participants and the
         same students are active in different phases of the online course.
                   In  both groups,  group  A   and  group B,   the estimation    concerning  individual   attributes like   gender,
         position, university and   status, did not  provide  any   statistically significant results. So, it can  be   said that in
         online courses, the participants do not choose their communication partners on the basis of individual attributes;
         for example, they do not get involved with students from their own university.

       Conclusions
                   The aim of this study was to examine and model changes in communication network structures during
         online discussions   in  a virtual course   at university  level. In the  analysis,  social network   analysis  methods,
         multidimensional scaling and social network analysis measures were used to examine the patterns of interaction
         in two small groups. Further, social network analysis with Siena program was used to explore the changes in
         communication networks at structural and dyadic levels. The MDS-maps indicated that group B's network is
         more dense than group A's network. However, the social network analysis measures indicated that there are no
         big differences between the groups although there were more sent messages in group A than in group B. In
         group B there were less different discussions threads than in group A's discussion. A reason for the differences
         in the network structure between the groups can be found in the 3-cycle effect of Siena modeling. The structures
         were different because the 3-cycle effect in group A indicated that the same participants were active in many
         discussions at the same time. Thus, it can be said that the results of the study suggested that during a virtual
         course the participants tend to form subgroups and hierarchical structures in communication networks as in any
         other  social community.    In addition, the   results show  that  participants  did  not choose  their  communication
         partners  on  the  basis of individual   attributes. Maybe   something     like that  more    extensive  research   on the
         individual attributes could help to find out whether these play a role in these interactions.
                   In this study, multidimensional scaling, social network analysis measures and social network analysis
         with Siena program was used to examine patterns of interactions and the changes in communication network in
         time. It can be argued that with these multiple methods we are able to get more insight what happens during the
         virtual courses. In addition, Siena program can be used to examine changes in communication structures in a
         networked learning environment. For future research, it would be important to study whether the quality of the
         discourse has an effect on changes in time in communication networks.

       References
         Arvaja, M., Rausku-Puttonen, H., Häkkinen, P. & Eteläpelto, A. (2003). Constructing knowledge through role
                   play in a web-based learning environment. Journal of Educational Computing Research 46, 161-179.
         Borgatti, S.P., Everett,   M.G. and  Freeman,    L.C.  (2002). Ucinet    for Windows:     Software   for Social  Network
                   Analysis. Harvard, MA: Analytic Technologies.
         Freeman, L. C. (1979). Centrality in Social Networks: Conceptual Clarification. Social Networks 1, 215-239.
         Haythorntwaite, C. (2000). Online personal networks: Size, composition and media use among distance learners.
                   New Media & Society, 2(2), 195-226.
         Hewitt, J. (2003). How habitual online practices affect the development of asynchronous discussion threads.
                   Journal of Educational Computing Research, 28 (1), 31-45.
         Hewitt, J. (2005). Toward an understanding of how threads die in asynchronous computer conferences. The
                   Journal of the Learning Sciences, 14(4), 567-589.

1-
Resnick, L. B., Levine, J. M., & Teasley, S. D. (1993). Perspectives on socially shared cognition. Washington:
          American Psychological Association.
Resnick, M. & Wilenky, U. (1998). Diving into complexity: Developing probabilistic thinking through role-play
          activities. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 7, 153-172.
Scott, J. (1991). Social network analysis: a handbook. London: SAGE.
Snijders, T.A.B.  (2001). The  Statistical Evaluation of Social Network   Dynamics. In M. E. Sobel and M.   P.
          Becker (Eds.), Sociological Methodology, pp. 361-395. London: Basil Blackwell.
Snijders, T.A. B. (2005). Models for Longitudinal Network Data. In P. J. Carrington, J. Scott, and S.Wasserman
          (Eds.) Models and Methods in Social Network Analysis. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Snijders, T.A.B., Steglich, C.E.G., Schweinberger, M. & Huisman, M. (2007). Manual for SIENA version 3.
          University of Groningen: ICS, Department of Sociology.
van Duijn, M.A.J., Zeggelink, E.P.H., Huisman, M., Stokman, F. N. & Wasseur, F.W. (2003). Evolution of
          sociology freshmen into frienship network. The Journal of Mathematical Sociology, 27(2), 153-191.
Van de    Bunt, G.G., Duijn,  M.A.J. & Snijders,  T.  (1999). Friendship   Networks Through  Time: An  Actor-
          Oriented Dynamic Statistical Network Model. Computational & Mathematical Organization Theory,
          5(2), 167­192.
Wasserman, S., & Faust, K. (1994). Social network analysis: methods and applications. Cambridge: Cambridge
          University Press.

                                                                                                                  1-
