    Example from a Framework for Future Learning Environments:
        Human Factors and Learner Engagement in Collaborative
                            Workspaces with Tablet Computing
                Eric Hamilton, Andrew Hurford, Pepperdine University, US Air Force Academy,
                                       Email: eric.hamilton@pepperdine.edu

          Abstract: This research centers on a design to elevate learner engagement or immersion in
          mathematics  classrooms   in order  to  optimize   students' mathematical    growth. The  design's
          theoretical logic is related to eight   principles for future learning   environments,  and   to an
          interpretation of engagement as recruitment of attentional, perceptual and complex reasoning
          resources.

Introduction
          Previous research based on self-reports by mathematics students at the high school and college level
suggests a perception by students that upwards of 80% or more of the time that they are in mathematics classes
does not involve substantial mathematical cognition. These figures are average values; for many students, the
percentage of time they self-reported as disconnected from mathematical activity during class time approaches
95%  or  more.  Although    disengagement  and    its causes are multi-factored  and   complex, student explanations
accounting for disengagement include confusing instruction, general boredom or distraction, and a sense that the
class topics are too difficult, too easy, or meaningless.
          The ascendancy    of learning   science research   and its visibility in addressing  enduring    problems in
education is a promising development in the past decade. How learning science contributes to the problems of
traditional classroom environments is crucial to next generation educational environments. One such problem is
the productivity of class time. The research discussed in this poster discusses investigations in promoting routine
and productive  engagement     in mathematics    classrooms.  More   specifically, it  focuses on a design  to recruit
learners' attentional, motivational and   complex     reasoning  resources in   order to optimize their mathematical
growth   during classroom    instruction. The    design involves  a  blend of   tablet computers  with  collaborative
workspaces to promote deep immersion or engagement by learners in classroom mathematics.

Intervention
          Four distinct instructional intents guided the iterative design of the intervention. The design intents
were met with the hardware and software technologies including TabletPCs (hardware), notebook software to
prepare, store and retrieve handwritten material (WindowsJournal) and collaboration software (SynchronEyes
from Smart Technologies). The products work well, though this research is not product-specific but rather is
organized around the functionalities they represent and the ways in which the functionalities enhance each other.
For the purposes of this paper, the combination of these technologies is referred to as the SynchronEyes x Tablet
treatment.

                       Figure 1. Screenshot View of Student Screens from Teacher Screen.

Instruments and Measurement and Results
Is this design  associated  with  higher  levels of   engagement? Students  in   the  comparison  group self-reported
either full or deep engagement with a PDA form of Experience Sampling Method (ESM) in 52% of the polled
events. Students in the experimental group self-reported either full or deep engagement in class activities at a

                                                                                                                          3-3
       67% rate. A straightforward z-score computation supports a statistically significant difference at the .005 level.
       These results were   supported  by   independent   classroom    observations during   each of   the PDA-ESM      class
       sessions, and by interviews with the participating faculty. The data tend to confirm underlying conjectures about
       the value of rapid and precise feedback loops in promoting learner engagement, permitting the teacher to adjust
       questions or task parameters in adaptive response to student needs.

       Table 1: Eight Principles of Future Learning Environments (Expansion of principles originally appearing in
       (Hamilton 2006; Hamilton in press).

       1.   Increased sightlines in the classroom ­ greater ability for everyone in a classroom, teachers and students
            alike, to see conceptual models others are using in the classroom; content, cognition and affect become
            more visible.
       2.   Increased emphasis on models and modeling ­ a greater stress on systems of ideas and relationships
            both in how learning "tasks" are structured and in how assessment is carried out; connections and the
            structure and relationships of ideas becomes as salient as ideas;
       3.   Increased connectedness ­ individuals become more meaningfully connected in the learning experience
            to each other, to teachers, and to those outside of the classroom;
       4.   Increased "one-to-one-ness" in the classroom ­ a greater sense of individualization and customization
            for the individual learner under the management of a teacher, emulating a one-to-one tutoring experience.
       5.   Increased  fluidity   of learning   context   ­  transfer to  and from  virtual systems,   greater emphasis  on
            heterogeneous   competencies    functioning   together,  greater integration of cognitive, social  and affective
            dimensions, more interoperability of individual-social-machine knowledge forms; a principle of "hybrid"
            modes of learning modes and content.
       6.   Increased emphasis on generativity and creativity - Learners function in more imaginative settings in
            which they are able to be more imaginative
       7.   Increased emphasis on self-regulatory competencies ­ Learning environments will increasingly offload
            onto  students  tasks  previously   carried out  by  teaching professionals. Teaching  professionals   will then
            engage more sophisticated competencies and skill sets.
       8.   Increased interactional bandwidth ­ the capacity of the learning environment to mediate meaningful
            content and affective representations that are shared by all participants.

       Descriptive Framework for Future Learning Environments
                This research contributes to and relies on an evolving framework that describes key characteristics or
       principles of future learning   environments.     The  framework    invokes  multiple  theoretical  perspectives and
       suggests that future learning   environments     will feature combinations  of these  characteristics or elements  to
       produce synergies or compounds that have unique affordances for learning. Table 2 lists eight principles. Each
       in some fashion can enable, propel or be enabled or propelled by the others. Each represents, on a standalone
       basic, salient features of promising environments of the future. While it is outside the scope of this poster to
       elaborate fully on the types of synergies that combinations of these principles might afford, the design studied in
       this project can be expressed as a combination of several of them, and that combination is discussed as a means
       to illustrate the overall framework.
                For example, the first characteristic, of greater sightlines, is the most salient feature of the intervention.
       One  primary  sightline advantage    for the teacher   is the capacity to see, on  demand   and  without  cueing  the
       students, the mathematical workspace of any student or all students. The display in Figure 1 illustrates one
       screenshot from a class involved in the intervention. The teacher can scroll through the display and observe
       students work in real-time. The sightline provides the teacher an opportunity to minimize distracters to viewing
       student mathematical models. The second principle, of increased emphasis on modeling, can be instantiated by
       the fact that a teacher can view not only individual answers (such as with clickers or in calling on students
       during a class session) but, at the least, can see a flow of ideas as they are reflected in student writing. The
       poster includes a cross-walk illustrating how all eight principles are instantiated through this approach.

      References
       Hamilton, E. (2006). International collaborations blending new pedagogies and new technologies in engineering
                education:  principles and   examples.    Fifth  Global  Colloquium   on  Engineering   Education,  Rio  de
                Janeiro, American Society for Engineering Education.
       Hamilton,  E.  (in  press). Principles   and  Grand     Challenges:   A  Prospectus   for  the  Computer-Supported
                Collaborative Learning (CSCL) Community. 2007 International Conference on Computer Supported
                Collaborative Learning, Rutgers, NJ.

3-0
