                                                  In The Eyes of Experts:
        Teaching Dynamic Features in Biology by Modeling Experts' Eye
                                        Movement Strategies to Novices
                        Halszka Jarodzka, Knowledge Media Research Center, Konrad-Adenauer-Straße 40,
                                        72072 Tübingen, Germany, h.jarodzka@iwm-kmrc.de
              Katharina Scheiter, University of Tuebingen, Applied Cognitive Psychology and Media Psychology,
                         Konrad-Adenauer-Str. 40, 72072 Tübingen, Germany, k.scheiter@iwm-kmrc.de
                         Peter Gerjets, Knowledge Media Research Center, Konrad-Adenauer-Straße 40,
                                        72072 Tübingen, Germany, p.gerjets@iwm-kmrc.de
                 Sven Gemballa, University of Tübingen, Department of Zoology, Evolution and Ecology Forum,
                     Auf der Morgenstelle 28, 72076 Tübingen, Germany, sven.gemballa@uni-tuebingen.de

                 In  biology  education,    it is crucial  to be  able to classify   objects  based    on  complex   visual
                 information (e.g., shapes and locomotion patterns of fish). Usually, this ability is trained with
                 books   displaying    static features  and  only  explaining  dynamic    features.    However,  for many
                 classification tasks the dynamic features are very important. Therefore, the overall aim of the
                 two studies described in this paper was to develop an innovative instructional technique for
                 teaching classification skills to students using dynamic visualizations. In order to develop this
                 technique,   the first study    was conducted    to analyze   classification  processes   of experts and
                 novices in detail. This was done by investigating process-oriented differences between experts
                 and novices using eye movements and verbal data obtained during classifying the locomotion
                 pattern of different types of fish. In a second study the process data of experts are replayed to
                 novices in order to support novices in adapting experts' classification strategies.

       Classifying Natural Objects in Biology According to Dynamic Features
                 In  biology  education,    a  pivotal  skill that students  need    to acquire   during   their university training
         consists in classifying natural objects (e.g., fish) according to complex static and dynamic visual features (e.g.,
         shapes, locomotion      patterns).   Traditionally,  these  skills are   trained   with  static   pictures  and    complex
         identification keys that comprise schematic line drawings of the relevant characteristics. However, for many
         classification tasks dynamic   features   are  also  very  important.  Therefore,    the development     of an  innovative
         instructional technique for teaching classification skills to students using dynamic features is a challenge for
         biology   education. Unfortunately,      experts'  performance    on   classification   tasks  is highly   automated,  and
         therefore not  easy  to verbalize    or  describe.  Accordingly,   the focus   in the   first study  is on  the underlying
         processes involved   in experts'   task  performance.   These  processes    were  first captured   and  analyzed   in detail
         based on a combination of verbal protocols and eye tracking data. In a second study the process data obtained by
         this method are used to support novices in analyzing fish locomotion patterns.

       Diagnosing Strategies in Inspecting Dynamic Scenes ­ Study 1
                 Numerous studies have already been conducted on the topic of expertise (for an overview see e.g.,
         Reimann, 1998). These studies revealed several differences between experts and novices. One important finding
         is that expertise is acquired through long lasting training, whereby more and more knowledge is summarized
         and organized in schemata. DeGroot (1978) found important general differences between experts and novices in
         chess problem solving, that for instance experts solve problems faster than novices because they perceive larger
         and meaningful patterns; they also possess chunks of related patterns and are able to recognize them within
         problems. Due to the acquisition of these complex and highly integrated knowledge structures, experts can use
         many shortcuts in problem solving. With regard to the task of classifying biological locomotion patterns this
         might imply that experts do not need to go through a complete decision tree, but rather can use knowledge-based
         shortcuts for  classification (cf. findings   from   medical  diagnosis; Schmidt,     Norman,     & Boshuizen,   1990).  In
         order to uncover the problem solving processes deployed by experts, usually verbal expressions during problem
         solving, so called verbal protocols are obtained (Ericsson & Simon, 1980). However, with increasing expertise
         and at the same time increasing automation of schemata application, these processes become less accessible for
         verbalization  (Ericsson &    Simon,    1980). Since,  the  focus  in  this paper  is on   a  highly visual  task, namely
         classification of biological locomotion patterns, this lack in accessibility for verbalizations might be even more
         severe. Hence, verbal protocols alone may not be a sufficient method for capturing classification processes of
         experts. Therefore, we decided to additionally capture experts' visual strategies in a more direct way by means
         of eye tracking. Since, the classification of biological locomotion patterns is a complex knowledge-based visual

1-0
task a combination of verbal protocols with the analysis of eye movements might be an appropriate method. In
line with this reasoning, Van Gog, Paas, and Van Merriënboer (2005) concluded that the combination of verbal
reports and eye movement data provides promising insights into expertise acquisition in different domains and
allows to derive novel guidelines for instructional design. Therefore, the aim of our first study was to analyze
eye movements and verbal protocols of experts and novices during a biological classification task.
          However,   it remains   an  important  open   issue    to what  extent  it  is    possible to  infer the underlying
cognitive  processes   and  knowledge     structures from    eye movement      pattern.  According      to Yarbus  (1967)   the
relation between eye movements and cognition is notably reliable for task-relevant looking. In this case the
human eye has to align itself actively and directly to the stimulus currently to be processed, so that the focus of
attention captured by eye tracking may be appropriate to reveal cognitive processes. Since participants in our
study  had to   conduct  a  visual  classification   task, we  assume    that  at least     some  inferences   from  their  eye
movements    to  the cognitive  strategies   involved   in   classification  are  possible.    However,    due  to the  highly
integrated knowledge structures of experts it may occur that experts use knowledge-based shortcuts to classify
biological locomotion    patterns  without   even  attending   to   the relevant  dynamic      features  of the   stimulus. For
instance, experts  might   easily  recognize   a particular  species    due  to  some    prominent    static  features (e.g., a
specific pattern of colorful body stripes characteristic for a particular fish species). Upon his highly integrated
schematic knowledge about different fish species, the expert might not need to observe the locomotion pattern
of this fish in detail, since based on his schematic knowledge the expert simply knows how this fish species
swims   without  further   perceptual   processing.  For   a novice,    this type of  knowledge-based         problem  solving
shortcut will not be available. The novice will rather need to scan the entire fish for moving parts. Consequently,
we have to keep in mind that the visual strategies of experts as they can be registered by means of eye tracking
result from   a combination    of  perceptual   processing     and  knowledge-based         processing   operating  on  highly
integrated schematic knowledge structures.
          In sum, it is assumed that different levels of expertise with regard to a biological classification task will
be reflected in different eye movement patterns. In particular experts should solve classification problems faster,
and thus need less time to describe and classify biological locomotion patterns (cf. deGroot, 1978). Moreover, it
is assumed    that experts  use knowledge-based       shortcuts,    like immediately        associating  a  biological species
recognized from static features with a certain locomotion pattern. Furthermore, it is assumed that there is an
effect of different expertise levels on verbal data. It is expected that experts verbalize less than novices due to
schema automation (Ericsson & Simon, 1980). However, it is expected that experts' verbalizations will be more
accurate than those of novices (cf. Johnson, 1988). These assumptions are investigated in Study 1 in the domain
of fish locomotion pattern.

Participants and Design
          Fourteen participants (M = 27.21 years, SD = 7.29 years; 6 women and 8 men) with two different levels
of expertise took part in the first study. Eight of them were biology freshmen of the University of Tuebingen,
Germany    with  an  average   age   of 23.5   years  (SD    = 1.60),    who   already   took   part  in   an  elementary   fish
classification  course  and therefore   had  a rough    idea of  fish   anatomy   and    the  respective   terminology.  They
participated for payment (10 Euro) and were classified as novices. Six persons, classified as experts, with an
average age of 32.17 years (SD = 9.11), were at least doctoral candidates within this domain and participated
voluntarily. Assignments    of  the  participants  to different    expertise   levels were     conducted    by  a professor   of
Marine Biology. Additionally, the expertise level of the participants was validated by means of a questionnaire.
As dependent variables process data from two sources were obtained: eye tracking and verbal protocols.

Materials and Apparatus
          The stimulus material used in this study consisted of four videos (for screen shots see Figure 1) shown
in an audio video interleave format (AVI) on an eye tracker monitor (the areas of interest displayed in Figure 1
where not visible to the participants). Each video depicted an individual fish during swimming whereby each of
the four   fish was  characterized    by  a   different locomotion      pattern   (i.e., tetraodontiform,     subcarangiform,
labriform, and   balistiform). The   duration   of  each   video  was    eight seconds      on average.    The  videos looped
automatically. The participants' task was to classify or describe the fish locomotion pattern as soon as they felt
able to do so. Eye movements during watching the videos were recorded with a Tobii 1750 eye tracking system,
which captured eye movements in an unintrusive way by recording them with invisible cameras integrated in the
monitor frame. Verbal data were recorded with the Camtasia software using a standard microphone. In order to
assess  possible   control  variables   a questionnaire    was   administered.    This      paper and    pencil   questionnaire
consisted  of   12 items,  including    demographic     data   (age, gender),    experience     (number     of oceanic  dives,
possession   of aquarium,   possession    of fishing license,  educational    degree     in biology), interest  (frequency    of
snorkeling, frequency of watching movies on the topic, and frequency of reading about fish), and subjectively
estimated expertise regarding the domain of fish locomotion.

                                                                                                                                    1-1
                         video (1): tetraodontiform                              video (2): subcarangiform

                              video (3): labriform                                  video (4): balistiform

                       Figure 1. Screenshots from videos used in Study 1 (with areas of interest displayed).

        Procedure
                  After participants had been welcomed and the procedure had been described to them, they filled in the
         questionnaire. Subsequently, the eye movements of the participants were calibrated. Afterwards, they watched
         the four videos, while   being eye  tracked. The   videos  looped automatically,  so participants could decide                            for
         themselves on how long they wanted to watch each video. After having watched each of the videos, participants
         had to describe the locomotion pattern of the depicted fish before continuing with the next video.

        Results
        Questionnaire Data
                  Differences in the questionnaire data within the groups are displayed in Table 1. Item (1) was an open
         question, items (2) and (3) had a dichotomous response format, items (4) to (9) had a six-point Likert-scale
         response format  with   answers   ranging  from   "strongly  disagree" to "strongly  agree". From   these                            results it
         follows  that experts  had  completed     significantly more oceanic   dives, (F (1,12) = 18.84,   p <  .01),                           were
         significantly more interested in fish (F (1,12) = 46.94, p < .01), did more snorkeling (F (1,12) = 88.17, p < .01),
         read more about fish (F (1,12) = 10.26, p < .01), and rated their own knowledge on fish locomotion higher (F
         (1,12) = 39.47, p < .01) than novices. Thus, substantial differences between experts and novices were confirmed
         by this set of data.

         Table 1: Means and standard deviation for the questionnaire data.

                                                                           Experts             Novices           p
           (1) Current number of oceanic dives                             240.50 (154.07)     5.63 (15.91)      < .01
           (2) Possession of an aquarium                                   1.67 (0.52) 1       1.75 (0.46) 1     .76
           (3) Possession of a fishing license                             2.00 (0.00) 1       2.00 (0.00) 1                                2
           (4) I'm very interested in fish.                                5.83 (0.41)         2.75 (1.04)       < .01
           (5) I snorkel very often.                                       5.17 (0.98)         1.38 (0.52)       < .01
           (6) I watch movies or documentaries about fish very often.      4.33 (1.51)         2.88 (1.36)       .27
           (7) I visit aquaria very often.                                 3.50 (1.23)         2.75 (1.17)       n.s.
           (8) I read a lot about fish (books, internet).                  3.83 (0.98)         2.13 (0.99)       < .01
           (9) I know a lot about typical patterns of fish locomotion.     5.00 (1.27)         1.63 (0.74)       < .01
               Note: 1 "yes" was coded as 1, "no" was coded as 2; 2 could not be analyzed due to lack of variance

        Verbal Data

1-
         Verbal data were coded in the following manner: Naming the correct technical term, which describes
the locomotion pattern, was coded as 1, whereas naming a wrong technical term or none was coded as 0. The
remaining verbal data obtained from the descriptions of the locomotion pattern were coded in two ways. First, it
was coded whether participants described correctly which part of the fish body moved. Second, it was coded
whether participants described correctly how the part of the fish body moved. Again, the correct answer was
coded with 1, a correct but colloquial description was coded with 0.5, and everything else was coded with 0. The
coding system is summarized in Table 2.

Table 2: Coding system for verbal data.

               Technical term?     What moves?                                                            How does it move?
  coding       1                   1                                                0,5                   1                  0,5
  video (1)    tetraodonti         anal and dorsal                                  e.g., upper and       oscillating        e.g., moving like
                                   fin                                              lower fin                                a paddle
  video (2)    subcarangi          caudal fin                                       -                     undulating         e.g., wavelike
  video (3)    labri               pectoral fins                                    -                     oscillating        e.g., moving like
                                                                                                                             a paddle
  video (4)    balisti             anal and dorsal                                  e.g., upper and       undulating         e.g., wavelike
                                   fin                                              lower fin

         Results show that experts knew significantly more technical terms for the locomotion patterns (F (1,12)
= 10.01,  p <  .01;  cf. Table 3). This                              indicates that novices   lack factual  knowledge    about fish locomotion.
Furthermore, results show that novices, compared to experts, were not able to recognize which parts of the fish
body are important for the locomotion (F (1,12) = 11.42, p < .01). This indicates a need for attentional guidance
for novices. On the other hand, experts and novices did not differ in the way they described how the parts of the
fish body move, although both groups barely described it. This might be due to the fact that the technical term
already included the locomotion pattern by definition. However, novices did not express the technical term;
therefore they obviously    need additional                              information   on different locomotion   pattern   during watching   the
videos.

Table 3: Mean number (SD) of correct descriptions for all four videos.

                         Coding                                                 Experts         Novices          p
                         Technical term?                                        1.33 (1.21)     0.00             < .01
                         What moves?                                            4.00 (0.00)     2.36 (1.28)      < .01
                         How does it move?                                      1.08 (1.11)     1.21 (1.04)      .83

Eye Tracking Data
         Eye tracking data were analyzed using Clearview 2.70 software. Novices had significant longer mean
viewing times per video than experts (F (1,13) = 17.17, p < .01; cf. Figure 2).

                                                                  30         27,75

                                                                  25

                                                                  20

                                                                  15
                                                                                                   10,79
                                                                  10

                                                                   5

                                                                   0
                                                                            novices               experts

                                Figure 2. Mean viewing time per video in sec.

                                                                                                                                                   1-
                                    viewing time per video (sec.)
                    To analyze the eye-tracking data in greater detail, we defined separate areas of interest (AOIs) for each
         of the four videos. AOIs are precisely defined areas on the object (e.g., one fin) that are used to summarize
         parameters like number of fixations or viewing times. For instance, Figure 3 displays differentiated results for
         different  AOIs in   video  2.   The  chart  represents  a difference   measure,   namely experts'  viewing    times for
         different areas of interest subtracted from the viewing times of novices. Thus, the focus is on the difference
         between both groups. Bars above the zero-line indicate that novices looked longer on the AOIs represented by
         the  bars, whereas   bars below   the zero-line   indicate that   experts looked longer on   these AOIs.   For instance,
         novices paid more attention to the body (F (1,14) = 3.99, p = .07) and the caudal fin (F (1,14) = 8.57, p = .01)
         than experts. These two parts of the fish body are crucial for the classification of the locomotion pattern shown
         in video 2. However, although novices focused their visual attention on the relevant parts of the fish body in
         video 2, their verbal data indicated that they were not able to recognize them as crucial. Experts on the other
         hand paid more attention to the stripes on the fish body than novices (F (1,14) = 1.83, p = .20). These stripes are
         a static feature that is not crucial for the classification of the locomotion pattern, however, it allows for the
         classification of the fish species. Therefore, the approach that the experts took in analyzing video 2 might be an
         example     confirming    the  assumption    that experts  tend    to  use knowledge-based    shortcuts  in movement
         classification that are unavailable to novices. For instance, in video 2 experts might have chosen to focus on a
         feature that is unique for a particular species (i.e., the stripes) and that allows them to infer the locomotion
         pattern of the fish from this knowledge about the species without looking in detail at the moving parts of the fish
         body. However, these shortcuts that show up in experts' eye movement data pose some problems for the idea of
         using experts' gaze patterns as instructional materials for novices. As novices do not possess the knowledge
         structures yet  that enable   the shortcuts, a  gaze replay    of an  expert might  be of very limited  use as  training
         material for a novice. This issue is addressed in Study 2.

                 Figure 3. Differences between experts and novices in gaze durations per AOI in video 2.

       Process Training Through Eye-Movement Modeling ­ Study 2
                    In a second study, the novel approach of supporting knowledge acquisition based on eye movement
         modeling (EMM) is addressed more directly. The basic idea of this approach is to replay eye movements of
         experts to novices. Novices then may follow these gazes with their own eye movements. Mirroring the eye
         movement pattern of experts, in turn, might facilitate the acquisition of expert strategies for novices.
                    Findings from worked examples research and considerations based on cognitive load theory support
         this approach.  According     to  cognitive  load theory   (Sweller,   Van   Merri nboer, &  Paas,  1998),  meaningful
         learning   presupposes  that  the   working  memory's    capacity   is not   exceeded, particularly not by  extraneous
         cognitive  load (ECL)     which   hinders learning   and   can be  reduced   by  appropriate instructional design.   The
         reduction of ECL can for instance be achieved by presenting worked examples (Atkinson, Derry, Renkl, &
         Wortham, 2000). In worked out examples learners are given problems together with an optimal solution strategy
         usually  observed  in experts.   In particular, the presentation   of  process-oriented examples    may be  helpful  for
         learning. Process-oriented examples do not only present a solution procedure but also comprise the reasoning

1-
processes that led to this procedure (Gerjets, Scheiter, & Catrambone, 2004; Hoogveld, Paas, & Wim, 2005). In
line with this reasoning, the idea of EMM can be seen as the provision of a perceptual process-oriented worked
example (cf. Van Gog, 2006).
         In addition, this approach of replaying eye movement patterns of experts may also be viewed as an
innovative kind of cognitive modeling. Cognitive modeling is based on observational learning (Bandura, 1997).
Bandura (1997) showed that observing a model performing a task already leads to learning, without having ever
performed   this task  before. This    may   also be  true for observing    process  data    related to cognitive  tasks,   for
example verbal protocols or eye-movement data. The presentation of modeling depends on the task, for example
the strategies can be simply described or experts themselves can be shown on videos solving the problem and
explaining  how   and   why    they do   it  (Van   Merri  nboer,  2002).   Presenting  gaze   replays   of  experts   can  be
considered  an   innovative    representational   format   for modeling.    According     to the  cognitive  apprenticeship
approach  (Collins,   Brown,   &  Newman,       1987)  experts often   fail to uncover    important   tacit knowledge      (i.e.,
knowledge that is difficult to access) which might hinder learning. Eye movement modeling might be a suitable
method to reveal tacit perceptual knowledge of experts to novices.
         However, there might also be some challenges in implementing the approach of EMM. First, as results
from Study 1 showed experts seem to use knowledge-based shortcuts in their task performance. Due to novices'
lack of the relevant knowledge that prevents them from using these shortcuts, raw eye movements may not be
useful for modeling purposes. Consequently, experts might need to be instructed to "behave more didactical"
before their eye movements are recorded. For instance, current studies on expert behavior in writing processes
state that already rather subtle instructions, that is, only reminding experts that the results of their behavior will
be presented to novices, change their behavior dramatically (Jucks, Schulte-Löbbert, & Bromme, in press). This
may be also true for eye movements. Second, even if novices know where they should look at, they still might
lack relevant schematic knowledge that would allow them to meaningfully interpret what they see. For instance,
in Study  1 novices    focused  their   visual  attention  on  the relevant  parts   of the  fish  body,  their  verbal    data,
however, indicated that they were not able to recognize them as crucial. Thus, even if novices are instructed
where to look they still might not know why they should look at a certain area and what information can be
obtained from focusing that area. Hence, additional information is needed. This information can be provided on
the basis of verbal protocols of experts that received an instruction for didactical behavior. These protocols
might serve   as  cues  in order    to help  solving   highly  complex    visual   tasks.  Additionally,    they might     offer
instructional explanations.    Thus,   a combined     presentation  of gaze    replays  and   verbal    protocols should    be
particularly beneficial to learners.
         In line with this reasoning, the following research questions will be addressed in Study 2: First, it is
expected  that gazes   of  novices  align    to expert gazes   presented    during learning.  This    would  result    in  more
homogenous     gaze   patterns compared     to  a control  group   learning  from  video   materials  without    gaze  replay.
Second, it is expected that modeling by means of experts' gazes leads to better learning outcomes only when the
experts  received a   specific didactical    instruction. Receiving    gaze  replays  of   uninstructed  experts,  however,
might even result in worse learning outcomes, since the shortcuts that experts might use have the potential to
distract novices  from    concentrating  on     important features  of the  stimulus.   Third,  it is expected    that  verbal
explanations lead to better learning outcomes for both types of EMM (with and without didactical instruction)
compared to a condition without modeling. Without EMM the verbal explanation might even confuse learners
because the may not know to which part of the visual stimulus the verbal explanations refer. This might lead to
worse learning outcomes.

Design
         In the second study, two factors will be varied resulting in a 2*3 design. The first factor is verbal
explanation (with vs. without). The second factor is EMM (without gazes vs. gazes of uninstructed experts vs.
gazes of instructed experts). Dependent variables arise from two sources: posttest data and eye tracking data.
The posttest comprises factual knowledge assessed by text-based questionnaires. In addition, visual tests are
involved in order to capture the mental model of the locomotion pattern built during learning. Furthermore, eye-
tracking data will be collected.

Material and Apparatus
         The material for the second study is currently under construction. It is designed as a browser-based
learning  environment     that can   be  presented    on   a standard  computer.     The   experiment    will    start with  a
questionnaire  on  demographic      data and    important  control  variables   (cf. first   study). Subsequently,     a   short
introduction to basic technical terms of fish physiology, underlying physical principles, and a rough description
of different locomotion patterns will be presented. This will be followed by the learning phase where the four
locomotion patterns used in Study 1 will be taught. For each locomotion pattern, a short textual description will
be presented   (i.e., the technical term    of  the locomotion   pattern).  Then,  a video   of  a   swimming    fish  will be
displayed  according   to  one of   the  six experimental    conditions.  This  procedure    will  be repeated   for   all four

                                                                                                                                     1-
         videos (cf. first study). Afterwards, participants will be asked to describe each swimming mode. Furthermore,
         factual knowledge will be measured by means of multiple choice tests and by means of recognizing locomotion
         pattern of known and unknown fish (video based).

        Results
                  This study is currently in preparation and will be conducted in December 2007. The results will be
         presented at the conference.

       General Discussion
                  This paper aims at developing a novel method for facilitating the acquisition of expert strategies in the
         domain of classifying biological locomotion pattern. This method is based on the idea of using experts' eye
         movement pattern as instructional material to model their perceptual strategies to novices. In order to develop
         learning materials to implement this method, a first study was conducted to identify differences between experts
         and novices with regard to verbal data and eye movements during the classification of fish locomotion pattern.
                  Results show that process data differ as a function of expertise levels. Results from verbal data show
         that experts are well able to name the locomotion pattern using the correct technical term. Not surprisingly,
         novices were not able to do so. Moreover, results show that compared to experts, novices are not able to identify
         the parts of the fish body relevant for locomotion. This leads to the assumption that attentional guidance for
         novices  is needed,   which   can  be  achieved  by EMM.    Surprisingly,  experts  and  novices  both   refrained from
         describing the locomotion pattern appropriately. However, this finding might go back to different reasons for
         experts  and novices.   For experts,   who  often  named   the correct  technical   term of a locomotion    pattern, the
         finding might be due to the fact that the technical term already includes the locomotion pattern by definition.
         However, novices did not express the technical term. So, they just might not be able to describe a locomotion
         pattern  appropriately. Therefore,     they might  need   additional  instructional explanation  during   watching   the
         videos.  Results with  regard  to  eye  movement    data  show   that experts  do not necessarily  focus  on   the AOIs
         crucial for identifying a locomotion pattern. Instead they might concentrate on features that are not related to
         locomotion pattern but allow to identify the fish species displayed. This finding seems to contradict previous
         research that  often  shows   that increasing   expertise results in  ignoring irrelevant information.   This  has been
         shown   in  different domains,    like arts (Antes  &   Kristjanson,  1991)   and motion    recognition  in  gymnastics
         (Moreno, Reina, Luis, & Sabido, 2002). Haider and French (1999) found that this effect arises at a perceptual
         level already. However, the contrasting findings we obtained might be due to the specific task of classifying
         locomotion patterns. As deGroot (1978) already found, experts solve problems faster than novices since they
         perceive complex and meaningful patterns; and possessing chunks of related patterns enables them to recognize
         the patterns within problems. Therefore, experts probably do not need to focus on the body parts for identifying
         a locomotion pattern as they can use different kinds of shortcuts due to their expertise.
                  The findings from Study 1 led to the assumption that merely watching an expert solving a problem in
         her/his own    way may    not  be  exceptionally  useful  for novices.  Thus,  additional   instructions for experts  to
         "behave  in  a more   didactic manner",     are needed. This  procedure  has   shown  to  be  successful in  a different
         domain, namely writing processes of experts for novices (Jucks, Schulte-Löbbert, & Bromme, in press). In this
         field, even subtle manipulations lead to dramatic changes in experts' behavior. Additionally, attention direction
         may not be sufficient, as verbal data from the first study revealed. Directing the attention of novices to important
         parts of a  video  does   not necessarily   mean  that  relevant  schemata  will  be  activated. Therefore,   additional
         information   has  to  be offered   to  novices,  for  instance   by  providing   them   with additional  instructional
         explanations as will be done in Study 2.
                  In sum, up to now very little is known about the promising approach of supporting learners by means
         of EMM. Further research is needed in order to examine different presentation formats for gaze replays as well
         as different ways of offering additional verbal information that can be combined with gaze replays.

1-
References
Antes, J.R., & Kristjanson, A.F. (1991). Discriminating artists from nonartists by their eye-fixation patterns.
         Perceptual and Motor Skills, 73, 893-894.
Atkinson, R.K., Derry, S.J., Renkl, A., & Wortham, D. (2000). Learning from examples: Instructional principles
         from the worked examples research. Review of Educational Research, 70 (2), 181-214.
Bandura, A. (1997).  Behavior   theory  and the models   of man.  In J.M.  Notterman  (Eds.), The   evolution of
         psychology: Fifty years of the American Psychologist (pp. 154-172). Washington, DC, US: American
         Psychological Association.
Collins, A., Brown, J.S., & Newman, S.E. (1987). Cognitive Apprenticeship: Teaching the craft of reading,
         writing, and mathematics. In L.B. Resnick (Eds.), Knowing, learning, and instruction: Essays in honor
         of Robert Glaser (pp. 453-493). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
deGroot, A.D. (1978). Thought and choice in chess (2nd ed.). The Hague: Mouton.
Ericsson, K.A. & Simon, H.A. (1980). Verbal reports as data. Psychological Review, 87, 215-251.
Gerjets, P., Scheiter, K. & Catrambone, R. (2004). Designing instructional examples to reduce intrinsiccognitive
         load: Molar versus modular presentation of solution procedures. Instructional Science, 32, 33-58;
Haider, H. & French, P.A. (1999). Eye movement during skill acquisition: More evidence for the information-
         reduction hypothesis.  Journal of  Experimental  Psychology:  Learning, Memory,     and Cognition,  25,
         172-190.
Hoogveld, A.W.M., Paas, F., & Wim, M.G. (2005). Training higher education teachers for instructional design
         of competency-based education: Product-oriented versus process-oriented worked examples. Teaching
         and Teacher Education , 21 (3), 287-297.
Johnson, E.J. (1988). Expertise and decision under uncertainty: Performance and Process. In R. Glaser, M.J.
         Farr, & M.T.H. Chi (Eds.), The nature of expertise (pp. 209-228). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Jucks, R., Schulte-Löbbert, P., & Bromme, R. (in press). Supporting experts' written knowledge communication
         through reflective prompts on the use of specialist concepts. Journal of Psychology (to appear in an
         Special issue on Knowledge Communication edited by F.W. Hesse).
Moreno,  F.J., Reina,   R., Luis, V.,  &   Sabido, R.  (2002).  Visual search  strategies in  experienced   and
         inexperienced gymnastic coaches. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 95, 901-902.
Reimann, P. (1998).  Novizen   und  Exertenwissen.  In F. Klix  & H.  Spada  (Eds.), Wissen,  Enzyklopedie   der
         Psychologie, Serie II: Kognition, Themenbereich C: Theorie und Forschung (pp. 325-367). Göttingen:
         Hogrefe.
Schmidt, H.G.,  Norman,   G.R., &  Boshuizen,   H.P.A.  (1990). A cognitive perspective   on medical  expertise:
         theory and implications. Academic Medicine, 65, 611-621.
Sweller, J., Van Merrienboer, J.J.G., & Paas, F.G.W.C. (1998). Cognitive architecture and instructional design.
         Educational Psychology Review, 10, 251-296.
Van Gog,   T.   (2006).   Uncovering   the  problem-solving  process   to design effective   worked   examples.
         [Dissertation] Maastricht: Datawyse.
Van Gog,   T.,  Paas  F., &   Van  Merriënboer,  J.J.G.  (2005).  Uncovering  expertise-related  differences  in
         troubleshooting performance: Combining eye movement and concurrent verbal protocol data. Applied
         Cognitive Psychology, 19, 205-221.
Van Merrienboer, J. (2002). Observational learning from video-based export models in multimedia learning
         environments. [Online] http://www.ou.nl/Docs/Expertise/ OTEC/Projecten/onderzoeksvoorstellen%20
         PDF/ voorstel_36_pwo.pdf
Yarbus, A. (1967). Eye movements and vision. New York: Plenum Press.

Acknowledgments
The current study is part of a larger research project on "Resource-adaptive design of visualizations for supporting
the comprehension of complex dynamics in the Natural Sciences" funded by the German Leibniz-Gemeinschaft
(funding period: 2007-2009).

                                                                                                                      1-
