        Creating a Participatory Learning Environment in Large Lecture
                                  Classes Using Pen-Based Computing

                           Aditya Johri, Vinod K. Lohani, Engineering Education (0218), Virginia Tech,
                                 Blacksburg, VA, 24061, Email: ajohri@vt.edu, vlohani@vt.edu

                  Abstract: Although large lectures are a reality of formal learning organizations, particularly
                  in nation's research universities, limited research looks at how we can improve learning within
                  them.   Most  learning sciences    research focuses   on  small  or   medium   classes  or informal
                  learning leaving a gap in our understanding of learning related issues in large lectures. In this
                  paper   we present  a  theoretical investigation  of  the use   of pen-based   computing   in  large
                  lectures (>150 students). In particular, through this case study we examined how the combined
                  use of Tablet PCs and the interactive software DyKnow creates a learning environment that is
                  conducive  to  student participation  and   learning. We   argue   that these  technologies   enable
                  participation by facilitating creation,  sharing,   recording,  and   reflecting of representations.
                  Although the ideas presented in this paper are primarily theoretical, we do find supporting
                  evidence   through  in-class (N=100   to  250) and    online  surveys   (N =  525)  of  engineering
                  freshmen at Virginia Tech.

       Introduction
                  In spite of decades of research and theoretical ideas around situated learning (Lave & Wenger, 1990)
         and the benefits of apprenticeship based practices (Collins, Brown & Newman, 1989), the reality of education is
         still one of efficiency based on Taylorism. Students enter classrooms for a mandated time period and are taught
         specific topics `efficiently.' Most of us are a part of this reality at our institutions. Large lecture classes with
         several hundred students are especially popular in the introductory freshman year. For example, a freshman year
         engineering course "Engineering Exploration EngE1024" at Virginia Tech was taught in a 32-seat classroom
         until fall 2004 and beginning in spring 2005, the course format was changed to include a large lecture (150+
         students) followed by a hands-on workshop section (32 students) (Lo, et al., 2006). Given the large extent to
         which these classes are prevalent, there is surprising little research on learning in these classes. Furthermore,
         given the recent increase in the use of in-class technologies (Lohani, et al., 2007), we need to examine if current
         or future technologies can support learning in large lecture classes (for exceptions, see Dufresen et al. 1996;
         Kashy et al. 1999). In this paper, we present a theoretical foundation for understanding the role of pen-based
         technologies within large classes. Pen-based computing, which allows for digital inking and annotations, are
         increasingly  being used  in higher   education  (Roschelle,   et  al. 2007;  WIPTE    2007).  The  conceptual  ideas
         developed in the paper are supported by data from in-class (N=100 to 250) and online survey data collected by
         the authors from their students (N=525) in EngE1024, instructor notes, and digital artifacts collected from the
         students. The in-class survey data was collected during different lectures and therefore the sample size varies
         across items.

        The Context for the Study
                  The case study presented in this paper comes from an implementation of pen-based computing in a 2-
         credit freshman year engineering course ­ Engineering Exploration EngE1024 ­ at Virginia Tech. The course,
         offered by the Department of Engineering Education (EngE), includes general problem solving, engineering
         ethics, sketching, early design (including realization), graphing and simple analysis of graphs, flowcharting and
         introduction  to programming    concepts using   LabVIEW.      EngE    1024 is a required  course   of all engineering
         freshmen (~1300 each year). For our freshmen this is their first foray in college education. Course activities are
         targeted at  generating excitement    about  engineering   profession   and   cultivating  awareness   of  engineering
         practices among them In recent years, a number of hands-on activities have been designed and implemented in
         EngE1024 as a result of a NSF supported project (Lo, et al., 2006, Lohani et al., 2006, Mullin, et al., 2007).
         Current course delivery format includes a 50-min lecture led by an EngE faculty in a large classroom followed
         by a 90- min. hands-on workshop led by a graduate teaching assistant (GTA) every week.              Authors co-taught
         two large lectures (300 & 150 students) of EngE 1024 and supervised all GTAs in Fall 2007. As a result of a
         new computing initiative, all incoming freshmen were required to purchase a Tablet PC and we used the device
         and the  software   DyKnow     extensively  in the   lecture sections.   This  was  the   second year   of  Tablet PC
         implementation in engineering instruction at Virginia Tech (Lohani et al., 2007, 2008).

       Participatory Learning and Representations

1-
         We  conceive       of participation as becoming    engaged      with  a community    of practice.   Participation,
meaningful and guided (Cobb et al., 2001; Rogoff, 1990), is critical for learning. We believe that large classes
can be used to facilitate learning process that can be engaging and can help build learning communities for long
term gains. Therefore, in our conception of large lectures we focus our attention on how the use of pen-based
computing can help achieve that goal by acting as a critical "node" in a distributed activity system of large
lecture classes. The state of the research on the use of pen-based computing in large classes is limited to studies
of student assessment, grading, and successful implementations (see Besque, 2006). In short, most studies report
short-term  gains without      a careful understanding   of how    classes are   actually transformed  as  a      cognitive  or
activity system  as a result     of  these technologies.  The    primary  idea   underlying our  conception       of enabling
participation in large lectures is that "ability is part of the individual­environment transaction (Barab & Plucker,
2002)." Therefore, we realized that we need to put effort in the design of the environment, especially the role of
technology   in the environment,      since  technology   transforms   the system.    We  see students   engage      with   the
lectures as they  participate    by   co-constructing and co-interpreting   representations.  One  critical  element    of   a
distributed participatory system is the use of representations within the system. Representations can range from
any visual, textual and/or audio symbol that can be socially interpreted. In the context of our paper, we largely
conceive  of representations      as  semiotic means   employed     in   science and  mathematics,  and   particularly       in
engineering, such as equations, sketches, flowcharts, and graphs. Representations have been a strong focus of
research within the learning sciences and have played an especially strong role in our understanding of science
and mathematics practices (Danish & Enyedy, 2006; Greeno & Hall, 1997; Hall, 1996; Lee & Sherin, 2006;
Suthers & Hundhausen, 2001; Zhang, 1997). Empirically, most of the studies have looked interactional account
with a few participants ­ in this paper we try to look at them from the viewpoint of a large class. Norman (1993)
talks about cognitive artifacts and how representations make us intelligent; cognition and learning are primarily
the use of representations and thinking is with and through representations. Digital representations in software
such as DyKnow can reorganize learning by providing the affordance to co-create representations. They also
make it easier for people to share representations. One of the ways is to look at technology more holistically as a
part of the "sociomaterial" fabric (Orlikowski, 2007) that makes up an organization. In this sense, technology is
seen as  being  intrinsically    tied to the practices of the    organization.   Yet, not all technological       artifacts are
knowledge artifacts or are part of knowing. They may indirectly facilitate knowing (Barab & Roth, 2006) but
they become part of the cognitive system, we argue, by performing a critical role in the action by producing
representations that are engaged with knowing. They become part of an activity system or a cognitive system.
In figure 1 we provide a conceptual diagram of the process by which representations enable participation in
large lecture through the use of Tablet PCs and DyKnow. This figure serves as frame that forms the basis of the
discussion that follows. It is not meant to be exhaustive or represent a strict cyclical process. For instance, we
recognize that sharing might occur before creating, the basic idea is that the four activities of creating, sharing,
recording, and reflecting, are critical for learning within the activity system.
                                               representations by individuals and
                                               groups, shared/non-shared
                                               (co-construction)

         representations                                                                         instructor and
         browsed and                                                                             student; student-
         redrawn before                                                                          student
         exams or                                                                                (joint activity;
         assignments                                                                             common ground)
         (reinterpretation)

                                             representations available post-hoc
                                             (organization of knowledge)

                Figure 1. Enabling Participation in Large Classes through Pen-Based Computing.

The Technologies: Tablet PC and DyKnow
         The case study presented here relies on two primary technologies. The hardware required is a Tablet
PC and the software is DyKnow. In addition, the classroom environment should be able to support Internet

                                                                                                                                  1-
         connection for all students and the instructor(s) which is used to connect to the server that hosts the DyKnow
         application.

        Tablet PCs
                  Tablets    have  a    long history  in   the computing    field.   Alan  Kay     first conceived    of the   idea of
         "Dynabooks"   and    proposed    that they   will be  the first "metamedium"       for use  by   humans.    One  of the   first
         commercially available devices based on this concept was Apple's Newton which was introduced in 1993. And
         even though the Newton finally took the form of a PDA, and was not a commercial success, it proved that pen-
         based computing devices were feasible in terms of design. In the last 5 years there has been a surge in the
         availability of Tablet PCs and their use in educational settings (WIPTE, 2007), with a number of factors, not the
         least of which is   a   stable operating  system,  playing  a   part. Tablet   PCs are  unique    since  they combine    high
         computing power with direct pen-based input and unlike smaller devices, such as PDAs, they provide larger
         screen space as well. This combination provides users with the affordance (Norman, 1990) to engage in several
         design   activities such  as   sketching  and ideation    directly in  digital medium,    allowing   them    to easily store,
         manipulate, and share their creations. The ability to be able to manipulate and share creations digitally takes
         Tablets beyond what could be done with paper and pen, and people sitting around a table. In this study we will
         focus on one particular affordance of Tablets ­ the ability to create and share external representations.

        DyKnow Software
                  DyKnow      (www.dyknow.com)        is an interactive  software    that supports   collaborative    note-taking  and
         interaction  among    different  stakeholders     such as  students    and   instructors. DyKnow        uses  a client-server
         architecture where    different  computers    are  connected    to a  central  server  that `serves'    the  software  to  the
         subscribers. Once a user logs into the software they have different options based on the privileges associated
         with the account. Instructors have the permission to start and stop a session and can control most options such as
         looking at the list of participants, taking attendance, and being able to initiate chat. Student participants, on the
         other hand,  have    limited   privileges to initiate  interaction within   DyKnow     but  can   participate   by observing
         dynamic representations made by the instructor and making representations of their own. Overall, the primary
         control of the interaction rests with the instructor. Figure 2 gives a quick glance at the DyKnow interface. There
         are other software applications such as Microsoft OneNote, Classroom Presenter (Anderson et al., 2007), and
         GroupScribbles (Dimitriadis et al., 2007), available for the Tablet related applications,           but DyKnow software
         met our needs and resources of      supporting hundreds of users at the same time.

                                                     Figure 2. The DyKnow Interface.

       Enabling Participation by Supporting Representational Practices
                  As  discussed    previously,  we    conceptualize  the    use   of Tablets and   DyKnow        as a  way  to  enable
         participation by the creation, exchange, and use of representations within the class. These representations are
         crucial for any socio-cognitive system and for learning. In this section we look in-depth at how participation is
         supported.

        Creating Representations
                  One  of    the biggest  advantages   of  using DyKnow        on Tablet  PCs   is the   ability to be able  to create
         representations of different kinds on the panels (panels are slides or pages within DyKnow). The ability to create
         representation that can be viewed dynamically by students helps eliminate the need of a whiteboard in the class
         and makes it easier to reach and interact with hundreds of students. Through this technology, students can get
         the representations directly on their computer. In addition, DyKnow allows students to add to the representation
         presented by the instructor by creating their own representations. Students can add text or graphics to comments

1-00
made by their instructor on a particular panel. They can also take notes on a separate area about a panel. In this
way the students  become   participants and co-creators  in  process,  creating a common   foundation  (Alterman,
2007). The ability for self-expression and co-creation of a representation is critical for student participation and
learning (Suthers & Hundhausen, 2001). "As individuals or groups work on problems, they may make drawings,
write notes, or construct tables or equations. These representations help them keep track of ideas and inferences
they have made and also serve to organize their continuing work (Greeno & Hall, 1997; pages not numbered)."
Figure 3 shows an example of a representation of a "human hand system and its interacting components" created
by a student after students were instructed about use of a systems approach in engineering.

            Figure 3. Representation of a "human hand system" shared by a student in EngE1024

        The functionality to create representations is also supported in other ways through multiple kinds of
annotation and pen tools. For instance, the instructors can prepare panels in advance by writing on them with a
purple ink which is only visible to the instructor even when the panel is shared. By doing this the instructor can
create elaborations on the panels but ask students to participate, by creating their representations and writing,
rather than doing all the work for the students. Participants can use different colored inks for differentiating
among the representations they are making. Instructors can use a flicker tool to highlight certain area within the
panels and draw   the attention of the  students. Of  course, there is a functionality to highlight and  erase the
writing. Free hand annotation which allows for free hand sketching makes the creation of representations easier,
flexible, similar to what students are used to using pen and paper. Our in-class survey results show that the
majority of students (70%, N=163) either "agree" or "strongly agree" with the statement that they like the ability
to write on the panels. The students also like that the instructors can write on the panels (57%, N=75).

Sharing Representations
        In addition   to creation, one  of the   primary participatory processes  is the  exchange  or sharing  of
representations among the members of a group or community. Within DyKnow the representations made by the
instructor are of course shared with the students. But more than that, the representations made by the students
can be shared with the instructor and with other students as well. Through the "Panel Management" function,
DyKnow allows the instructor to pull panels from students. The instructor can pull the panels for a particular
student (using their user-id as identification) or anonymously. In addition, the panels can be pulled randomly
from among the class. These can be previewed and the instructor can then share them with the rest of the class.
This function creates visibility among the participants. In our class we used this functionality in several ways.
We provided different kinds of panels ­ blank, partially filled ­ to the students and asked them to draw some
representation on the panel. We then used the panel management functionality and shared the panels with the
class. As an example, a student's representation of a "hand system" and its components, as shown in figure 6,
was shared by authors    with the  entire  class  to further emphasize   the importance   of systems approach   in
engineering. The answers or ideas provided by students ranged from nothing to very substantial representations.
Initially we were hesitant to share panels that did not have anything on them or had very little but a comment
during office hours from a student convinced us that this was the right thing. The student said that seeing such
panels made him realize that he was not the only one that did not get it, there were others as well and made him
feel like there were other participants like him and that he could do it. Therefore, we realized that just showing
selected panels that were `really good' might have adverse effect in that students might feel threatened. The
students were engaged and we tried to do this as often as possible ­ every 10 minutes or so ­ to keep the
students engaged.

                                                                                                                       1-01
                 In  addition to  the    panels  and    representations   on  panels,  DyKnow      also  supports  additional
         representations that can be shared. DyKnow has a polling functionality where students can be polled and these
         results can be shared back with the students. In our class we used this in several different ways. One was to
         gauge the opinion of students, to get feedback about the class and the software, and to quiz them on multiple
         choice questions. Another representation allows the students to display to the instructor their status ­ how well
         they do or do not understand what is being taught. This shows up on the instructors screen as a pie chart with
         different colors and different colors for each student as well. This increases awareness and visibility within the
         activity system making it easier for the instructor to repeat a certain idea or example. One of the advantages of
         in-class exchanges is the number of responses, signifying interactions, which we can get from students. When
         we asked students to submit panels we got responses from all of them and then we could share back some of the
         panels with them. The   ability to provide   a public forum   for  individual effort (Wolfam,   2002) is  one of the
         advantages of large classes and we are able to do that. This was also true for features such as "polling" and
         "voting." In our in-class survey, 50% (N=110) of the students either "agreed" or "strongly agreed" with the
         statement that they "like the sharing of panels in class." Figure 4 below shows DyKnow in use for previewing
         student panels and collecting them for sharing with the class. On the left is the list of student from whom the
         panels have been  selected  for previewing.    Figure 5   shows  a panel  where  one  of  authors is teaching linear
         regression concepts by drawing representations on the panel. On the right is the status panel where the red color
         represents the students who selected "I do not understand" on the status indicator. In this example, it can be seen
         that a good number   of students   indicated their inability  to understand  linear regression  concepts which   was
         addressed  by reviewing  the key   concepts    again. Therefore,   sharing  representations aided  in developing  a
         formative assessment based instruction.

         Figure 4. Previewing  and   Collecting Student     Panels  Figure 5. Lecture Slides (Left), Explaining a Formula
         and Looking at Participants                                (Center) & Student Feedback (Right)

        Recording Representations
                 Another   affordance of    DyKnow      is the ability to   create a permanent    record of   the panels  and
         representations. This works both statically and dynamically. As panels are passed from the instructor to the
         students they have the record of representations drawn by the instructor as well as what they drew themselves.
         They can later return to these panels and even `play' them in the manner in which they were passed and drawn
         upon in the class. Recordings serve as organizational memory as well as provide a basis for building something
         on top of it. Unlike the process where something was written on the white board and then erased there are
         records here. Also, there is a transformation where rather than students copying what was on the board they get
         most of it and then can build on top of it. The presence of representations makes it possible for observational
         learning but also to be able to participate later on, more like a lurker. Representations can be used later to write
         upon and re-interpret. The recording of representations allows us to extend the learning environment beyond the
         lecture, as is usually the case. We forget that students' lives do not stop after the lecture and they participate in a
         number  of  networks of  events    and these   representations   often   become a   part of their conversation   and
         interaction. Therefore, they are essential for organizing their knowledge and in the long term for building an
         organizational memory. In our survey students reported that they used the recordings of the lectures and the
         representations created therein to review for exams and for homework. Although some students reported that
         they used the recordings frequently (11%, N=12), most of the students said that they used them on a "need to
         know" basis (41%, N=43).

        Reflecting on Representations
                 The recorded representations provide the opportunity to be able to reflect on the artifact, reinterpret,
         and  review it. Therefore,  the  participatory    environment    created by the technology   enables  and  supports

1-0
reflection which leads  to  understanding, "People      use representations    to aid understanding    when  they  are
reflecting on an activity or working on a problem (Greeno & Hall, 1997)." This process sometimes occurs in the
classroom  when  a previously  produced   artifact is reviewed   in class   in the following  lecture. There is more
writing and  discussion around  it and  reflection on   what it is. But  the   reflecting occurs primarily outside of
classroom. Students bring up the panels and review them before exams. Of course, the process of reflection is
indirectly, or directly, present in the creation of artifacts that follow. Whether in exam, as part of an assignment,
or as a design product, the understanding that students derive is reflected later on. In practice, as students take
the follow-up courses that build on this course they use many of the concepts that they learn here. Therefore the
process of reflection is the key to learning. An an example, below is an email received by one of the authors
from a  student  during  final exam   period   in  fall 2007  that   illustrates  use of  sharing and   reflection on
representations by a group students in authors' class for EngE1024 final exam preparation.

        Hi Dr Lohani,
                   This is the study guide that my friends and I built. We called each other then I sent out an
        email. We all logged in. We picked topics. Then we started filling it all in. Taking turns helping each
        other and chatting with our writing function at the same time as we were typing. As promised I'm
        attaching a copy of this file. Thanks!

        Another aspect of reflection is formative assessment in the class. According to Angelo & Cross (1993),
classroom   assessment  is an  ongoing  process    and  by  employing    short    and simple  assessment   techniques
instructors can get feedback and in turn provide students with feedback on the results of the assessment and
suggestions for improving learning. DyKnow proved to be an efficient tool to incorporate formative assessment
into instruction. An example is presented below from a lesson on flowcharting. Traditionally, the instructors
used to describe the flowcharting process by developing an incomplete flowchart. This year due to incorporation
of DyKnow, we decided to share a blank panel with all students and asked them to draw the flowchart on their
own for a given problem. This problem was discussed before giving this in-class assignment and involved use of
sequential and decision control structures. It may be noted that students were assigned to read a flowcharting
document before coming to this lesson. We collected some panels randomly after about 5 minutes and started
projecting collected panels on a large screen through a projector. The first panel shared with the class, work
submitted by one of the students, is shown in figure 6. Since the panel did not show any significant amount of
work, the author, feeling that it would embarrass the student, although unknown to class, who submitted the
work, quickly changed to another panel that showed a reasonable effort (see figure 7) and discussed various
elements of the flowchart that were right or wrong or missing. This was the first day the author experienced the
instant advantage of collecting students' work through panels and has implemented this strategy since then to
cover a number of other aspects of the course. Students were thoroughly assured that the work is being collected
anonymously and their submissions would in no way affect their course grade. Since students did not have the
option to prevent their panel from collection, they were encouraged to participate in the class activity which was
found very helpful in a large class. After one of the lectures on flowcharting a student stopped by the second
author's office and admitted feeling very good after seeing the first panel, see figure 6 again, and thinking that
he's not the only one who's lost in the class. Ever since that discussion, we have started using all panels for
discussing students' work or prior knowledge.

Figure 6. Student panel showing flowchart work              Figure 7. Student panel showing flowchart work

Conclusion
        Recent   technological advances   are  making    it possible to  transform    experiences within   classrooms
through the use of devices with new affordances as well as replication of prior affordances in digital forms.
These technologies and their application bring to light many learning sciences theories and how they can be
conceived.  As can be   seen from  this preliminary   account   of  the use of   pen-based  computing  hardware    and
software there is a possibility and an opportunity to transform large lecture classes to make them more inclusive
and participatory. Our account of the use of Tablets and DyKnow is different than previous accounts of using

                                                                                                                         1-0
         technology in large classes. We're uniquely qualified to examine role of technology in developing feedback
         instruction system to enhance learning experiences of students in large classes. To our knowledge ours is the
         largest engineering program in the country that requires its students to own a Tablet PC. Together, Tablets and
         DyKnow have the ability to create, share, record, and reflect on       different kinds of representations and give
         students a  chance to  express   themselves  and engage   in the lectures.  If we consider  the  class as   a cognitive
         system, then the tools available for use within the class re-arrange cognition and learning.     Large lecture classes
         have their limitations in terms of engaging students and the individual attention. One major limitation is the use
         of gestures and facial expressions to advance communication and encourage joint activity. Common ground and
         mutual knowledge are hard to ascertain and establish. The use of these technologies helps us overcome some of
         these disadvantages. When asked in an exit survey (N=525) if the use of technologies in the class "effectively
         contributed" to  their learning, 148   (28%)  students responded   "Strongly   agree"  and  242  (45%)   students   said
         "Agree." 69 (13%) students were "Neutral", 58 (11%) "Disagree," and 19 (4%) marked "Strongly disagree."
         Therefore,  the overall   response  to the use of technology    was  quite  positive. The   results were  similar   to a
         question about DyKnow, "The DyKnow software has been successful in making the classroom environment
         interactive and  conducive   to  learning:"  Strongly  Agree  70   (13%),  Agree  251   (47%),   Neutral   124  (23%),
         Disagree 62 (12%), and Strongly Disagree 28 (5%). In the same survey the student were asked for open-ended
         responses to "usefulness of Tablet PCs for in-class activities)," several responses pointed out the usefulness of
         DyKnow, especially the ability to work with representations:
         x  "I liked that we could make our own notes on the Dyknow program during lecture."
         x  "Being interactive and allowing us to draw things that needed to be drawn and just give a different feel to
            the ordinary class lecture"
         x  "DyKnow, being able to add my own input/notes to the slides, having all my notes in one place, drawing
            designs"
         x   "DyKnow was especially useful on the tablets because we could interact by writing or ideas and thoughts
            out on the tablet. It was easy organize notes in class using OneNote, it helped to be able to write directly on
            the slides used in the lecture."
         x  "DyKnow      made   it easier to follow  a professor's lecture, draw   right onto  the  program   using  your  notes
            without all the paper mess"
         x  "The questions that we were to answer or illustrate an answer for & then were shown to the class-- keeps
            people engaged during class"
         x   "I thought the tablet was very useful when the instructor was trying to draw what his point was.          The good
            part about having a tablet and DyKnow was that we got to keep a copy and go back to it if we were confused."
                  The  theoretical  and  conceptual  understanding   we  have  built in  this  paper will guide  future  design
         iterations of the class and the data collection. In future studies we will focus on two different affordances of the
         Tablet PC: 1) Digital inking and annotations ­ being able to sketch, manipulate the sketch, take notes, activities
         typically performed by an individual, and 2) the affordance to be able to share the representations with others
         either via the digital means such as DyKnow. In particular, we want to assess students' use of Tablet PCs for
         sharing and interacting. Anecdotal evidence from informal observations suggests that although students highly
         appreciate the digital-ink feature and being able to annotate, the use of Tablet's collaboration features among
         students is limited. Previous studies show that even within large lectures small group exercises can be used
         successfully (McKinney     &   Graham-Buxton,    1993).   We  also plan to  collect   focus group   data  to  learn the
         "reflection" process and the use of representations beyond their creation and sharing in the classroom.

       References
         Alterman, R. (2007). Representations, Interaction, and Intersubjectivity, Cognitive Science, 31, 815-841.
         Anderson,   R., Anderson,   R.,  Davis, P.,  Linnell, N., Prince,C., Razmov,    V.,   Videon, F.,   (2007). Classroom
                  Presenter: Enhancing Interactive Education with Digital Ink, IEEE Computer, Sept. 2007, 56-61.
         Angelo, T. A. and Cross, P. K. (1993). Classroom Assessment Techniques: A Handbook for College Teachers,
                  2nd Ed., Jossey-Bass Publishers, San Francisco.
         Barab, S. & Wolff-Michael, R. (2006). Curriculum-Based Ecosystems: Supporting Knowing from an Ecological
                  Perspective. Educational Researcher, Vol. 35, No. 5, 3-13.
         Barab, S. & Plucker, J. (2002). Smart People or Smart Contexts? Cognition, Ability, and Talent Development in
                  an Age of Situated Approaches to Knowing and Learning. Educational Psychologist, 37(3), 165-182.
         Barron,  B.  (2000). Achieving    Coordination   in Collaborative   Problem-Solving    Groups.   The   Journal   of the
                  Learning Sciences, Vol. 9, No. 4 (2000), 403-436.
         Berque, D. A., Prey, J., and Reed, R. H. (eds) (2006). The Impact of Tablet PCs and Pen-based Technology on
                  Education, Purdue Univ. Press.
         Cobb, P.,   Stephan, M.,   McClain,    K., &  Gravemeijer,   K. (2001). Participating   in  Classroom  Mathematical
                  Practices. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 10, 113-163.
         Collins, A., Brown, J. & Newman, S. (1989). Cognitive Apprenticeship: Teaching the Crafts of Reading,

1-0
Writing,  and Mathematics.    In L.B.  Resnick  (Ed.).   Knowing,  Learning   and Instruction:  Essays in Honor   of
          Robert Glaser. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. 453-494.
Danish,  J. & Enyedy,   N.  (2006). Unpacking    the    Mediation of Invented Representations.  Proceedings   of the
          Seventh International Conference on the Learning Sciences, Bloomington, IN, 113-119.
Dimitriadis, Y., Asensio, J.I., Hernandez, D., Roschelle, J., Brecht, J., Tatar, D., Chaudhury, S., DiGiano, C., &
Patton, C. (2007). From socially-mediated to technology-mediated coordination: A study of design tensions using
          Group Scribbles. Proceedings of Computer Supported Collaborative Learning Conference, CSCL 2007.
Dufresen, R. Gerace, W. Leonard, W., Mestre, J. & Wenk, L. (1996). Classtalk: A Classroom Communication
          System for Active Learning. Journal of Computing in Higher Education, 7, 3-47.
Greeno, J. & Hall, R. (1997). Practicing Representation Learning with and About Representational Forms. Phi
          Delta Kappan. http://www.pdkintl.org/kappan/k9701gre.htm
Hall, R.    (1996). Representation   as   Shared    Activity: Situated  Cognition  and   Dewey's   Cartography    of
          Experience.The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 5(3), 209-238.
Kashy M., Tsao, Y., & Davis, N. (1999). Impact of Asynchronous Learning Networks in Large Lecture Classes.
          Group Decision and Negotiations.
Norman, D. (1993). Things That Make Us Smart: Defending Human Attribute in the Age of the Machine. Basic
          Books, NY.
Norman, D. (1990). The Design of Everyday Things. Basic Books.
Lave, J. & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge: Cambridge
          University Press.
Lee, V. & Sherin. B. (2006). Beyond Transparency: How Students Make Representations Meaningful. Proceedings of
          the Seventh International Conference on the Learning Sciences, Bloomington, IN, 397-403.
Lo, J.L., Lohani,   V.K.  and Griffin, Jr.,  O.H.,  (2006). Full  Implementation  of a New    Format for  Freshmen
          Engineering Course, Proceedings of the 2006 ASEE Annual Conference and Exposition, Chicago, IL,
          June 18-21, 2006.
Lohani, V. K., Castles, R., Spangler, D., Johri, A., and Kibler, D., (2008). Analysis of Tablet PC Based Learning
          Experiences in Freshman to Junior Level Engineering Courses, Paper Accepted for 2008 ASEE Annual
          Conference, June 22-25, 2008, Pittsburgh.
Lohani,  V.  K., Castles, R., Lo,  J., and   Griffin. H.  (2007). Tablet PC   Application  in a Large  Engineering
          Program, Proceedings of the 2006 American Society for Engineering Education Annual Conference
          and Exposition, Chicago, IL, June 18-21, 2006.
Lohani,   V.K.,  Kachroo,   P.,  Chandrachood,      S., Zephirin,  T.  Loganathan,   G.V.,  and  Lo,   J.L., (2006).
          Mechatronics   Experiment    in  a Freshman     Year  Course,  Proceedings   of  the  2006   International
          Conference on Engineering Education, Puerto Rico, July 23-28, 2006.
McKinney, K. & Graham-Buxton, M. (1993). The Use of Collaborative Learning Groups in the Large Class: Is
          it possible? Teaching Sociology, 21(4), 403-408.
Mullin, J., Jinsoo, K., and Lohani, V. K., (2007). Sustainable Energy Design Projects for Engineering Freshmen,
          Proceedings of the 2007 ASEE Annual Conference and Exposition, Honolulu, HI, June 24-27, 2007.
Orlikowski, W. (2007). Sociomaterial Practices: Exploring Technology at Work. Organization Studies, 28(09):
          1435-1448.
Rogoff,  B. (1990).  Apprenticeship    in thinking: Cognitive  development  in  social context. New  York:   Oxford
          University Press.
Roschelle, J., Tatar, D., Chaudhury, S. R., Dimitriadis, Y., Patton, C., & DiGiano, C. (2007). Ink, improvisation,
          and interactive engagement: Learning with tablets. Computer, 40(9), 38-44.
Suthers, D. & Hundhausen, C. (2001). Learning by Constructing Collaborative Representations. An Empirical
          Comparison of Three Alternatives. Proceedings of EuroCSCL.
Weaver, B. (2006). Student Minds and Pen Technologies: A Wonderful Pedagogical Marriage. In The Impact of
          Tablet PCs and Pen-based Technology on Education, Purdue Univ. Press, Indiana, 13-20.
Wenger, E., White, N. Smith, J. & Rowe, K. (2005). Technology for Communities. CEFRIO Book Chapter,
          http://technologyforcommunities.com/CEFRIO_Book_Chapter_v_5.2.pdf (Last accessed 11/18/07).
WIPTE (2007). Workshop on the Impact of Pen-Based Technology on Education. Purdue University.
Wolfam, S. (2002). Making Lemonade: Exploring the Bright Side of Large Lecture Classes. In Proceedings of the
          33rd SIGCSE Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education.
Zhang, J. (1997). The Nature of External Representations in Problem Solving. Cognitive Science, 21/2: 179-217.

Acknowledgments
We are grateful for the support of EngE1024 faculty and workshop instructors and sincerely thank Dr. Glenda
Scales,  Associate   Dean,  College    of  Engineering   and   Hayden  Griffin, Head    of Engineering    Education
Department for initiating and supporting the Tablet PC initiative. We would also like to acknowledge funding
support from NSF (DLR grant # 0431779). We appreciate the feedback provided by our students.

                                                                                                                       1-0
