                        Th!nklets for mathematics education. Re-using computer
                            games characteristics in educational software

                                 Vincent Jonker, Monica Wijers, Utrecht University, Freudenthal Institute
                                                Email: v.jonker@fi.uu.nl, m.wijers@fi.uu.nl

                  Abstract:   Computer   games   are   engaging    activities for a  growing  number    of  children.
                  Technology,    especially   computers and   the  internet,   have rapidly  become    more  widely
                  available in educational settings as well as at home. Mathematics, not always an engaging
                  subject for elementary and middle schools students, can be made more engaging by designing
                  challenging tasks that are meaningful for children in which they actively participate. Also,
                  using computers in math education contributes to students' motivation and engagement. This
                  paper reports on a study focused on the contribution of playing so-called "Th!nklets" on doing
                  and   learning mathematics.   "Th!nklets"   are   interactive   computer  activities that involve
                  mathematical thinking and problem solving. Some findings from the analysis of the online use
                  of the Th!nklet `Share Money' by 600 Dutch children age 10-12 are presented.

       Objectives
                  Computer games nowadays are omnipresent and very popular. Not only young people play them, but
         the target group is expanding for example with respect to gender and age. Computer games are very diverse: on
         the one end of the spectrum we see large open virtual worlds like Habbo Hotel, World of Warcraft or Second
         Life, on the other end we see small puzzle like games like Bejeweld, Brain Training and Add like Mad.
                  Children aged 8-12 are a growing audience for commercial game-sites like www.addictinggames.com
         and educational game-sites, like www.thinklets.nl for mathematical games, and of course the growing mobile
         possibilities of Sony PSP, Nintendo DS and the mobile (smart) phone. On those sites (and on those mobile
         devices) children  play a variety  of mostly  small  puzzle like   games.  Prensky (2005)  refers  to these  as mini-
         games. Playing together this kind of mini-games (educational or not), talking about which games they like, how
         good they are etc. is part of the culture of children (Gee, 2003).
                  It is beyond   doubt that   playing games   is a motivating   and  engaging activity. Most   educators  and
         designers agree that playing games can also support learning in general, and contribute to specific skills and
         subjects in particular. A number of game studies have examined the relationship between games and education
         (Squire, 2003; Squires & Preece, 1999; Kirriemuir & McFarlane, 2004; Sanford & Williamson, 2005). It is a
         challenge to find out and understand how to use and/or design games that are engaging for kids and at the same
         time offer challenging, valuable learning opportunities.
                  Some studies have specifically focused on mathematics education (Terc 1998; Hoyles & Noss              2003;
         Jonker & van Galen 2004; Alexopoulou 2006; Wijers & Jonker 2005). For mathematics education a central
         question is: Can playing games contribute to the learning of mathematics?
                  This  paper reports  on   a research  study that  aims  to   answer this question focused    on the  use of
         Th!nklets,  online mathematical    mini-games,  by  kids  aged 8-12,   both  in unsupervised   settings (at home,  at
         school) as well as in supervised (math at school) settings. Sub questions are:
            x     Which characteristics of    Th!nklets motivate and engage kids to play?
            x     Which characteristics contribute to a learning-gain?
            x     How can the learning experiences with Th!nklets be successfully exploited in math education?
                  The start of the research focuses on the first two subquestions: what characteristics make Th!nklets
         engaging and how can we assess what students learn from playing Th!nklets in informal unsupervised sessions,
         without interfering in the free-play setting? In this paper we will focus on the Th!nklet `Share Money', a mini-
         game that is part of the Th!nklet collection (that currently comprises around 70 mathematical games for age
         group 10-12).

1-0
Task 2 of `Share Money'     with Euro coins                     Task 4 of `Share Money' with Fantasy coins

  Figure 1. Interface of the Th!nklet `Share Money' with two examples of coin-sets (`Euro' and `Fantasy').

        This Th!nklet `Share Money' (Figure 1) is designed to support money math (basic skills like counting,
addition, subtraction, multiplication and division). The coins at the top must be dragged to one of nine `boxes' in
the middle and the task is to distribute the coins in a 'fair way'. This means that in the end each box has an equal
amount of money, not an equal number of coins, a mistake that           is made by some children. Four different tasks
are presented in the course of one month- every week a new task -. For each task a different sets of coins is used.
The final task (task 4) differs from the first three, because instead of the Euro coins with known values a set of
`non-Euro' coins are used with subsequent values from 1 tot 9. When a task is finished, the player clicks `OK'
and if the solution   is correct  a 9-letter word   will appear.   This word  is the 'solution' that can  be   sent to  the
Th!nklets website. Children that send in four correct solutions can win the prize of that month.

Theoretical framework
        The     first part  of  the  theoretical framework      is based   on research     into design   principles    and
characteristics of 'good'   games.  In recent  years, researchers   have  begun    looking  at the  educational   value of
computer games, conducting research, for example, on the ways in which computer games can expand learning
opportunities both in and out of school. An important aspect of the educational value of            games is motivation,
which  depends   for  a  large part on the   `flow' the  player  experiences  in   the game (Csikszentmihalyi, 1990;
Overmars, 2003). The research has also contributed to our understanding of learning and design principles of
good games   (Gee,    2003,  2004;  Squire,  2003).   A difficult aspect of gaming is that the learning often stays
invisible and is implicit (Leemkuil & de Hoog, 2005). One of the challenges in this research is to find ways to
make the learning visible and explicit.
        The second component of the theoretical framework consists of domain-specific theory on the learning
and teaching of mathematics. In Realistic Mathematics Education - RME - it is important that children actively
participate in the learning process (Freudenthal 1973, Gravemeijer, 1994). Other RME principles are interaction
and making  use    of  students own  productions    and  constructions.  The  Th!nklets  website,   that offers   informal
mathematical    challenges   with game-like   features,  reflects  the  didactical principles   of  realistic mathematics
education  (Jonker    &  van Galen,  2004).  In  general   Th!nklets are  designed  to support  children   in  developing
mathematical understanding (Drijvers & Gravemeijer, 2004; Jonker & Van Galen, 2004). Th!nklets provide an
interactive environment in which children can work actively on their own level and           can construct and produce
ideas that raise their level of mathematical understanding.
        These two      theoretical perspectives both stress the importance and influence of specific characteristics
of learning environments and of tasks in order to make learning possible.

Methodology
        The  research    as  a whole   can be  seen as   a cyclic  design study  (or design    experiment)    with several
phases. One  of  the    main characteristics  of this type  of  developmental      research is  the strong    and constant
interaction between theory and practice (Gravemeijer, 2004). Generating theoretical knowledge, for example on
design principles for Th!nklets and on how students learn using Th!nklets in informal settings, and developing
practical materials such as Th!nklets and a tracking system for research and educational use, are both ingredients
of this type of research.
        The objective of the research is to understand both the motivational aspects as well as the aspects of
mathematical learning involved when playing Th!nklets. We aim to find out what children like and don't like
about the design, interface and `content', what keeps them engaged, and finally what they actually do when
playing Th!nklets. Three instruments are used to gather data:

                                                                                                                              1-0
            1.  Statistics of the online-behavior. How long do children stay on the website of Th!nklets? At what time
                do they come to the website (during school time, during after school club time, prior to going to bed,
                etc.).
            2.  Online survey connected to the Th!nklet `Share Money' with questions like:
                a.  Did you play the game at home? At other locations?
                b.  With whom did you play?
                c.  Did you like the game? why/why not?
            Previous research on the use of  Th!nklets (Jonker and Van Galen 2004) learns that children do like to fill in
            an online survey after finishing a task. It takes only 1 or 2 minutes to answer the questions. Answers are
            registered automatically.
            3.  A tracking system to record what children actually do when playing with the Th!nklet `Share Money'.
                This tracking system makes it possible to play back the actual behavior of the child and thus gives
                insight in the problem solving strategy. The tracking system registers every mouse click of the student
                with the following parameters (Figure 2):

                time stamp                  a value in seconds, counted from the start of the session
                value of the coin           which coin is clicked and what is the value of the coin
                x and y position            position of the coin after being moved by the mouse
                       Figure 2. The parameters of the subsequent mouse click events as part of the tracking system.

                Data analysis is done both in a quantitative way (on the data gathered for all three instruments) and in a
         qualitative way for a set of data gathered by the tracking system. Conclusions will be drawn from the analysis of
         data from those three instruments.

       Results
         1. Statistics on online behavior of users of the Th!nklets website

                                      Figure 3. Screenshot Th!nklets online page www.thinklets.nl.

                Although Th!nklets (Figure 3) are primarily developed for educational purposes (with an important role
         for teachers to introduce the software and guide the children while playing and learning), the web statistics log
         file of the Th!nklets web page make clear that children do play those games at home as well. The bar graph
         (Figure 4) shows peaks at 4 PM (when children come home from school) and 7 PM (after dinner). Apparently
         the mini-games are part of their gaming-culture (Kafai, 2002).

                Figure 4. Statistics of the Th!nklets web page (number of visitors each hour of the day) from November
                                                      1 to 18, 2007 (1).

1-0
2. Online survey
       By clicking `Send' (see Figure 1) the online survey (for collecting facts about the players of the game
and the setting in which they play) is presented with the following questions:
   1.  What is the 9-letter word?
   2.  I experienced the mini-game to be: (very difficult, difficult, normal, easy, very easy)
   3.  Did you like to play this mini-game? (yes/no, why)
   4.  With whom did you play this mini-game (alone/with a friend/with parents/with teacher)
   5.  Where did you play this game? (at home/ at school / other)
   6.  You are a (boy/girl). Age.
We will present the outcomes of the survey question by question. The population consisted of 638 children.

Question 1 ­ What is the 9-letter word?
   x   On task 1 (with Euro's) 455 out of 638 answers (more than 70%) present the right 9-letter word.
   x   On task 4 (with fantasy coins) 16 out of 41 answers (39 %) give the right 9-letter word. This task is
       more complex than all other previous tasks.

Question 2 - I experienced the mini-game to be (very difficult, difficult, normal, easy, very easy).

               Figure 5. Outcomes on Question 2 for task 1 (the Euro-task) in percentages (n=638).

Question 3 ­ Did you like to play this mini-games (yes/no)?

         Figure 6. Outcomes on Question 3 for task (`opgave') 1 and 4 in percentages (task 1: n=638; task 4:
                                                   n=41).

Question 4 ­ With whom did you play this mini-game (alone/with a friend/with parents/with teacher)

                     Figure 7. Outcomes on Question 4 for task 1 in percentages (n=638) .

Question 5 - Where did you play this game? (at home/ at school / other)

                                                                                                                  1-0
                                                                            Figure 8. Outcomes on Question 5 for task 1 in percentages (n=638) .

         Question 6 ­ You are a boy/girl. Age.

                                                From task 1 we find an average age of 10.8 years, where 37% is a boy and 62% is a girl. The average
         age of about 11 years old fits into the Th!nklets web page philosophy. Most mini-games are intentionally meant
         for                          grades        5-6   (in    the     Dutch        system       `group'          7     and  8, this                     equals     age      group       10-12).        The       ratio      boy-girl       is
         influenced by a greater willingness among girls to fill in the online survey (Jonker and Van Galen, 2004).

         3 Analysis of childrens behavior on the Th!nklet `Share Money'
                                                In order to be able to find out if playing has an effect on learning we want to know in detail what
         children do. The tracking system recorded the following variables (as stated in the Methodology part): 1) time
         stamp: a value in seconds, counted from the start of the session; 2) value of the coin: which coin is clicked and
         what is the value of the coin and 3) x and y position: position of the coin after being moved by the mouse. The
         data set of the subsequent mouse clicks during one session can be used as input for the `Share Money Analyzer'
         where the researcher can replay the played sesson.

        Qualitative analysis - task 4
                                                Since it is possible to play back each session a qualitative analysis is possible. We did this for task 4 in
         the Th!nklet                                  `Share Money'. This is the most difficult problem for which a straightforward strategy of dividing
         the coins in order of their value does not work. An extra effort is needed to finally make combinations that will
         work.
                                                We analysed 41 solutions, 25 of which were incorrect and 16 correct. If we look at the time on task
         related to the result (correct or incorrect) we see the following pattern.

                                                         Duration per session (incorrect result)                                                                           Duration per session (correct result)

                                      45                                                                                                                45

                                      40                                                                                                                40

                                      35                                                                                                                35

                                      30                                                                                                                30

                                      25                                                                                                                25
                                      20                                                                                                                20

                                      15                                                                                                                15

                                      10                                                                                                                10
                                       5                                                                                                                 5

                                       0                                                                                                                 0
                                           1  2   3  4  5   6  7  8   9  10 11 12  13 14 15  16 17 18  19 20 21  22 23 24  25                                 1    2    3    4     5    6    7    8    9    10   11   12    13   14   15   16
                                                                              casenumber                                                                                                       casenumber

                                                                                                Figure 9. Duration per session on task 4 (n=41).

                                                For incorrect results the duration is shorter: average around 4 minutes,                                                                  for correct results the average is
         about 10 minutes, (8 minutes without the online survey part). It is interesting to see what actually happened in
         the longest session with an incorrect result an the shortest session with a correct result.
                                                Analysis longest - incorrect - solution
                                                When analysing this solution (no.25 in the left graph of Figure 11) step by step, it turned out that in this
         session after about 5 minutes a correct solution was found. This was not acknowledged by clicking `OK'. The
         process of sharing money continues and several times during this process another correct solution is found, but
         the                          result        is never     submitted.           There        are    some      long      breaks                    in  the      process,        the  longest        one    lasted         for  over      3
         minutes. In the end all coins are removed from the playing field and are back in their starting position. Only at
         that time (after about 20 minutes) the anonymous player clicked the button `OK'. In the online survey the only
         filled in field showed that the player thought the activity to be `hard' (5); further we know when it was send: a
         Saturday                               morning          at     11:15.    Since         no    other     information       was                      provided        on   the       form      we    can   only      guess          what

1-10
                      duration (min.)
                                                                                                                                        duration (min.)
happened: maybe a teacher was preparing the use of the Th!nklet in class by trying out several solution methods,
maybe a group of children was playing together taking turns.
       Analysis of shortest - correct - solution
       The whole solution process of this session took a little over 3 minutes, 49 steps were needed. It was a
clear concise process of dividing the coins systematically over the nine field on the playing board. There are no
very long breaks in this process, the longest one took 13 seconds     the next longest 9. All other actions follow
each other mostly within 3 seconds.
       Player starts by dividing the three coins with the highest value i.e. 9, and then makes 9 in the other six
fields as well (left picture of Figure 10). Then a mistake was made: player starts adding another total of 9 to
each field, after two fields the mistake was discovered and the coins were removed. Now a total of 10 is created
in each field by moving the coins with values 1 and 2 in the playing board one row up (middle picture of Figure
10). After a break of 13 seconds the last row is filled, by adding the coins with value `3'. Then after a pause of 9
seconds the other coins are distributed: the 6-es are added to the 9-s in the first row and the ones are moved
within the playing field to the bottom row, so that finally each filed has a total value of 15 (picture on the right
of Figure 10).

                     Figure 10. Subsequent situations of the shortest ­ correct ­ solution analysed.

       Other information: player is a girl aged 11 who is playing alone, she thinks it is fun, scores difficulty
medium and writes: it is fun because it is `not too easy'.
       We    can conclude from  the  playback    of sessions   that we may need to include  more   variables in a
detailed quantitative analysis. For example we could use the time between each two actions to detect pauses.
Pauses may be used for thinking or calculating. One example of a thinking pause is found in the solution of a
boy of 10 who finds it pretty hard but fun. The boy starts by distributing coins with value 1 and 2, then after
some thought he removes the coins (45 seconds have passed).       Now for 2 and a half minutes nothing happens.
Then in about a minute a fully correct solution is laid out. This solution: found by thinking or calculating differs
from solutions found by just moving coins in that it does not show a regular pattern (Figure 11):

  solution found by shuffling coins (used mostly)            Solution found with long pause by the 10 year old boy
                                                                              (used rarely)
                                         Figure 11. Two solutions of task 4.
Conclusion
       In this research we focussed on the use of the mini-game `Share Money' that was played by 600 Dutch
children age 10-12 years old. We formulated the main research question "Can playing games contribute to the
learning of mathematics?" and operationalized this question into three more detailed questions.
   1.  Which characteristics of Th!nklets motivate and engage kids to play? From our research we can state
       that:
       x     It is important that the game is accessible both from a classroom setting and home setting;
       x     Online (free) accessibility of those mathematical games makes it possible to play the games during
             the whole day, children can choose their own moment of playing;
       x     Children do not experience the tasks as mandatory, they play it for fun.
       x     Characteristics that make this Thinklet 'fun' for kids can be derived from the answers on the open
             part of question 3 'why is it fun/no fun', We distinguish three main groups of characteristics that
             are mentioned:

                                                                                                                       1-11
                       o    Level of difficulty in relation to ability of the player (hard, a challenge, easy, I'm good at it);
                       o    Characteristics of the game content ('I like money');
                       o    Characteristics of the activity ( I like to puzzle, to calculate, to think, to learn, I like math).
            x      The average duration of playing one task of the Th!nklet Share Money with a correct result is between
                   5 and 10 minutes. We hypothezise that this is a duration that is attractive for this age group. To test this
                   hypothesis we will analyse and compare data of other popular and less popular Th!nklets.
            x      It is important that the task is not too difficult and also not too easy in order to have a right `flow'
                   (Csikszentmihalyi, 1990).

            2.     Which characteristics contribute to a learning-gain?
                   It is too early to draw hard conclusion. We assume that the fact that children can keep going on,         there
                   is no time limit and a coin can always be moved again to another part of the playing field or to the side,
                   and the fact that they are in control, contribute to learning. During the process of solving the task we
                   can see that decisions are being made towards a correct solution or towards a more systematic approach
                   (sometimes all equal coins in the same box). This indicates learning taking place. It is yet unclear if this
                   learning only applies to the task they are doing or whether a strategy is also applied to the next tasks or
                   even to other tasks. In the further research we will look more deeply into this.

            3.     How can the learning experiences with Th!nklets be successfully exploited in math education?
                   x   The  money    context  is  important  for basic  skills.  We    think that using  mini-games    like `Share
                       Money' can enrich the mathematics lessons. But:
                   x   We   do  miss  the  involvement   of  the    teacher.  This  will be   the  challenge  of  developers    and
                       researchers and on-going research: to explore possibilities that both student and teacher will be
                       involved in playing and using the mini-games.

       Importance of the study
                   Research  in  the field of computer   games   and   education    connects  several   themes: 1).  The   growing
         awareness that children learn both in and out of school; 2). The shift in attention from teaching to learning and
         from teachers to learners; 3). The view of learning as an enjoyable, social activity;       4). The focus on the role of
         information   technology  in collaborative    learning; and  5).    An understanding     of the motivational     aspects of
         learning. These    observations   apply   not only  to  games      and education    generally,  but also   to games    and
         mathematics education specifically.
                   Technology   is changing    the traditional  setting of   a  mathematics   lesson.   Intelligent software  (like
         Th!nklets described above) can take over the hours of practice that nowadays is done by the teacher with a
         whole class. Children can work on their own level and in their own time (including home). The teacher will get
         more time to concentrate on reasoning and reflection, on group dynamics and individual support.
                   The  study   shows  that   the  development   of  game-like     activities like   Th!nklets  can    enhance    the
         mathematics lesson and make a natural bridge with home learning.

       Endnotes
              (1) Source: Sawmill (Universal log file analysis & reporting)

       References
         Alexopoulou, E., Bennerstedt, U., Childs, M., Jonker, V., Kynigos, C., Pratt, D., et al. (2006). Literature review
                   on the use of games in mathematical learning, part ii: Deployment. Report of the learning patterns for
                   the design and deployment of mathematical games project. London: Knowledge Lab.
         Csikszentmihalyi,   M.  (1990).   Flow:   The  Psychology    of    Optimal    Experience.   New  York:     Harper  Collins
                   Publishers.
         Drijvers, P.  &  Gravemeijer,    K.  P.  E. (2004). Computer       algebra as  an   instrument: Examples      of algebraic
                   schemes.  In: D.   Guin,   K.  Ruthven,  &    L. Trouche     (Eds.), The   didactical  challenge    of symbolic
                   calculators: turning a computational device into a mathematical instrument, pp. 163-196. Dordrecht,
                   The Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
         Freudenthal, H. (1973). Mathematics as an educational task. Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Reidel.
         Gee, J. (2003). What video games have to teach us about learning and literacy. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
         Gee, J. P. (2004). Learning by design: Games as learning machines. Interactive Educational Multimedia, 8, 15-
                   23.
         Gravemeijer, K. P. E. (1994). Developing realistic mathematics education. CDbeta press, Utrecht.
         Gravemeijer,   K., &   Drijvers,  P. (2004).  Tool  use  in an     innovative  learning  arrangement   for  mathematics.
                   Granted research proposal (nwo).

1-1
Hoyles, C., & Noss, R. (2003). What can digital technologies take from and bring to research in mathematics
         education? In  A. J. Bishop, K.  Clements,  C. Keitel, J. Kilpatrick  & F.  K.  S. Leung (Eds.),   Second
         International Handbook of Mathematics Education (pp. 323-349). Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer
         Academic Publishers.
Jonker, V., & Van Galen, F. (2004). KidsKount. Mathematics games for realistic mathematics education in
         primary  school.  Paper  presented  at the 10th International  Conference    on  Mathematics   Education
         (ICME), Copenhagen, Denmark.
Kafai, Y., Fishman, B., Bruckman, A., & Rockman, S. (2002). Models of educational computing @home: New
         frontiers of research on technology in learning. Educational Technology Review, [Online serial], 10(2),
         52-68.
Kirriemuir, J., & McFarlane,   A.  (2004).  Report  8: Literature review   in Games   and   learning: Bristol, UK:
         Futurelab.
Leemkuil, H.H., & Hoog, R. de (2005). Is support really necessary within educational games? In C. Conati & S.
         Ramachandran     (Eds.),  Educational   games   as intelligent    learning environments.     (pp.  21-31).
         Amsterdam. http://www.cs.ubc.ca/~conati/aied-games/leemkuil.pdf
Overmars, M. (2003). Tutorial: What is a good game? Utrecht: Utrecht University, Computer Science.
Prensky, M. (2005). In educational games, size matters. Mini-games are trivial, but 'complex' games are not an
         important  way for teachers, parents   and others  to look at  educational  computer  and    video games.
         Retrieved May 25, 2005, from http://www.marcprensky.com/writing/Prensky-Size_Matters.pdf.
Sanford, R.  &   Williamson,  B.  (2005).  Games    and Learning,   a  Handbook     from Futurelab.   Bristol, UK:
         Futurelab.
Squire, K. (2002). Video games in education.
Squire,  K. (2003).  Design   principles  of next-generation   digital gaming   for  education. In:   Educational
         Technology, 43(5), 17-23
Squires, D., & Preece, J. (1999). Predicting quality in educational software: evaluating for learning, usability
         and the synergy between them. In: Interacting with Computers, 11(5), 467-483.
TERC.    (1998).  Through     the  glass  wall:  Computer    games     for  Mathematical    Empowerment,       from
         www.terc.edu/mathequity/gw/html/gwhome.html
Wijers, M., & Jonker, V. (2005, June 23-24). Thinklets: Use and design of challenging mathematical          games.
         Paper presented at the Games, Learning and Society, Madison, Wisconsin.

                                                                                                                       1-1
