Characterising knowledge construction through a process analysis
                                                   of dialogues
                                             Michael Tscholl, John Dowell
                          Department of Computer Science, University College London
                                            Malet Place, WC1E 6BT London
                               e-mail: m.tscholl@cs.ucl.ac.uk, j.dowell@cs.ucl.ac.uk

         Abstract: We present an analysis of discourse in case-centred learning. The analysis answers
         questions about how an abstract representation of a case is constructed through discourse, and
         about what cognitive products result from that construction. The analysis relies on a generic
         learning model that supports the coding and quantification of learning discourse. This analysis
         is demonstrated through its application to a set of dialogues taken from 2 groups of medical
         students who, as part of their professional training, were asked to explain the medical ethics
         engendered by two patient cases. The analysis shows that the learners strengthen their existing
         conceptual knowledge, rather than acquire new conceptual knowledge, and specifically that
         they  make    valuable  new     connections   between   structurally  similar episodes,   and  between
         concepts  and   specific   facts of the   case.  We  assess  the value  of an  analysis   of   cognitive
         processes  for  characterising   collaborative     case-centred discussions,  and its  use  in showing
         differences of processing of information in different learning environments.

Introduction
         In the discussion   that   lies at the core   of   learning by  shared problem    solving,  learners  construct a
representation of the problem that is essentially virtual and occasionally real. Learners use their individual and
shared knowledge, and they acquire knowledge through the construction. In this paper we examine how this
virtual representation is constructed, and what knowledge learners acquire in the process.
         We make the assumption that fundamentally the same cognitive processes occur in both individual
learners and in groups of learners (cf. Dillenbourg, 1996). We therefore take the further step of suggesting that
what is  known    about  how   individual    learners  learn  from   problem   solving  can  be   applied   to a group   of
collaborative  learners.  Such   processes   as    abstraction,  generalisation  or association    that  have   been  well
established in  studies  of individual    learners may    equally occur  with   groups of  learners.  We    present here a
generalised model of learning from problems that integrates prior models and findings for application to both
individuals and groups.
         We make a further, methodological assumption that these cognitive processes of learning are reflected
systematically in group dialogues and are amenable to analysis. In other words, we assume that people say what
they think, and   that what  they   think and   know    can  be determined  from  what    they  say. The  purpose   of the
generalised learning model is to direct this analysis of dialogues. Other recent work has similarly relied on an
analysis of the cognitive   processes    evident   in utterances  to investigate collaborative    learning. Moreover   the
general notion of co-construction, as one of the core concepts in constructivism, entails that utterances can be
seen as constructing knowledge in a group learning situation: learners add knowledge, elaborate knowledge,
analyse knowledge, etc. (e.g. Davies, 2003). However, this prior work does not make a commitment to what is
constructed by these processes. Rather, the interest of this research is in investigating which processes occur in
order to derive conclusions about the general quality of a discussion (cf. Hara et al., 2000; Newman et al., 1995)
Other work has focussed on the knowledge and information processed in a group learning situation, exploiting
the concept  of critical thinking   (Garrison   et al.,  2000);  however   the  aim was   to gauge   how    much  a  group
learning environment supports a community of inquiry of which critical thinking is a core component.
         Our   approach   posits  a relation  between     processes  and  products,  that  is, it speculates   about what
knowledge   is constructed   by  specific   cognitive   processes.   We  focus  especially on  how   the  correct abstract
representation of the problem is constructed, and describe which processes are employed during the construction
of that representation. This description allows us to characterise a learners' discussion on a case in terms of
processes.

Learning as abstracting a structure
         Learning with cases and problems is fundamentally the abstraction of structure; it is the recognition of
deep features that give meaning to the situation. Cognitive science has consistently viewed learning in this way,
particularly in relation to episode-based problem solving (Gick & Holyoak, 1980; Forbus, 2001). Our aim is to
discover which cognitive processes occur when people attempt to solve problems and which processes give rise
to  the structure of   a case.  To  this    end we    first compiled   a generalised   model   of  learning    from  cases,

                                                                                                                              2-0
         characterising what is learnt and how. The model delineates a set of cognitive processes and a set of cognitive
         products (most notably the structure of the case) that are likely to occur as a result of the tension between the
         case (novel information) and existing knowledge. The model is summarised in the next section and is the basis
         for identifying learning processes occurring when people discuss cases.

       A model of learning from cases
                  Learning with cases and problems occurs through two main processes: first, people use their existing
         knowledge to interpret and conceptualise the case, refining their knowledge in the process; second, they may
         abstract a structure from the case. These two processes are intertwined: using existing knowledge to interpret the
         case entails recognising new relationships within that knowledge, relationships that then represent the structure
         of the case. Even without acquiring structural knowledge, cases can promote learning by refining the existing
         knowledge    because  cases,   consisting of  specific concrete   aspects, function   implicitly as tests  of  existing
         knowledge. For example, people may ask whether some conceptual knowledge is really useful to interpret the
         case, and  by  verifying the applicability   of that knowledge,    they may   learn  more about   when  to  apply  that
         knowledge. Clearly, the process of verifying the applicability of knowledge is most pertinent with conceptual
         knowledge, but also models may be tested.
                  Research on learning from problems and examples has identified more specific processes of learning.
         In  mathematics   learning, for example,   students   acquire knowledge    about the  conditions  of applicability  of
         production rules by adding the specific features of an example to the condition part of that rule. A similar form
         of  learning occurs   when   conceptual   knowledge    is used  to interpret  cases,  leading to  learning   about the
         conditions under which specific concepts should be used. However, learning of concepts also entails recognising
         the structure of problem features, a pattern or constellation of concrete problem aspects that is representative for
         a specific type of problem. The literature on this form of learning is extensive, and a common theme is that
         experts possess a large set of domain-specific examples acquired through practice that permits them to see the
         structure of a problem situation beyond its surface features. Chi et al.'s (1981) research on experts vs. novices
         led to the claim about the role of a conceptual system (concepts related to other concepts) in problem solving.
         This  research  emphasised   that learning    occurs  through  practice which   teaches  how   to apply   concepts  to
         examples, how to relate concepts and how to abstract structural (relational) knowledge from examples.
                  The research on example-based problem solving has identified generalisation over specific features of
         instances as the core learning mechanisms, by which those cognitive products found in the research cited above
         are build. Reusing an earlier example to solve a current one forces a generalisation over the two: the concrete
         features are abstracted and represented by more general knowledge (Ross & Kennedy, 1990). The role of earlier
         solved problems (memorised problem solving episodes) is hence crucial and explains why it is that expert-type
         knowledge is generated through practice and experience.
                  When earlier episodes are used, a problem may be solved through analogy, and people may abstract the
         structure common both to the current and the past problem (Gick & Holyoak, 1980). However, analogies are
         computationally complex, and demand some structural knowledge about the solved problem. As a result, though
         analogies may occur, they occur infrequently.
                  While the reuse of episodes is frequent in problem solving, novices are more likely to use conceptual
         knowledge because they still do not possess an adequate knowledge base of episodes. However when episodes
         are available  and are   used,  conceptual  knowledge     is used  at several stages  of  reuse: at retrieval, for the
         identification of similarities between    the current  and   memorized  episodes,   and  when  transferring  structural
         knowledge from the past to the current problem. In these stages, conceptual knowledge is used, but may also be
         acquired. Knowledge abstracted in this way constitutes domain-specific knowledge in the form of principles or
         `points of the story'. Individual case aspects that have been found also provide indices for the organization of
         episodes in memory (Kolodner, 1993) and become part of the domain-specific vocabulary. In future situations,
         students will rely on this vocabulary to encode new cases. Table 1 presents the learning processes and associated
         learning products.

       Identifying processes in dialogues
                  A small number of recent dialogue analyses have examined the latent content of utterances to answer
         questions about learning. Garrison et al. (2000) interpret utterances as processes to gauge the quality of learning.
         They explain their focus on this cognitive dimension of dialogues by contrasting it with "other dimensions, such
         as  the participatory or social dimension,    (that) lead  to measures  of  quantity, not quality   and tell  us about
         motivations and conversations rather than the learning taking place" (Newman et al., 1995). Clearly this work
         assumes that learning manifests itself in dialogue in a systematic way amenable for analysis. By characterising
         learning, our model allows us to derive a distinct coding scheme allowing us to recognise learning in dialogues
         in terms of processes and products.

         Table 1: processes and products of learning with cases.

2-0
                  processes                                description                         products
   1   relating aspects and concepts        emphasising that a concept applies          concept instantiation
                                            because of a specific aspects
   2   relating concepts                    implying that concepts are related (e.g.    domain-specific
                                            are similar, depend on each other, are      conceptual system
                                            in opposition)
   3   relating aspects                     relating two or more aspects. Relations     new structured
                                            are normally causal, but can also be of     episode
                                            other type (e.g. linear)
   4   relating cases                       saying that two cases are similar or        knowledge base of
       (from learning material or           different; or implying that a similarity    cases
       personal or public episodes)         or difference between cases has been
                                            identified
   5   abstracting similarities/            emphasising an aspect that makes two        encoding knowledge
       differences                          cases similar or different
   6   abstracting principles               providing a description of the case that    encoding knowledge;
                                            captures its point, it story                problem types
   7   analogies                            using another case to interpret a current   knowledge base of
                                            case                                        cases;
                                                                                        encoding knowledge;
                                                                                        domain-specific
                                                                                        conceptual
                                                                                        knowledge;
                                                                                        new structured
                                                                                        episode

A process coding scheme
         The coding scheme deriving from the model is largely the description of what constitutes evidence for
an element of learning. For example, to assign the category `relating cases' to a proposition, specific indicators
must be present in the proposition. The specification of the coding categories is a list and a description of these
indicators. The presence of one or more indicators in a proposition is the basis upon which a categorisation of
the proposition is made.
         The process-coding   scheme   uses    two kinds   of indicators:  reference and   keywords/key  phrases. To
describe the indicators, a short review of the basic components of the model of learning is helpful. The model
describes learning as a set of processes that generate a set of learning products. Learning processes operate on
knowledge and information and hence the identification of information and knowledge is a first step towards the
identification of the processes. For example, if a student draws attention to the similarity between two cases
("this situation is similar to [another one]", the proposition mentions the two "situations", and establishes a
relationship of similarity between them ("...is similar to...").
         However, to capture not only explicit mentioning of specific facts, concepts or cases, references to
facts, concepts or cases are used to identify a unit where a learning process may be evident. A reference is a
surface expression that points to a concrete aspect (fact), a case or a concept that employs a term that is different
from the one used in the cases and lecture material.
         The second type of indicator is keywords (and key phrases). Keywords are frequently used in content
analysis schemes    because they  are reliable   and   objective indicators.   Some  research  (cf. Chi, 1997)  used
keywords  such   as `because'  and  `so'    to search  for `explanations'.    The presence of  such  keywords  is an
indication that the proposition should be classified as an explanation. However keywords are found relatively
rarely. That is, mental representations and mental phenomena can be identified only rarely with keywords.
         The keywords    relevant  in this    coding  scheme   are   used  to identify the processes  of relationing.
Specifically, keywords indicating a comparison ("is similar", "is different") are used to identify propositions
where cases are related to cases. Keywords indicating an explanation ("because", "so") are used to identify the
relationing of aspects with concepts (`this concept applies because of this fact'; e.g. "she is free to chose because
she is of sound mind"). A last set of keywords and key phrases is used as an indicator for relationing concepts as
`contrasting' or `being in opposition'. These are keywords indicating contrasts, such as `but' (for example, "they
cared about  her welfare, but    restricted her  freedom").   Table  2   reproduces the cognitive processes and   the
indicators required for their identification.

                                                                                                                         2-0
         Table 2: processes and indicators for their identification in utterances.

              #             processes                     primary indicators               secondary indicators
                       (coding category)
              1   relating aspects and                reference to an aspect           reference to a concept;
                  concepts                                                             indication of relationing

              2   relating concepts                   reference to a concept           reference to a concept;
                                                                                       indication of relationing

              3   relating aspects                    reference to an aspect           reference to an aspect;
                                                                                       indication of relationing
              4   relating cases                      reference to other cases         reference to another case;
                                                                                       keywords: "similar",
                                                                                       "different", "is like"
              5   abstracting similarities/           reference to other cases         reference to other cases;
                  differences                                                          reference to an aspect;
                                                                                       keywords: "similar",
                                                                                       "different", "is like"

              6   abstracting principles              reference to whole case          reference to some abstract
                                                                                       principle/type
              7   analogies                           reference to other cases         use of its structure
                                                                                       (interpretation/decision/
                                                                                       solution)

       Characterising small-group case-centred discussions
                 We observed two small groups of students taking a course on professional skills development within
         the undergraduate medical programme at UCL. The groups were given two clinical scenarios in each of which a
         profoundly ill patient wished to end their life. During the discussions, the students develop a shared explanation
         for each scenario that would take into account the relevant concepts and principles of medical ethics facing the
         clinicians treating the patients.
                 Two landmark cases (Mrs. B and Mrs. Pretty) were chosen for the sessions. The cases are similar in all
         aspects with the crucial difference, however, that Mrs. B is able end her own life, while the physical condition of
         Mrs. Pretty  would   require      the active intervention     of a  physician (active   versus passive    euthanasia).
         Understanding the similarities and differences between the two cases is of major importance to understanding
         the domain of medical ethics.
                 Euthanasia cases are normally understood on the basis of several general ethical principles: autonomy
         (the right to chose), nonmaleficiance (the prohibition for physicians to harm patients) and beneficence (the duty
         to help and do good). Euthanasia cases raise ethical issues because these principles often are in conflict with
         each other. For example, a patient requesting euthanasia would emphasise that it is her right to do so under the
         principle of autonomy, while a physician would rely on the principle of nonmaleficiance to deny her request.
         However, if the quality of life of the patient is very low, then the principle of beneficence may apply because a
         physician may help end the patient's suffering.
                 The students were introduced to these basic principles in an earlier lecture.
                 The two groups comprised 3 and 5 members, respectively and their discussions were videotaped. Two
         tutors were present during the discussions, but did not act as facilitators. The groups were located in the same
         room, either around a table or sitting in a circle in chairs.

        Results
                 In general, both groups identify the ethical dilemma in the cases and relate the case aspects correctly to
         the relevant concepts. The identification of the dilemma occurs gradually, with individual students bringing in
         different viewpoints that are then argued for and against by their peers. This characteristic is somewhat puzzling
         because the students' own  opinion      of the cases is based    on the principle of  autonomy,    i.e. they place the
         `freedom to choose' above all other considerations, and none of the students places much value on principles
         that conflict with the principle of autonomy. The arguments for and against the judges' decision are hence not
         made on the grounds that some students agree with the judges. Rather, it appears that some students take on
         temporarily the position of the authorities. In this sense, many exchanges can be characterised as arguments.

2-0
         Between the groups, an average of 15% of the utterances could be coded. It should be pointed out that
if the processing of a knowledge unit is distributed over several utterances (and different students) it is counted
as a single positive instance (see figure 3 for an example).

Processes
         The following sections present utterances that have been classified in one of the coding categories.
That is, these  utterances show  how  information    and knowledge      is processed. Below,       the processes  will be
exemplified, and their significance for learning discussed.
         The processes occur with different frequency. For example, the process of relating concepts to aspects
is very frequent, while the process of relating two aspects is infrequent. The process of abstracting principles did
not occur at all. A possible reason for the absence of this process is that the cases can be sufficiently structured
in terms  of  the known    ethical  dilemma.   Other  learning  material    where   less domain-specific      conceptual
knowledge is available may lead to the abstraction of a principle (e.g. the fortress problem and the convergence
principle, cf. Gick & Holyoak, 1980).

Relating aspects with concepts
         Multiple  utterances  show  that  the students check   whether    a specific aspect      of a case  warrants  the
application of a principle (see figures 1 and 2). We interpret these utterances as externalisations of a normally
internally occurring verification process. That is, students may want to use a principle or think that a principle
should apply, but verify the facts of the case about whether there are grounds for that application. There is a
probable reason for that externalisation: aspects function as and are used as `evidence' presented to the group in
order to justify the use of a concept for the conceptualisation of the entire case.
         The significance of the process for learning can be understood in terms of instantiation: the students
learn about a concrete feature that warrants the application of a principle. Future cases characterised by similar
features will prompt the application of the principle. It is clearly also possible that students generalise over the
concrete feature of the cases, acquiring more general knowledge about its applicability.

      145, E     but in this case [pointing to sheet] she was sick
     Figure 1. Group 1: student E refers to the fact that the patient is suffering, in support of the principle of
                                      beneficence (good and gentle death).

      75, I     [interrupting] I think she was {of/in} stable mind.
   Figure 2. Group 2: student I refers to the ability of the patient to make informed decisions, a precondition for
                                       applying the principle of autonomy

Formulating the conditions of applicability of concepts
We observed that sometimes the verification of applicability of a concept leads to the explicit formulation of
conditions   of applicability. This learning    process  is  highly   valuable because,   by      explicitly formulating
knowledge ­ specifically, the conditions of applicability of a concept ­ this knowledge is not tied to the studied
case, and hence does not require the retrieval of the case to use it in a future problem solving situation.
The  formulation  of general    knowledge   occurs  through  the   application of   a concept      to  the case, and   the
subsequent verification of its applicability. Instead of terminating the verification of applicability, conditions of
applicability may be formulated without explicit reference to the case (see figure 3). Similar to learning domain-
specific factual knowledge,    acquisition of  this knowledge   is  not demanded    by   the     task, and can   hence be
considered a valuable by-product.

      146, I     she was, but you know in this case I think if they said that this is legal then it could
                 potentially open up a lot of, ...... a lot of blur kind of, a lot of grey areas
      147, E     ...where to draw the line...
      148, I     exactly
      149, E     ... someone has to be able to say and someone has to be able to write...
             Figure 3. Group 1: example of an exchange where a student formulates general conditions
                                of applicability of the principle of autonomy (149, E)

Relating concepts
         Case-centred learning promotes integration of conceptual knowledge and relations between concepts
acquired  in isolation. Ethical (as environmental,   political, etc.) cases  are useful  to      understand  the conflicts

                                                                                                                            2-
         between principles, and the situations under which one principle may be favoured over another (e.g. Pata &
         Sarapuu, 2003). This educational value of the case method is recognised and accepted by many practitioners and
         educators and cases are indeed frequently employed in education to raise the awareness of potential conflicts,
         problem and trade-offs (Burgoyne & Mumford, 2001). The model of learning with cases presented here hence
         functions as a description of this utility in terms of cognitive processes.
                 While it can be assumed that the students possess some knowledge about contrasts between ethical
         principles, the discussion of the cases promotes the strengthening and clarification of the relationships between
         concepts. The discussion is here interpreted as providing an opportunity to voice the pre-existing conceptual
         structure (see figure 4).

              103, E    because in this case they were operating within the law and, say, they wanted to preserve
                       life, but the weren't... but they weren't ... really ... they weren't ... they weren't really relieving
                       suffering were they? ... which some people would argue {it would be?} ** preserve life.
                       Some people they * doctors *** relieve suffering * preserve life, but {when?} they are
                       suffering more {I mean?}then they should be able to end their life
          Figure 4. Group 1: student E formulates the dilemma between the principle of beneficence and nonmaleficence
                                                    using a mundane terminology

        Relating aspects
                 The process of relating aspects also entails a structuring of the case. However, here the structuring
         occurs on the basis of some mundane relation rather than a relation that is specific for the domain (such as a
         conceptual relation). Such relations are, in the simplest case, linear (the more..., the less...) or causal. Figure 5
         exemplifies  a  relationing between   the  aspect of  `sound  mind'   (that  is a   necessary precondition   for      even
         considering the patient's request) and the patient's depression. In this specific case, authorities have argued that
         the patient's request may be tainted by her poor mental state. The student's comment criticises that argument by
         identifying a relationship between her physical and mental health.
                 It should  be pointed    out that relationing of  aspects using relational   knowledge    other than domain-
         specific one is very infrequent in these discussions. We believe that in cases with more facts and in different
         domains (such as biomedical or business cases) the process is much more frequent.

              170, I     They think she can't decide on her own because she is depressed? Well of course she's
                        depressed
         Figure 5. Group 1. Student I establishes a (causal) relationship between the patient's state of health and her state
          of mind. The student criticises with it the claim that the patient may not be able to decide for herself because of
                                                           her depression.

        Relating cases and abstracting similarities/differences
                 We   present  these  two  processes  together    because they  often occur   in a  single utterance.  That      is,
         frequently when a reference to another cases is made, the similarity or difference between the cases is also
         explicitly stated. The process of relationing cases is highly valuable for learning. While memorisation of cases
         or episodes  is by itself  considered to  be a form   of learning (cf. Kolodner,    1993),  the reuse   of episodes     is
         crucially dependent on their organisation in memory. Episodes must be organised so as to permit efficient access
         and retrieval. Episodes that share features are normally grouped under a single header, with features not shared
         providing  a subsequent   identification opportunity  if the header matches     the input. Relating cases  becomes       a
         crucial mechanism in adding a case to the knowledge base, since it entails an assessment of similarities and
         differences, and an assessment of the relevance of the features, i.e. the identification of that or those features that
         represent the core of the case.
                 As described, the two cases represent similar situations. Active versus passive intervention is the only
         specific difference between them. This difference assigns different weights to beneficence and nonmaleficence,
         but the validity of autonomy remains unchanged.
                 Relating the cases, i.e. seeing the differences and similarities (see figure 6), promote the reiteration of
         the application of the ethical principles, as well as the search for a solution that is applicable to both cases. It is a
         first step towards a deeper understanding of the principles.

               64, C     (shakes head in disagreement) ... there is the difference, because [looks at sheet], because,
                         basically, Mrs. Pretty, no, Mrs. B ... it is passive and they could just switch off the
                         ventilator, because basically they are keeping her alive, without her will, ..., whereas the
                         other one [Mrs. Pretty] was actually actively given drugs to die. So that's why it's
                         difference there

2-2
                     Figure 6. Group 2. Student C identifies the difference between the cases.

Analogies
        References to several other cases are made in the discussions. These references serve the purpose of
introducing  knowledge,  and   in two   forms.   First, by  drawing  attention to  a similar   case, the   terminology   or
concept used to describe that case is reused to describe the current case. As an example, in figure 7, the student
introduces the   concept of  `quality   of life' through  a reference   to a similar case.  Second,     the students  have
knowledge    about the verdicts   in similar cases  (figure   8). This  knowledge    can be  used    to reason about    the
possible consequences of a decision. This function of analogies is of little use in the present cases since the
students are not required to give or reason about a decision. References to other cases appear to serve primarily
as introductions rather than as prototype `solutions' to the case. Nevertheless, references to other cases produce
valuable learning gains: they involve an assessment of similarities, and hence cases become related. Further, the
introduction of a specific terminology increases the likelihood that this terminology and its associated concept
will become part of the students' domain-specific vocabulary, and that it will be used to encode future similar
problem solving situation.

         139, I    yeah, ... there was a huge case in Canada a few years ago, where a father assisted his
                   daughter, she was really very disabled ... and no quality of life [C and E seem to know
                   the case] and he just suffocated her, and I think he got 12 years manslaughter.

Figure 7. Group 1. Example of a reference to another case that prompts the introduction of the notion of `quality
                                                         of life'

         147, I   I: because, I know someone who is a doctor and they had {referred?}, *** had a huge
                  motorcycle accident he actually {had to have?} blood transfusions, * but when it
                  actually came out ** [that he was a Jehovah's witness {who refuse blood
                  transfusions}] , ** how can a doctor try to preserve life ***
      Figure 8. Group 2. Example of a reference to another case that highlights the principle of `autonomy'

Summary
        Our analysis has identified the main cognitive processes occurring when students discuss cases. From
the results of the analysis we conclude that learning is conservative in the sense that students strengthen their
existing mundane conceptual system on ethics. However, some valuable learning occurs: the students increase
their knowledge about when to apply ethical concepts and learn some relations between concepts. The cases
fulfil their role as promoting the integration of conceptual knowledge with real-world specific knowledge, and
also the integration of conceptual knowledge. Further, relationships with other cases play a significant role in
learning: the students bring in cases from their personal experiences or public cases, and abstract similarities and
differences from them. These cases permit students to recognise what is common in euthanasia cases and what
are their core distinctive features.
        Our   analysis   helps  us   to understand   what   were    the cognitive    products  constructed    during    the
discussions. The   students identified  correctly  the  ethical   dilemma  in each   case, though    it is  likely that the
discussions served mainly as opportunities to externalise existing knowledge about the ethical dilemma rather
than the dilemma being identified for the first time. In any case, the discussion fostered a clearer recognition of
the relationships between ethical principles that embody the dilemma; and further, these conceptual relations
have become tied to two specific cases that may serve as the basis for conceptualisations of structurally similar
cases.
        The   occurrence    of relationing   between    cases is  of major   importance:   when   students    discuss   the
similarities and differences between the cases, they develop a knowledge base of cases, with the aspects found
to be  different functioning as distinguishing    features. These   features  are indices  for future   retrieval  of cases
(Kolodner, 1993). The abstraction of commonalties and differences between cases leads also to the acquisition
of a domain-specific vocabulary that will be used to encode future cases of medical ethics.

Discussion
        Construct validity is a paramount concern for dialogue coding schemes i.e. whether the construct that is
sought in the data is actually found (cf. Murphy, 2004). We have shown that the coding scheme is able to
discriminate between different processes and identify those processes valuable for learning, according to our
model. Moreover, the coding scheme permits new insights into how an abstract representation is constructed and
especially what processes are used when learners construct that representation.
        The application of the coding scheme is not restricted to a qualitative characterisation such as the one
described in this paper. Rather, characterisation of learner dialogues has found application especially in relation

                                                                                                                               2-
         to the use of technology in education. For example, Newman et al. (1995) used a content coding scheme to
         identify differences in  the quality  of learning  (specified in relation to  a measure   of   critical thinking) in
         traditional face-to-face versus asynchronous computer-based environment settings. A similar application may be
         envisioned for the coding scheme presented here.
                  The approach to analysing learner dialogues and deriving a characterisation from it is complementary
         to other approaches.  Most   research on  learning in a  collaborative setting  relies on socio-cultural   or socio-
         cognitive views of learning, where specific interactions are deemed of significance for learning. For example,
         much work has been devoted to understanding how argumentation affects learning, and correlations between
         argumentation structures and learning have been identified (Veerman et al., 1999). We argue that some of this
         work  can  be integrated with   the approach  presented   here. Indeed, argumentation     may  entail   some  of  the
         processes claimed to be conducive for learning. For example, learners may point to a specific fact to support a
         claim, an argumentation move that, in our approach, is seen as relating a concept to a fact. While we cannot
         substantiate a relation between dialogue moves and cognitive processes, we believe that analyses targeting one
         or the other aspects of a dialogue may overlap.

       References
         Burgoyne, J. & Mumford, A. (2001). Learning from the Case Method.         Report to the European Case Clearing
                  House (RP301).
         Chi, M.  (1997). Quantifying    Qualitative Analyses  of  Verbal  Data: A  Practical   Guide.  The Journal    of  the
                  Learning Sciences, 6(3).
         Chi, M., Feltovich, P. & Glaser, R. (1981). Categorisation and Representation of Physics Problems by Experts
                  and Novices. Cognitive Science, 5, 121-152.
         Davies, E. (2003). Knowledge Integration in Science Teaching: Analysing Teachers' Knowledge Development.
                  Research in Science Education, 34, 21-53.
         Dillenbourg, P. (1996). Some Technical Implications of the Distributed Cognition Approach on the Design of
                  Interactive Learning Environments. Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education 7(2), 161-80.
         Forbus, K. (2001). Exploring Analogy in the Large. In Gentner, D., Holyoak, K., & Kokinov, B. (Eds.) The
                  Analogical Mind: Perspectives from Cognitive Science. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
         Garrison, D. R., Anderson, T., & Archer, W. (2000). Critical Thinking in a Text-Based Environment. Computer
                  Conferencing in Higher Education. Internet in Higher Education, 2(2), 87-105.
         Gick, M. & Holyoak, K. (1980). Analogical Problem Solving. Cognitive Psychology, 12, 306-55.
         Hara, N., Bonk, C. J., & Angeli, C.    (2000). Content analysis of online discussion in an applied educational
                  psychology course. Instructional Science, 28, 115-52.
         Kolodner, J. (1993). Case-based Reasoning. San Matteo: CA, Morgan Kaufmann.
         Murphy,   E. (2004). Promoting   Construct  Validity  in Instruments for  the  Analysis  of Transcripts   of  Online
                  Asynchronous Discussions. Educational Technology Research and Development (online).
         Newman, D. R., Webb, B., & Cochrane, C. (1995). A content analysis method to measure critical thinking in
                  face-to-face and computer supported group learning. Interpersonal Computing and Technology, 3(2),
                  56-77.
         Pata, K. & Sarapuu, T. (2003). Development of Mental Models by Environmental Role-play in Synchronous
                  Collaborative  Virtual Workplace.   Proceedings  of  eLSEE, e-Learning   in   Science and Environmental
                  Education.
         Ross, B. & Kennedy, P., (1990). Generalising from the Use of Earlier Examples in Problem Solving. Journal of
                  Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition, 16.
         Veerman, A. L., Andriessen, J. & Kanselaar, G. (1999). Collaborative Learning through Computer-Mediated
                  Argumentation. In Hoadley, C. & Roschelle, J. (Eds.) Proceedings of CSCL99. Mahwah: NJ, LEA.

       Acknowledgements
         This work was supported by the Economic and Social Research Council of the UK (grant L328 25 3013).

2-
