              How learners share and construct metacognition
                                       in social interaction?
   Tarja-Riitta Hurme, Sanna Järvelä, University of Oulu, Department of Educational Sciences and Teacher
 Education, Research Unit for Educational Technology, PO BOX 2000, Fin-90014 University of Oulu, Finland
                             Email: tarja-riitta.hurme@oulu.fi, sanna.jarvela@oulu.fi
   Kaarina Merenluoto, Pekka Salonen, University of Turku, Department of Teacher Education & Centre for
                          Learning Research, Fin-20014 University of Turku, Finland
                           Email: kaarina.merenluoto@utu.fi, pekka.salonen@utu.fi,

        Abstract: The aim of this exploratory study was to examine how the six matched triads of
        pre-service teachers  share and  construct  metacognition    in mathematical   problem   solving  in
        WorkMates learning environment having or having not a stimulated recall group interview.
        More   specifically,  we   examined   socially  shared    metacognition    and we   performed    the
        qualitative content analysis of the discussion forum data from metacognition point of view.
        The results showed metacognition becoming shared and metacognition becoming visible but
        not shared in discussions.

Theoretical background and aim
        The aim of this exploratory was to examine how learners share and construct metacognition in social
interaction. More specifically, we examined socially shared metacognition (e.g. Tindale & Kameda, 2000; Iiskala,
Vauras & Lehtinen, 2004) by which we mean the phase in the groups' problem solving where jointly constructed
knowledge is used to regulate and control the group's cognitive processes meaningfully for the group to reach joint
solution. For this suggested being essential that an individual's computer note identified as metacognitive has an
intention to interrupt, change or promote the joint problem solving process. The other members in the group are
able to utilize the suggested way of thinking in their individual problem solving process.
        For  collaboration and   joint problem   solving it is  essential that the  participants make   a conscious,
continued effort to coordinate their activity in order to reach shared knowledge (Roshelle & Teasley, 1995). To
do so, individual's need  their metacognitions,   referring to  their  knowledge   of  cognition, and   regulation of
cognitive processes (Flavell, 1979; Brown, 1987), to explicitly provide rationale for their own thinking and to
verify their understanding about other participants' contributions to joint problem solving. Further, to construct
the joint solution the group members have to contribute to the other participants' externalized knowledge by
explicitly explaining their thinking (cf. Kirschner, Beers, Boshuizen & Gijselaers, 2007). In this process, the
unshared  knowledge  in   one  participants' head  becomes     jointly constructed  knowledge    (Beers,  Boshuizen,
Kirschner  &  Gijselaers,  2005)   through   the negotiation   of  common     ground   (Bromme,   2000)   where    the
participants make their own understanding explicitly visible and provide feedback for others by formulating
their thoughts as written notes to the database (Lehtinen, 2003). Thus, the cognitively rich situation can be seen
as a facilitator for reciprocal interaction and metacognition.

Method
Participants and working conditions
        The participants in this study were 18 pre-service student teachers, aged 21 ­ 40 years at the beginning
of their teacher studies at university. All of them were native Finns having their first course for teaching primary
level mathematics. Almost 90% of them had graduated from upper secondary school during the years 2005 or
2004.  The participants filled  in two  self-report  questionnaires    concerning  metacognition    in  mathematical
problem  solving (modified,    Howard,   McGee,    Shia  &     Hong,   2000)  and  group   working  skills,  Students
Appraisals of Group   Assessment,   SAGA     (Volet, 1998).    The  items  in  the metacognition    and mathematics
problem  solving questionnaire   data  were  analyzed  using   the principal  component    analysis where   the most
powerful tendencies were liking or not liking mathematics and liking or not liking to work in groups. After the
groups were matched, they were randomly assigned to two working conditions, working in Workmates (WM)
with or without stimulated recall group interview.
        In this study, they worked in triads and solved 16 mathematical problems during two hour sessions, four
times during a four week period, January-February 2006 in university's computer classroom. Three groups had a
stimulated recall group interview immediately after joint problem solving session and three groups did not have the
interview. They worked with an asynchronous learning environment called Workmates (WM, http://wm.utu.fi).
Each participant had a personal user account and password to login only to their own groups' folder.

Mathematical problems

                                                                                                                         3-
       The mathematical problems presented in this poster were the following:
       Task 1. The equation problem                              Task 2. A strict lecturer
       Find one pair of numbers that satisfies the               A retired lecturer, known as a strict teacher, calculated how he,
       following equation:                                       during his long and self-denying career had given marks to his
                                                                 students as follows: 26172 D's, 11 583 C's, 4884 B's and 955
                  ¨§ 3  x ¸· : 5  4  y 1©4¹2                     A's.   How    many   marks  altogether  did the strict lecturer giveduring his long and self-denying career to his students? How
                                                                 many percentages more had he given D's compared to A's?
       Can you find another solution?                            In this task you are not allowed to use the calculator. You can
       How many solutions you can find?                          use approximated values to calculate the percentages.

       Data collection and analysis
                 The discussion forum data consists of the pre-service teachers' 624 computer notes. Further, the three
       triads' four  video-recorded         stimulated    recall group   interviews   were  transcribed  and  each   interview lasted
       approximately     25 minutes.        The    stimulated    recall interview   data was    used  to augment   the   researchers'
       interpretation of the discussion forum data.

       Discussion forum data
                 The pre-service teachers' written computer notes were analyzed from socially shared metacognition
       point of view, by two independent coders following the ideas of the qualitative content analysis (Chi, 1997). The
       unit of   the analysis       was   one computer    note.  The    rater independence  coefficient, Cohen's   Kappa    was  used
       (Cohen, 1960). In groups' problem solving metacognition was considered as socially shared when the group's
       groups'   jointly constructed        knowledge      is  used  to   regulate  and  control the  group's   cognitive   processes
       meaningfully for the group to reach joint solution. The computer note was characterized as metacognitive if it
       fulfilled the  following       three   criteria. First, the  message   should  be related to  and  focused  on   the earlier or
       ongoing discussion at least implicitly. Secondly, the message should have an intention to interrupt, change or
       promote the progression of the joint problem solving process. Thirdly, the message should also have an explicit
       explanation as to why the group should take another feature of the problem into account. After the coding, two
       raters reached a satisfactory agreement (K=.78; Landis & Koch, 1977).

      Results and conclusions
                 The  results       showed    that the  three  dimensions     of metacognition   were identified  in group   problem
       solving; metacognition becoming shared, metacognition becoming visible but not shared, metacognition as an
       individual's attempt to regulate the joint problem solving. In case of metacognition becoming shared, there was
       a more knowledgeable peer in the group who regulated the group's problem solving which was appreciated by
       the others. The results also show that there were three groups in which there were some metacognitive messages
       during the joint problem solving although it was not acknowledged. This can be explained by the lack of group
       members' mathematical skills which prevented them from using and building on the proposed way of thinking.
                 The results suggest how for socially shared metacognition it is essential that the other participants make
       their (mis)understanding visible by explaining it explicitly to the others thus allowing the others in the group to
       regulate and control how shared knowledge is used in the problem solving process.

      Selected references
       Beers, P.J., Kirschner, P.A., Boshuizen, H.P.A. & Gijselaers, W.H. (2005). Coercing knowledge construction in
                 collaborative       learning  environments.     In T.  Koschmann,    D. Suthers  &   T-W.   Chan  (Eds.).  Computer
                 Supported          Collaborative  Learning      2005:  The    Next 10   Years!  Proceedings   of  the  International
                 Conference on Computer Supported Collaborative Learning (pp. 8-17). Taipei, May 30­June 4, 2005.
       Brown, A.L. (1987). Metacognition, executive control, self-regulation and other mysterious mechanisms. In F.
                 Weinert & R. Kluwe (Eds.), Metacognition, motivation and understanding (pp. 65-115). Hillsdale, NJ:
                 Lawrence Erlbaum.
       Chi, M.T.H.    (1997).        Quantifying   qualitative   analysis of   verbal data: A practical  guide.  The Journal   of   the
                 Learning Sciences, 6 (3), 271-315.
       Cohen, J. (1960). A coefficient of agreement for nominal scales. Educational and Psychological Measurement,
                 20, 37-46.
       Flavell, J. (1979). Metacognition and cognitive monitoring: A new area of cognitive-developmental inquiry.
                 American Psychologist, 34, 906-911.
       Iiskala, T., Vauras, M. & Lehtinen, E. (2004). Socially-shared metacognition? Hellenic Journal of Psychology 1,
                 147-178.
       Tindale, R. & Kameda, T. (2000). Social sharedness' as a unifying theme for information processing in groups.
                 Group Processes & Intergroup Relations, 3, 123-140.

3-
