                                Real Arguments about a Virtual Epidemic:
                Conversations and Contestations in a Tween Gaming Club

                Yasmin B. Kafai, University of California, Los Angeles, 2331 Moore Hall, kafai@gseis.ucla.edu
               Jacqueline Wong, University of California, Los Angeles, 2331 Moore Hall, jacquelinew@ucla.edu

                 Abstract: Recent studies have examined how argumentation around science is positioned and
                 used in everyday interactions. Our research extends these investigations into a virtual world
                 called Whyville.net and its annual outbreak of Whypox, a virtual epidemic. We observed and
                 recorded players' conversations and contestations about Whypox in an after school gaming
                 club. We found that club members' argumentation involved the use of warrants, rebuttals, and
                 data as found in other studies of everyday argumentation. Players also developed different
                 theories, some unwarranted, about the causes and spread of Whypox, and used the epidemic to
                 position themselves as insiders. In our discussion, we address ways in which virtual epidemics
                 connect    to on-going  research    on  everyday  argumentation   and provide    starting points for
                 students' learning about infectious diseases.

       Introduction
                  The last decade has seen an increased interest in studying informal settings recognizing that outside
         school activities play a crucial role in students' engagement with and understanding of science. Most prominent
         has been  research  in science  museums     and  after school clubs (Falk  &  Dierking,  2002),   some of which   has
         focused on identifying "learning talk" in museum visitors' casual conversations during interactions with exhibits
         (Allen, 2002; Callanan & Braswell, 2006). Other research has traced how museum activities connect to learning
         from family or school environments through the content of visitors' conversations (Crowley & Jacobs, 2002;
         Palmquist & Crowley, 2007). Recent work has taken a closer look at conversations of family visitor groups as
         dialogic inquiry, focusing on how learning is mediated by members of the group as well as materials such as
         exhibit texts and interactive elements (Ash, 2003). For the most part, this research has focused on activities and
         talk within the physical confines of a museum location or home.
                 Our research extends the line of inquiry to events in virtual worlds in which youth participate in large
         numbers. Virtual worlds can be defined as online spaces visited by thousands, if not millions, of players where
         they can engage in shared activities (Bartle, 2003). Unlike science museum exhibits only accessible for limited
         hours each day,    virtual worlds offer  access  from  anywhere  and   at anytime. These  aspects  of  virtual worlds
         provide opportunities to participate in extended activities that require large number of participants (Bainbridge,
         2007). A popular proposal is to use virtual worlds for simulating epidemic outbreaks to study people's behaviors
         and interactions; such outbreaks are difficult to replicate in real-world settings for ethical reasons alone (Lofgren
         & Fefferman, 2007). We focused on the educational prospects of the annual outbreak of a virtual epidemic
         called Whypox in Whyville.net, a virtual world with 1.5 million registered players ages 8-16, to study players'
         engagement and learning about infectious diseases. We were interested in ways that the participation in a virtual
         epidemic could provide a context for the type of argumentations previously observed in homes and museums.
                 To do so, we focused on the conversations and contestations about Whypox in an after school gaming
         club where we observed and video recorded groups of participants as they were visiting Whyville several times
         a week. During an outbreak of Whypox, infected Whyvillians show two symptoms: red pimples appear on their
         avatars and the ability to chat is interrupted by "sneezing" (i.e., typed words are replaced by "achoo"). Our
         research goal was to examine the content and structure of argumentation of our participants: Do club members
         engage in  argumentation     practices such  as making  claims and  providing  warrants  when     discussing different
         aspects of Whypox? What kind of theories do players develop about the cause and spread of Whypox? What
         role does Whypox play to position participants within the gaming club? In our discussion, we address how the
         observed argumentation practices of children can be leveraged to support further science inquiry in the contexts
         of virtual worlds.

       Background
                 Science education sees argumentation as a key inquiry practice (Duschl & Osborne, 2002; Kuhn 1993;
         Newton, Driver, & Osborne, 1999) because it is central to the practice of science (Latour, 1987). Numerous
         studies have focused on the particular challenges faced by students and teachers to bring argumentation into the
         classroom. For     instance, students'  problems    in  distinguishing between    theory and evidence     have  been
         documented (e.g., Kuhn, 1993) and teachers' issues with orchestrating classroom discourse have been critically
         examined   (Lemke,    1990).  While    part of this research  focuses  on written  arguments (Bell   &   Linn,  2000;
         Sandoval & Millwood, 2005), much attention is also given toward argumentation as part of classroom discourse

1-1
(Kelly, Druker,     & Chen,    1998; Driver,   Newton,  &  Osborne,   2000).   Whether  they   are  written   or spoken,
students' arguments are generally analyzed in terms of the structures proposed by Toulmin (1958).
           More recently, researchers have focused on the study of argumentation in everyday contexts asserting
that  this is the  space in  which   youth learn and  practice argumentation.   While  the structures  of  claims,  data,
warrants, and backings offer a powerful analytical tool for looking at arguments, many everyday arguments
seem to lack these explicit structures.    However, research has shown that many of these same structures emerge
when elements that are left implicit by the speakers, such as assumption of shared knowledge, are taken into
account    (Bricker  and  Bell,  2007;   Simosi, 2003).  For   instance,   in Simosi's study   of  argumentation    in a
workplace, warrants and backings that seemed missing at first were apparent when considering the company's
official rules and assumed norms. Bricker and Bell traced argumentation among parent-child or peer-to-peer
conversations     across multiple   contexts  including science  classes,  home   and   play.  These   cross-contextual
analyses provided evidence that speakers often make references to past events -- and not just rules and norms
-- which are often missed in research that focuses on one single context.
           We expanded this study of everyday argumentation into the contexts of virtual worlds increasingly
popular    with children. Previous   studies  about the virtual epidemic   Whypox    focused  on   6th grade  classroom
discussions directed by teachers (Neulight, Kafai, Kao, Foley & Galas, 2007) or online chat content (Kafai,
Feldon,    Fields, Giang  &   Quintero,  2007).  We  documented   that  students often  likened   Whypox    to   naturally
occurring infectious diseases they had learned about in their science curriculum. The chickenpox-like qualities
of Whypox ­ its red pimples ­ might have led students to draw these conclusions (see Figure 1). In the analysis
of online chat content we found a significant increase and drop in Whypox-related words concurrent with the
outbreak   and  fading   of  the virtual epidemic.  The examination     of players' face-to-face   conversations   about
Whypox     in   the gaming     club  while  simultaneously   online  in  Whyville.net   allowed    us  to continue    the
investigation of multiple contexts seen by Bricker and Bell (2007) as instrumental in understanding peer-to-peer
everyday argumentation.

           Figure 1. Whyville.net: Whyvillian with Whypox (left), Beach with infected Whyvillians (right).

           In addition, we were interested in the kind of explanations or theories that players developed about the
causes and spread of Whypox. Related research about tweens ­ a common term for youth around the age of 10
to 12 ­ and their understanding of the computer virus (Kafai, in press-b) indicated that most of them focused on
behavioral aspects of the virus, i.e., what it does, but were not able to provide biological explanations, i.e., how
it functions. Our focus in this analysis was less on students' conceptual understanding of a computer virus but
more on the explanations that players offered in the context of their interactions about the causes or the length of
the  virtual  epidemic.   We    were interested  in how  the ideas   or legends  about  Whypox     spread   through   the
community (Windschitl, 2001) as an indicator of the kind of ideas that contribute to the theory building of what
a computer virus like Whypox might be like.
           Finally, we   place  the study  of  argumentation   about virtual  epidemics within   the   larger context  of
research about the value of games for children's development. Most relevant here is prior research on children's
conversational     practices in  games;  these studies have  shown   how   arguments   serve  to  position  players  and
communicate understanding (Goodwin, 1985; 2006). The Whypox virtual epidemic immerses players of the
whole community because participation in it is not a matter of choice. Thus even those players who do not catch
Whypox participate in the game as they make decisions whether or not to avoid the disease that might impact
their online   social contacts   and interactions.  We  have   proposed  elsewhere  (Kafai  et al.,  2007)    to consider
Whypox as a community or affinity event (Gee, 2003) because it creates a shared experience and history among
its players. As such, participation in Whypox offers multiple points of connection into understanding the causes,
symptoms and duration of infectious diseases (Au, Romo, & deWitt, 1999; Kalish, 1999; Parmelee, 1992) and
thus have possible instructional applications.

Methods
Research Settings

                                                                                                                             1-1
                  Whyville.net is a multi-user virtual environment (MUVE), with over 1.5 million registered players at
         the time of the study, that encourages youth ages 8-16 to play casual science games in order to earn a virtual
         salary which   youth    can   then spend   on buying   and  designing   parts  for their  avatars   (virtual characters),
         projectiles to throw at other users, and other goods (Kafai, in press-a). Social interactions with others are the
         highlight for most Whyvillians and consist primarily of chatting on the site where users are visible to each other
         on the screen (see the picture of the Beach in Figure 1).
                  In early 2005 we set up an after-school club at a school where 20 tweens ages 10-12 came to play on
         Whyville for an hour most days after school for three months. Most tweens were new to Whyville, though one
         had played for the year before the club started. Some of the youth were also students in one of the classes where
         Whyville was used as part of their infectious disease curriculum (see also Neulight et al., 2007). The players
         distributed themselves among 10 computers, often sharing a computer or wandering around the room talking to
         others. While the club began as a quiet place, it quickly became loud and lively as participants learned about the
         site and began to shout advice to each other, arrange parties on Whyville, chat, throw virtual projectiles at one
         another virtually, and critique each other's avatars . Often clusters of tweens would form around one computer
         when something interesting happened on Whyville.

        Data Analysis
                  In order to study the youth's conversations at the after school club, two video cameras were set up to
         focus on small groups of youth clustered at tables with two to three computers. The Whypox epidemic lasted
         three  weeks,  11  days    of which  were  videotaped  at the  club. After  an initial logging   of the video   data,  we
         identified all conversations    that were  directly related to Whypox.    As   the novelty of    Whypox  subsided,     the
         amount of Whypox talk decreased in later conversations. For that reason, we focused on the first two days when
         Whypox-related talk was most concentrated and analyzed the transcripts. We analyzed club members' inquiries
         about  the nature  of   Whypox,    such as identifying symptoms    or making   inferences  and   predictions    about  the
         duration   or source    of the  sickness. We   also highlighted  social  positioning   and play   where  Whypox       was
         incorporated into the group dynamics and activities of the tweens.

       Findings
        Whypox as a Context for Discussing Claims and Evidence about a Virtual Epidemic
                  We found extensive conversations and discussions about Whypox in the gaming club where the tweens
         were   both   online and    in  a shared  physical  space.  The  virtual epidemic   quickly   became    the   subject  of
         conversations     since it impacted   the  two most   popular   aspects  of Whyville:    appearances    of   avatars   and
         socialization. As such, the immediate concerns of the youth were to find out each other's infection status and to
         avoid getting sick. The following is an example of how one group reacted to and argued about the status of a
         boy's infection status.

                  Blake:    Hey Dude, don't get me sick.
                  Scott:    You're already sick man.
                  Blake:    No, I'm not.
                  Scott:    Yes you are, look, where are you.
                  Blake:      I'm right here.
                  Scott:    That's you?
                  Blake:    Yeah I changed me.
                  Leslie:   Where are you?
                  Blake:    Right here.
                  Leslie:   Oh you're not saying ah choo.
                  Blake:    I know, I don't have the Whypox...

                  Scott    claimed  that Blake was   already infected  with   Whypox.   Based   on  their understanding    that an
         avatar with Whypox would sneeze and have pimples, Scott and Blake both referred to Blake's avatar as evidence
         for their claim and rebuttal respectively. Eventually, the argument was settled when Scott and Leslie realized
         that they had mistaken another avatar for Blake's and confirmed that Blake's was "not saying ah choo." While
         this argument seemed incomplete at first, structural components such as warrant and backing emerged when we
         considered    the tweens'   shared  knowledge  (see  Figure  2). Based   on their  experiences    together   in class, on
         Whyville, and at the club, certain basic information about Whypox was assumed to be common knowledge
         among group members and was left implicit.

1-1
                   Figure 2. Tweens' argument about Whypox with implicit warrant and backing.

          Infection status  was    a frequent topic of  conversations.  Club   members  often   engaged  in   a claim-
contestation structure   that  involved  the  infection level of  the community.    As more  and   more  Whyvillians
appeared  to  have    Whypox,    one   club  member    would  state   "Everybody  has   Whypox",   which   would   be
immediately rebutted by others offering themselves as counterexample to the claim. In one example, not only
did Trevor   offer himself   as  a counterexample   to  Leslie's claim, he was  supporting his  rebuttal further  with
evidence from Whyville's city records and showing his confidence with a bet:

          Leslie:  Almost everyone has Whypox.
          Trevor:  I don't!
          Leslie:  I doubt it.
          Trevor:  You doubt it? Go to city records. I'll bet you $5.
          Leslie:  You mean 5 clams or $5.
          Trevor:  5 clams.
          Leslie:  Ok, I won't bet you, but I'll go anyway.

          Besides arguing about infection status, the youth also talked about Whypox in the context of infection
causes, strategies for dealing with symptoms, and symptom durations. Quite a range of opinions concerning
infection cause were given, ranging from whispering with an infected Whyvillian, sending y-mail, throwing
projectiles or even getting infected face parts, etc. The leading claim among these was proximity to an infected
Whyvillian. The following is a typical exchange between youth when uninfected club members on Whyville
saw avatars with Whypox moving close to theirs:

          Paul:    Ahh too many sick people. Get away. Aidan, you're ah chooing.
          There's a girl with Whypox following me! Ahh...!
          Scott:   There's a lot of people saying Ah choo.
          Aidan:   Woo hoo I gave you Whypox!
          Paul:    What?! Nuh uh.
          Aidan:   Yeah huh.
          Paul:    You don't see freckles on me.
          Aidan:   Yeah but guess what, tomorrow you are.

          Once again, a casual banter between the youth becomes a more substantial argument when implicit
elements are taken into consideration. It is clear from the excerpt that both Paul and Aidan shared the generally
accepted  notion   that one   can  get  infected by proximity.   They   also shared the understanding    that pimples
(referred to as   "freckles"  in this  case) were a symptom      of Whypox.   While both  of them   used  this  shared
knowledge as evidence for their claims, Aidan furthered his argument with an implicit warrant that pimples do
not appear immediately after infection. This particular sequence of symptoms had been discussed among the
youth at the club that day when everyone was gathered together at the beginning of the club session. Leslie
summarized for the convened club members that "you first... well... the thing [avatar] says achoo a lot, and then
you start getting these pink bumps all over your face." Aidan was also a student in one of the classes that used
Whypox    as part  of their  infectious disease  curriculum.  In class  he had read an  article on Whyville's   virtual
newspaper in which one Whyvillian described her symptoms from the 2002 Whypox epidemic, including the
fact that her pimples first appeared on the second day of infection (see Figure 3).

                                                                                                                           1-1
                       Figure 3. Excerpt from a Whyville Times article addressing Whypox and its duration.

                  A more specific crossover of classroom Whyville knowledge into conversations and arguments at the
         club concerns the duration of Whypox. One popular claim at the club was that it took seven days to recover
         from Whypox. Aidan seemed to be the main source of this idea at the club. The same article that he read also
         put forward the idea that Whypox only lasted for seven days in 2002 (see Figure 3). This idea propagated within
         the club and was subsequently repeated and accepted by other members. While Aidan and others who read the
         article based their claim   of  the seven-day   duration on information from  the article,  it is interesting that the
         reference was not necessary once this information was accepted as a fact and commonly known among the club
         members. In many instances, the seven-day rule was invoked readily by club members in their conversations:

                  Blake:    Aidan, it takes you a week to heal?
                  Aidan:    Yeah.

                  And later:

                  Lela:     What is whypox?
                  Paolo:    You only get sick if you're around sick people.
                  Lela:     Well, I'm not around sick people.
                  Paolo:    Good, then you're healthy.
                  Leslie:   It's only a week, no big deal.
                  Blake:    I know it does only last like a week.

                  Tracing the idea of a seven-day rule from a classroom Whyville task to the casual conversations at the
         after school  club  illustrates how   a common     knowledge  base can   form around    the youth's   shared  activity
         (Windschitl, 2001). This shared knowledge was present in the youth's conversations as they bantered with each
         others and tried to convince each others of their claims about Whypox. These arguments and demonstrations of
         Whyville knowledge took place in the broader social context of the youth's interactions at the club. As such,
         conversations about Whypox were also ways for the youth to position themselves within the club's Whyville
         community. The next section will revisit one of the excerpts above concerning Blake's infection status within its
         context of participating in the community science event of Whypox.

        Whypox as an Affinity Event: Insider/Outsider Positions
                  Our  last  finding pertains   directly to players' positioning as participants in  Whypox.     Unlike   many
         traditional games that have established activity structures the organization of which can be negotiated in play
         (Goodwin,  1985),   it was  not  clear  to some   club members  whether  or not they wanted       to be infected with
         Whypox at the beginning. On the one hand, Whypox disrupted the important social aspects of online chat and
         avatar appearance. At the same time, Whypox was becoming a topic of conversation and source of attention,
         with youth sharing complaints and strategies about the disease. Blake's reactions to Whypox provide a good
         example.  As discussed above, Blake didn't want to get Whypox and warned Scott not to get him sick.           Later in
         the same conversation, he changed from his initial negative response to wishing that he had Whypox:

1-1
         Blake:   ...I don't have the Whypox, I wish I did.
         Leslie:  Why? (In a bitter voice).
         Blake:   A coo. Ah choo.

         Soon following this comment, Blake expressed sympathy toward an infected player on Whyville, a
sentiment shared by his club friend:

         Blake:   Ah choo, poor guy.
         Scott:   Ah choo poor guy, that girls really sneezing. I don't sneeze that much.
         Blake:   You don't have the Whypox?
         Scott:   No. I just sneeze.
         Blake:   I don't want Whypox.
         Leslie:  Then get away fro, those people!
         Blake:   No, but everyone here has Whypox.
         Leslie:  Get away from those people.
         Blake:   This is my friend.
         Scott:   But he has Whypox, unless you want to catch it.
         Blake:   Yeah I want to catch it. No, just kidding.
         Leslie:  I read in this article, someone said that Whypox is sexy.

         As demonstrated by this exchange, sympathy for those infected with Whypox was mixed with fear of
contracting the disease.  Blake noted that everyone at one Whyville location were sick, including his online
friend.  In order to stay away from Whypox, he was not able to socialize with sick Whyvillians.        When Blake
repeated again that he wanted to catch the disease, Whypox became the context of the club members' jokes.
Blake noted that he was "just kidding" about getting Whypox.     Leslie responded by commenting that "someone
said that Whypox is sexy", which prompted the group to laugh.

         Later on the same day, Blake was infected with Whypox as well. Despite expressing his earlier wish
for Whypox, he complained that he was sick and joined others in expressing frustrations about the symptoms.
On   the next   day, when it became   apparent that  Ben didn't  know  about  Whypox,     Blake  led the others  in
expressing disbelief and ridicule:

         Blake:   You don't know what the Whypox is?
         Ben:     No.
         Blake:   He doesn't know what the Whypox are.
         Leslie:  Oh my god.
         Blake:   That's just sad. You should already know.

         While the conversations mentioned here around Blake were particularly rich with Whypox references,
the  sentiments  expressed   were  common.  One  frequent    response to seeing  avatars  with  Whypox    pimples,
including one's own, was verbal disgust (e.g., "Ewww...") accompanied by drawing nearby club members to
witness "how ugly my person looks". One's Whypox status could invoke both positive and negative reactions,
with club members expressing pleasure (e.g., "Yes!") when they remained uninfected or displeasure (e.g., "I
hate the  Whypox.")    when  dealing  with  symptoms. Since   many    assumed that   the disease could   spread by
proximity, Whypox also induced social ostracism, with frequent exclamations of "Get away from those people!"
At the same time, other club members had shared Blake and Scott's sympathy towards those who were infected
(e.g. "poor guy"). The conversations described here serve as examples of how Whypox became a part of the
club's Whyville community and created affinity between those who were in the know and those who weren't.
The argumentation about Whypox's infection status, causes, and duration took place within this social context
and was one way through which the youth participated in the club's Whyville community and demonstrated their
insider status.

Discussion
         These   findings extend   previous research on  children's   conversational pragmatics   associated  with
everyday   argumentation,  in particular how   these strategies  connect  across different  contexts   such as  the
Whyville virtual environment, the classroom, and the club. While researchers have begun to examine how these
competencies can be leveraged in the context of classroom science activities (Bricker & Bell, 2007), our efforts
are  more  directed  towards supporting  argumentation   in  the context of virtual world  activities. We   see the

                                                                                                                      1-1
         development of emotional and social aspects, and the design of conversational contexts as promising starting
         points.
                   We know from prior research that the emotional impact associated with Whypox is one of the main
         reasons for Whyvillians to choose to engage in further investigations in Whyville's virtual center for disease
         control to examine the bulletin board postings or to use the disease simulators (Kafai, Feldon & Quintero, in
         press). Our most interesting finding here concerns the conversations among club members about the desirability
         of having Whypox. Prior analyses of the online chat records indicated that some Whyvillians deemed Whypox
         important enough to fake one of its symptoms by typing `acho' into their chat bubbles. The perceived need to
         participate (or not) in Whypox could be one of the reasons of what lead club members to argue about various
         aspects of the virtual epidemic. Within this context, we suggest that positions of insider/outsider or sick/healthy
         can help situate players' argumentation about virtual epidemics. Virtual worlds offer the possibility to adopt
         more than one identity or role that could provide space for experimentation. Goodwin (2006) and others have
         argued that these forms of everyday play helps children to develop argumentative practices that can provide the
         foundation for science inquiry in schools.
                   An equally important aspect is the difference in breadth and depth of the arguments we observed in the
         face-to-face  club setting  when    compared    to the rather    sparsely worded   exchanges in  online chat or players'
         limited   participation in  the bulletin board     postings.  In  our analysis  of  face-to-face club conversations,  we
         recorded that claims in regard to several aspects of the virtual epidemic (e.g. causation, spread, and symptoms)
         were stated and club members either sought to confirm or rebut those statements using different data sources as
         evidence (e.g. observation, data check in records, and exceptions to rules). It is possible that the current bubble
         format of online chat is not very conducive for these forms of expanded claims and rebuttals. The use of online
         discussion  forums   such   as  blogs, wikis,  or  cheat   sites could be  used  to further argumentation   about virtual
         epidemics. Players then could debate in more detail claims such as the "seven-day rule" of Whypox or causes
         for the spread of infection. The physical proximity of members in the club might have facilitated the exchanges
         and thus would suggest that online discussion spaces need to be integrated in a similar way within Whyville
         play. Our findings suggest that these spatial, emotional and social aspects provide important scaffolds in how
         players become engaged in real arguments about virtual epidemics.

       References
         Allen,  S. (2002).  Looking     for learning   in  visitor talk:  A methodological    exploration. In  G.  Leinhardt, K.
                   Crowley,  &   K.  Knutson    (Eds.),  Learning    conversations   in museums   (pp.    259-304). Mahwah,    NJ:
                   Lawrence Erlbaum.
         Ash,  D.   (2003). Dialogic    inquiry  in life   science  conversations   of  family groups  in  museums.   Journal  of
                   Research in Science Teaching, 40(2), 138-162.
         Au, T. K., Romo, L. F., & DeWitt, J. E. (1999). Considering children's folk biology in health education. In M.
                   Siegal &  C.   C. Peterson   (Eds.),  Children's    understanding   of biology and   health.  Cambridge,  UK:
                   Cambridge University Press.
         Bainbridge, W. S. (2007). The Scientific Research Potential of Virtual Worlds.         Science, 317, 472-476.
         Bartle, R. A. (2003). Designing Virtual Worlds. Indianapolis, IN: New Riders Publishing.
         Bell, P., & Linn, M. C. (2000). Scientific arguments as learning artifacts: designing for learning from the web
                   with KIE. International Journal of Science Education, 22(8), 797-817.
         Bricker, L. & Bell, P. (2007, April). "Um...since I argue for fun, I don't remember what I argue about": Using
                   children's argumentation across social contexts to inform science instruction. Paper presented at the
                   National Association of Research in Science Teaching , 2007 Annual Meeting, New Orleans, LA.
         Callanan, M.A. & Braswell, G. (2006).       Parent-Child Conversations about Science and Literacy.         In N. Burbules
                   and D.   Silberman-Keller    (Eds.),  Learning   in Places:  The   Informal Education    Reader  (pp.123-137).
                   New York, NY: Peter Lang.
         Crowley, K. & Jacobs, M. (2002). Building Islands of Expertise in Everyday Family Activity.             In G. Leinhardt,
                   K. Crowley, & K. Knutson (Eds.), Learning conversations in museums (pp. 333-356). Mahwah, NJ:
                   Lawrence Erlbaum.
         Driver, R., Newton, P., & Osborne, J. (2000). Establishing the norms of scientific argumentation in classrooms.
                   Science Education, 84(3), 287-313.
         Duschl, R. A., & Osborne, J. (2002). Supporting and promoting argumentation discourse in science education.
                   Studies in Science Education, 38, 39-72.
         Falk,  J. H.  &  Dierking,   L.  D.    (2002).  Lessons    without  limit: How   free-choice  learning  is  transforming
                   education. Walnut Creek, CA: AltaMira.
         Gee, J. (2003). What videogames can teach us about literacy and learning. New York, NY: Hargrove.
         Goodwin, M. H. (1985). The serious side of jump rope: Conversational practices and social organization in the
                   frame of play. Journal of American Folklore, 98(389), 315-330.

1-0
Goodwin,   M.  H.   (2006). The  Hidden   Life of  Girls: Games    of Stance,   Status, and  Exclusion. Malden,   MA:
        Blackwell.
Fefferman, N. H. (2007).    The untapped potential of virtual game worlds to shed light on real world epidemics.
        The Lancet, 7, 625-629.
Kafai, Y.  B.  (Ed.) (in press-a). The    World  of Whyville:  Living,  Playing    and  Learning  in a  Tween   Virtual
        Worlds. Games & Culture. Special Issue.
Kafai, Y. B., (in press-b). Of monsters and sick computers: Children's folk conception of a computer virus.
        Journal of Science Education and Technology.
Kafai, Y. B. & Giang, M. (2007). Virtual Playgrounds. In T. Willoughby & E. Wood (Eds), Children's Learning
        in a Digital World.    Oxford, UK: Blackwell Publishing.
Kafai, Y. B., Feldon, D., Fields, D., Giang, M., & Quintero, M. (2007). Life in the time of Whypox: A virtual
        epidemic as a community event. In C. Steinfield, B. Pentland, M. Ackerman, &. N Contractor (Eds.),
        Proceedings    of the  3rd International   Conference  on  Communities      and  Technologies   (pp. 171-190).
        New York, NY: Springer.
Kafai, Y. B., Feldon, D., & Quintero, M. (in press). Investigating the `Why' in Whypox. Games & Culture.
Kalish, C. W. (1999). What young children's understanding of contamination and contagion tells us about their
        concepts of illness. In M. Siegal & C. C. Peterson (Eds.), Children's understanding of biology and
        health. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Kelly, G.  J., Druker, S.,  &  Chen,  C.   (1998).  Students' reasoning  about   electricity: combining   performance
        assessments with argumentation analysis. International Journal of Science Education, 20(7), 849-871.
Kuhn,  D.  (1993).   Science  as argument:   Implications  for teaching  and    learning  scientific thinking.  Science
        Education, 77(3), 319-337.
Latour, B. (1987). Science in action. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Lemke, J. L. (1990). Talking Science: Language, Learning, and Values. Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Neulight, N.,  Kafai,  Y. B.,  Kao,   L., Foley, B. &   Galas, C.     (2007).   Children's Participation in a Virtual
        Epidemic in the Science Classroom: Making Connections to Natural Infectious Diseases. Journal of
        Science Education and Technology, 16(1), 47-58.
Newton, P., Driver, R., & Osborne, J. (1999). The place of argumentation in the pedagogy of school science.
        International Journal of Science Education, 21(5), 553-576.
Palmquist, S.  &  Crowley,    K. (2007).   From   Teachers  to Testers:  How    Parents  Talk  to Novice    and Expert
        Children in a Natural History Museum.       Science Education, 91, 783-804.
Parmelee, A. H. (1992). Wellness, illness, health, and disease concepts. In E. J. Susman, L. V. Feagans & W. J.
        Ray (Eds.), Emotion, cognition, health, and development in children and adolescents (pp. 155-164).
        Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Sandoval,  W.   A., &  Millwood,   K.  A.  (2005).  The   quality of  students' use of  evidence  in written scientific
        explanations. Cognition and Instruction, 23(1), 23-55.
Simosi,   M.   (2003).   Using   Toulmin's   framework    for  the    analysis  of  everyday   argumentation:    Some
        methodological considerations.      Argumentation, 17, 185-202.
Toulmin, S. (1958). The uses of argument. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Windschitl, M. (2001). The diffusion and appropriation of ideas: An investigation of events occurring between
        groups of learners in science classrooms. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 38 (1), 17-42.

Acknowledgments
The work reported in this paper is supported by a grant of the National Science Foundation to the first author.
The views  expressed   are  those  of the  authors  and do not    necessarily  represent the  views  of the  supporting
funding agency or the University of California, Los Angeles.

                                                                                                                          1-1
