        Effective Feedback: Guidelines for Improving Performance
         Jody S. Underwood, Educational Testing Service, Princeton, NJ, 08541, jodysun@gmail.com

         Abstract:   Studies  suggest   that when   the goal  is to  help  students  develop    their abilities,
         feedback should not be presented along with an overall grade. The effectiveness of feedback
         will depend on features of its quality. We describe guidelines for giving effective feedback
         including giving overall grades, levels and functions of feedback, and practices in effective
         feedback. The guidelines are based on a review of research of feedback on writing as well as
         general theories of feedback. We learned that in order for students to benefit from feedback,
         they have to (1) notice it, (2) accept it, and (3) understand what to do with it. After reviewing
         the research, we end with recommendations that support these notions.

Introduction
         Here is a little-known result: Even when feedback interventions improve performance on average, they
actually reduce performance in more than one third of the cases (Kluger & DeNisi, 1996). In their meta-analysis
of feedback interventions, Kluger and DeNisi showed that two out of five comments had a negative effect on
performance. These results were based on 131 reports of experimental studies involving 12,652 participants in
many    different settings.  The studies concentrated    on   feedback   interventions  for  task performance,      using
selection criteria designed to focus on the effects a teacher, manager, boarding school counselor, or others can
have on a learner.
         How does this relate to providing feedback about performance on writing and other school subjects?
We describe a framework for giving effective feedback including giving overall grades, levels and functions of
feedback, and practices in effective feedback. The guidelines are based on a review of research of feedback on
writing as well as general theories of feedback (e.g., Kluger & DeNisi, 1996; Black & Wiliam, 1998). Different
terms are used for "feedback" in the review: commentary, response, feedback, and comments. We use these
terms interchangeably.

Review of Research Studies on Response to Writing
         The articles reviewed (see Table 1) focus on the types of feedback that can be given when there is
asynchronous   interaction   between student  and   some  external  teacher,  tutor, or coach.  We    will refer to case
studies, surveys, and reviews of research carried out in either elementary, middle school, high school, or college
classrooms. Case studies are typically experiments carried out in one or a few classes. Surveys are typically
evaluations of questionnaires that students fill out in which they respond to questions about what they do with
the feedback their teachers give them on their writing. Reviews are typically reviews of feedback research that
sometimes go beyond the domain of writing feedback. We found that many reviews focus only on a theory of
giving feedback without using any formal methods of measurement. Given that this type of traditional feedback
is often used in classrooms at all levels of education, we found this to be a shortcoming in the literature, and did
not review  papers   that  only  presented  theory. This  review  does   not  cover  rubrics or   external  assessments
explicitly, nor does it summarize theories of feedback. It is also not a meta-analysis, in that it does not use
quantitative methods to summarize the results of a set of studies.
         Software    is being developed    today  that  gives students  automated    personalized     feedback   on their
writing. Writing   workshop   spaces on  the  Internet  offer suggestions  a  priori  about  how  to  successfully   and
clearly  write an  essay  but do not  offer  personalized feedback.     These literatures  will not   be reviewed   here
because  our   focus is not  on  new technologies.   However,    the designers of    educational  software  and   online
environments may be particularly interested in the suggestions we offer since we are addressing best practices
for responding to student writing and other work in what can be considered an asynchronous environment.
         We learned that in order for students to benefit from feedback, they have to (1) notice it, (2) accept it,
and (3) understand what to do with it. After reviewing the research, we end with recommendations that support
these notions.

Overall Grading and Feedback
         It is common     to think that giving   feedback to  students  about their  writing in   any  form  will   foster
improvement    and   that detailed feedback   is an improvement      to an overall   grade  because   it gives   students
something to work with to improve their writing. However, studies show that feedback should not be given at
the same time as overall grades. One problem with including both grades and feedback is that students view the
main function of comments to be "grade justification" (McGee, 1999). Students also tend to ignore specific
diagnostic comments when a grade is also included (Storms & Sheingold, 1999).

                                                                                                                             2-
         Table 1: Reviewed Articles, listed by Content Area, Grade Level, and Type of Research.

                                                                   Grade Level                       Type of Research
                                        Content     Elemen-   Middle       High                  Case
         Article                         Area        tary     School       School    College    Study      Survey    Review
         Bardine, Bardine, &Deegan, 2000 English                              X                              X
         Beason, 1993                    WAC*                                          X          X
         Black & Wiliam, 1998            varied         X           X         X        X                               X
         Clare, Valdes, & Patthey-Chavez, 2000varied    X           X                             X
         Cohen & Cavalcanti, 1990         ESL                                          X          X
         Covill, 1997                    English                              X                   X
         Ferris, 1995                     ESL                                          X                     X
         Hedgcock & Lefkowitz,1994        ESL                                          X                     X
         Kluger & DeNisi, 1998           varied         X           X         X                                        X
         Knoblauch & Brannon,1981        English                                       X
         Leki, 1990                       ESL                                 X                                        X
         Lillios & Iding, 1996           English                              X                              X
         Matsumura, Patthey-
         Chavez, Valdes, &               English        X                                         X
         Garnier, 2002
         McGee, 1999                     Writing                                       X          X
         O'Neill & Fife, 1999            Writing                                       X          X
         Ransdell, 1999                  Writing                                       X                     X
         Straub, 1996                    Writing                                       X          X
         Straub, 1997                    Writing                                       X                     X
         Williams, 1997                  Writing                                       X          X
         Winter, Neal, & Waner,1996      Writing                                       X                     X
         Zamel, 1985                      ESL                                          X          X
         *Writing Across the Curriculum

                  In a follow-up to their meta-analysis of feedback interventions, Kluger and DeNisi (1998) found that
         students usually perceive scores to be a measure of their standing relative to peers. In contrast, feedback to the
         individual that highlights weaknesses and strengths appears to be more effective in improving performance. In
         an early  study,  it was   found that   scores can  actually   impede  learning   and that  their normative  nature
         (comparison   with others)  and low level   of specificity attenuate their effectiveness as   feedback  interventions
         (Kluger & DeNisi, 1996). In Black and Wiliam's (1998) review of the literature on formative assessment, they
         found that  the use  of overall grades  in conjunction    with feedback can  be detrimental.  Even  if  task-oriented
         feedback comments could be helpful for a student's work, their effect could be undermined by providing grades,
         which can result in a negative motivational effect.
                  These studies suggest that when the goal is to help students develop their abilities, feedback should not
         be presented along with an overall grade. The effectiveness of feedback will depend on features of its quality, as
         is examined in the remainder of this article.

        Level of Feedback in Writing: Content vs. Surface
                  In analyzing feedback many researchers look at comments in terms of the implied level of revision they
         call for, for example, those that call for changes to the overall meaning or purpose of a composition and those
         that call for changes at a micro-level such as spelling and grammar (i.e., those aspects of writing that do not
         result in alterations to the piece as a whole). Ferris (1995), for example, coded teacher comments according to
         whether they addressed the organization, content, mechanics, grammar, or vocabulary of the paper. Similarly,
         Beason's   (1993)    study coded  comments     in  accordance    with  the  criteria  (focus, development/support,
         organization, mechanics,    expression, validity, other)   they reflected. Often, these  classification systems are
         referred to  and studied   in terms of  the   bifurcation between  global  (content,  organization, etc.) and local
         (grammar, mechanics, etc.) feedback, otherwise called content- and surface-level feedback.

2-
What Teachers Do
          Much  attention has been  paid  to student  preferences,  teacher practices, and composition   quality in
terms of this content- and surface-level dichotomy and it has been found that there is quite a discrepancy among
what teachers do in practice, what students prefer, and what results in better quality writing.    Some teachers
concern themselves primarily with surface issues when they respond to student papers (e.g., Clare, Valdes, &
Patthey-Chavez, 2000; Matsumara, Patthey-Chavez, Valdes, & Garnier, 2002; Zamel, 1985). Matsumara et al.'s
(2002) research in urban third-grade classrooms revealed that across both low- and high-achieving schools most
of the comments on student papers were surface-level, but that the quality of the content and organization of
students' final drafts were significantly predicted by the amount of content-level feedback received on earlier
drafts. Beason's (1993) work, on the other hand, revealed that most of the comments teachers and peers made in
giving feedback   were more   global or   content-related. One  study solicited  teacher self-reports on  feedback
practices from instructors of an English as a Foreign Language (EFL) institute course, an EFL university course,
and a native-speaker English course. They, too, found quite disparate views on how and what type of feedback
should be given and what is best suited for students ­ one instructor reported that she emphasized mechanics
and grammar (purposefully not concerning herself with content) in giving feedback and another teacher reported
focusing on content (Cohen & Cavalcanti, 1990). Teachers in another study reported an interest in global issues,
but noted that responses were often at a local level (Fuller, 1987). One possible explanation for this disconnect
may be that teachers have a difficult time focusing on and reacting to both global and local matters at the same
time in reviewing student papers, a finding of Zamel's (1985) study of university-level ESL writing classes. She
concluded that teachers can become "so distracted by language-related local problems that they often correct
these without realizing that a much larger meaning-related problem has totally escaped their notice."

What students prefer
          Similar to the lack of cohesion among teachers in feedback practices, there is no common ground in
what students prefer in writing feedback. Just as teachers give feedback as they deem appropriate and as they
prefer, the case is the same with college students. In his study, Straub (1997) asked students to look at various
comments given on a student essay and complete a survey on their preferences for each type of comment. He
found that students seemed to prefer equally comments on both local and global matters of writing. However,
preferences were found for certain types of local and global comments. For example, feedback on sentence
structure, grammar, organization, and development was looked upon favorably by students, whereas feedback
pertaining to word choice or that contrasted with ideas expressed by students was not received as well. Ferris
(1995), too, found that although most comments were at the local level, students attended to and appreciated
both global and local comments equally. While some students find either type of feedback useful in improving
their papers, others express distinct preferences for global (Cohen & Cavalcanti, 1990; McGee, 1999) or local
(Leki, 1990) commenting styles. Students in McGee's study, for example, reported that feedback on "trivial"
matters such as formatting, missing words, and mechanical issues was of little use to them in improving their
papers, while Leki's research found that students exhibited a lack of interest in having teachers comment on
essay content. They felt that such feedback did not help to improve their writing; instead they benefited much
more from teacher response that clearly pointed out errors. We find it interesting that these studies cross college
level ESL and writing courses. Since these results all came from studies that focused on college courses, we
cannot explicitly extend    these findings   to students in  other  grade   levels, though we  can take   them   as
considerations.

Effect on revision/writing
          It is useful to look at the effects of content- and surface-level feedback on the processes of writing and
revising. The results of Beason's (1993) study showed that the majority of feedback teachers gave was of a
global nature, but the majority of the revisions students actually made were at the surface level or affected only
the microstructure of the paper. In a study of 10th and 11th graders' academic and affective responses to content-
versus surface-level  feedback,   Covill (1997)  found  that students receiving  primarily content-level  feedback
spent  significantly more   time  revising   than  the  group  that  received  primarily   surface-level feedback.
Furthermore, the types of revisions varied with type of feedback: those in the content-level feedback condition
made more micro- and macrostructure changes while those in the surface-level condition made more formal
(e.g., mechanics) and meaning preserving (e.g., paraphrasing) changes. It is important to note, however, that
there was no significant improvement from the first to the second draft between those in the content-level versus
those  in the surface-level feedback  condition.   It appears, then,  that there exists no one-to-one    correlation
between the type of feedback given and the resulting revisions or quality of compositions. Although there is
some evidence that points to the benefits of content-level feedback (i.e., that it results in better organization and
quality of content, and perhaps results in more time spent revising), the results seem to vary greatly from study
to study. More research is needed in order to determine more conclusively the relationship between level of

                                                                                                                        2-
         feedback and writing quality and revision practices.

        Timing
                   Another   consideration     is  the  stage  of  writing     at which    content-   and    surface-level   feedback  is
         introduced. As Zamel (1985) put it, "we need to establish priorities in our responses to drafts and subsequent
         revisions and encourage students to address certain concerns before others."
                   Research suggests that students pay close attention to feedback given on early drafts, thus underlining
         the importance of the type of feedback teachers give at this stage of writing (Ferris, 1995). While Sommers
         (1982) sees the value in all types of comments, she stresses that "in responding to our students' writing, we
         should be guided by the recognition that it is not spelling or usage problems that we as writers first worry about
         when drafting and revising our texts." Responding to surface-level issues in the drafting phase of writing gives
         the impression, she says, that these are the most critical aspects of writing; it results in the confusion of process
         and  product.  Instead    we   should  be  helping   the student  to  refine   or clarify   his/her  purpose  or   meaning,  the
         organization of the piece, and the logic of the argument. Contrary to her opinion, ESL and foreign language (FL)
         learners in Hedgcock and Lefkowitz's (1994) study seemed to indicate a slightly stronger preference for surface-
         level feedback on first drafts and reported learning more when teachers did so. This, however, could be a by-
         product   of  the nature  of   ESL    and FL   learning  in  that students    of  language   are  striving   more   to learn the
         intricacies  and   idiosyncrasies     of the   language   itself than    having   their  ideas and     organization    corrected.
         Interestingly, the teacher in Cohen and Cavalcanti's (1990) study who reported emphasizing surface issues and
         deliberately disregarding content issues in providing feedback said the reason behind doing so was that English
         proficiency examinations did not assess content. Despite the conflicting evidence and opinions in regard to this
         matter, it does seem important to consider the "scale of concern" we assign to comments (Sommers 151). That
         is, it is important for the teacher to point out to the student the most critical aspects of the paper that need to be
         revised.
                   In summary, the research on the effects of content- and surface-level feedback on student writing is
         inconclusive.  That   is, neither   level of   feedback  is the   main   determining    factor for   improvement     in writing,
         though both seem to offer some improvement to some students at different times for different purposes.

        Function of Feedback: Directive vs. Facilitative
                   Feedback,   when     used   appropriately   for formative      improvement,     puts the   locus   of control   in the
         student's hands. There are complex connections between the way in which feedback is received, the way that
         perception motivates the selection of a course of action, and the learning activity that may or may not follow
         (Black   &   Wiliam,  1998).   Writing    many    directive  comments      (e.g., corrections  of    wording    or conventions,
         proofreading) gives students the idea that the teacher wants to control the essay, and that the teacher is picky
         (McGee,    1999).  The    data indicate   that subjects  found    most   unhelpful   those   comments    that   lacked  a sound
         explanation,  were   unclear,   that  attempted   to wrest  control   of  the  paper   from  the  student,   or that dealt with
         "trivial" matters such as missing work or formatting (McGee, 1999).
                   One  way    to  look  at  feedback   is in terms   of  the  tone  or function     inherent in  it. In other  words, a
         comment can be suggestive, perhaps pointing to an idea or phrase that could use more clarification or focus, or it
         can  be  instructional,  pointing   students   to a  grammar     rule or  theory  that  could  help  to  improve    the writing.
         Similar  to  level of feedback,     the  function  of feedback    is  also  discussed    in terms   of a dichotomy,     between
         directive  (comments      that tell   students directly  what    needs   to be    revised,  e.g., criticisms)   and  facilitative
         (comments designed to help guide students to rework their text on their own, perhaps in the form of questions or
         reflections).
                   It would seem that facilitative comments would have a better effect on student learning than comments
         that are  more directive.    However,     several studies   have  found   evidence    to the contrary.   For  example,    Zamel
         (1985) found that very explicit, directive comments were more helpful than suggestive comments in improving
         writing in college freshmen, but she also found that implicit feedback prompted revisions. She suggests that
         teachers  gradually   shift  their  feedback   styles from   more     directive   to more   facilitative as   students  become
         comfortable with the expectations placed on their writing (Knoblauch & Brannon, 1981). In a study of first-year
         college composition students, Ransdell (1999) found that students almost equally preferred directive comments
         and facilitative comments, with a smaller number of students believing both types of comments to be equally
         useful and another small number of students believing a combination of these types would be best. Students who
         preferred directive commentary reported that it helped them figure out what needs to be fixed and that it did not
         leave them feeling confused. That is, there is no guesswork with directive commentary. Students who preferred
         facilitative commentary argue that it allows some room for writers to expand in different ways as opposed to
         being constrained to making revisions that they believe the teacher wants to see. Ransdell, a teacher-researcher,
         said he tried to use facilitative commentary.         He found, however, in reviewing end-of-semester portfolios, in
         which   students   included    up  to two  revised   essays, that  students    made   few   revisions   and   often  overlooked
         facilitative comments. First-year students in McGee's (1999) study were put off by directive comments, feeling

2-
that by commenting in this manner the teacher was being too particular or was attempting to control the essay.
Balancing   comments   so that   directives and less  controlling types of  comments    are distributed  more   equally
throughout essays makes the teacher seem like an interested reader as opposed to a critic.

Who Controls the Writing?
         It may be, then, that it is the level of control over student writing that really impacts how comments are
received and heeded in the revision process. Feedback as it controls student writing is a prominent issue among
researchers who study feedback practices. Brannon & Knoblauch (1982) speak of the teacher's tendency to
comment on student writing in terms of the discrepancy between what the student has written and the teacher's
idea of what constitutes good writing, or what they call the "Ideal Text." Instead, they contend, the teacher
should be looking at the discrepancy between what the student has achieved and what the student intended to
achieve. By doing so, the teacher would exert less control over students' writing, allowing them to reflect on
their own   purposes  and choices.   This,  of  course, would  require   a discussion   or survey,  as  Reesor   (2002)
suggests, to actually determine the student's intentions. Reesor was thinking along the lines of Brannon and
Knoblauch   as to how    teachers  should   negotiate a feedback  strategy with   the students,  so that   the teacher's
feedback will meet each student's needs, and keep the control of the text in the student's hands. As Sommers
(1982) explains, "teachers' comments can take students' attention away from their own purposes in writing a
particular text and focus that attention on the teachers' purpose in commenting."       Because of this, students may
then feel compelled to make changes to meet the teacher's perceived needs instead of what the student deems
necessary to improve the quality of the essay. Straub (1996) lays out a hierarchy of control based on the function
of comments, ranging from corrections (most controlling), to criticisms and commands, to qualified evaluations
and advice (least controlling). Praise is somewhat nebulous and does not fit nicely into this hierarchy; it is "less
controlling than  criticisms  or commands     [yet]....underscore[s] the  teacher's values  and   agendas."    Students,
Straub (1997) found, seem to most favor those comments that offer direction but do not control the writing.

Student Perceptions
         Inherent in this connection between the function of a comment and the degree of control it exerts over
student writing,  is the way   that teachers   are  perceived when   they  give feedback    using different    modes of
expression. If the teacher comes across as demanding, students may not be as receptive to the feedback as when
the comments are posed in a more favorable light (i.e., as guidance, advice, or suggestions). O'Neill and Fife
(1999) maintain that teacher comments cannot simply be labeled "directive" or "facilitative" without taking into
account the entire classroom context, including the teacher's perceived ethos and the entirety of the feedback
system (i.e., student-teacher conferences and other feedback opportunities). Like the students in McGee's (1999)
study, whose preference and receptivity for types of feedback were dictated by how it made the teacher look as a
person, students in O'Neill and Fife's research indicated that it was the overall character of the teacher that
determined how students approached teacher comments. Subjects in Straub's (1997) study were asked to explain
preferences for certain modes of commenting, and indicated that some comments made the teacher come across
as harsh  and  judgmental,    while others   were   supportive and   encouraging.   They    also indicated  that  some
comments tried to impose the teacher's view on the students, while others encouraged the students to develop
their own ideas. In other words, the role that the teacher plays socially and politically is very important. A
teacher with an interruptive voice can silence the student's voice, compelling the students to change their papers
even  without  agreeing  with  the  suggested  revisions  (Williams, 1997).   Just as teachers   stress to students  the
importance of using the appropriate voice, so, too must teachers in responding to students (Fuller, 1987).

Other Practices in Effective Feedback
Positive vs. Negative Feedback
         Students prefer  positive  feedback,   which   comes  in  two   flavors:  praise  and constructive    criticism.
Feedback is considered positive when comments include what the student needs to improve. After interviewing
several students about their attitudes toward their teacher's response style, Bardine, Bardine, and Deegan (2000)
found that most students believe that the purpose of teacher feedback is to inform students about what they are
doing wrong. A teacher of one of the classrooms involved in this study reflected on the results:

         I also learned that the tone of my comments was just as important as the outcome I wanted for
         the response. In other words, students wanted to be praised and know that they were doing
         something right. If they don't receive this message, or if it sounds like I am ordering them to
         do something differently, then I might not get a motivated response. (Bardine et al., 2000, p.
         100)

         These findings   are echoed  in    several other studies as well. In a   study of college  freshmen,   McGee
(1999) notes that students respond more easily and more happily to praise. Beason (1993) writes that positive

                                                                                                                            2-
         response  plays  a vital role   in helping  students  recognize  their  strengths and gain  confidence.  In contrast,
         negative  response   styles have   been   shown to  be a   major de-motivator,    having strong effects on  students'
         attitudes toward   writing  (Hillocks cited  in Connors    & Lunsford,   1993; Storms    &  Sheingold,  1999).   Some
         students  in Ferris' (1995)    study felt depressed  and experienced    lower levels  of motivation and   self-esteem
         because they felt that all of their teacher's comments were negative. A review of the research by Winter, Neal,
         and Waner (1996) finds that students may not even attend to feedback stated in a negative manner.
                   It is important   to note  that  although  these studies do   point to  the positive  effects of  praise on
         characteristics of the writer such as confidence and self-esteem, they are also careful to say that praise does not
         necessarily help students to produce better papers (Knoblauch & Brannon, 1981). For instance, while Beason
         (1993) confirms    that praise does  benefit writers, he also finds that  compared    to problem-oriented  feedback,
         praise does not automatically result in better writing. Winter et al. (1996) report that students who receive praise
         are likely to write longer essays and to exhibit more positive attitudes about writing, but they do not seem to
         produce better writing. Praise, like other cues that draw attention toward self-esteem and away from the task,
         generally has a negative effect on attitudes and performance (Black & Wiliam, 1998). For example, students
         who received "ego-involving feedback" sought help less than students who received "task-involving feedback."
         However, verbal praise and supportive feedback can increase students' interest in and attitude towards a task,
         even if the feedback itself has little effect on performance. Furthermore, students themselves report that praise
         does not motivate them to improve, nor does it help them to improve (Leki, 1990).
                   Considering   positive   feedback  in the  second,  more  substantive   sense, in a   meta-analysis  of  the
         instructional effect of feedback from classroom tests (not specifically for writing tasks), Bangert-Drowns, Kulik,
         Kulik, and   Morgan   (cited   in Black &  Wiliam,   1998) found   that feedback  was  more  effective  when  it gave
         details of how to improve the answer, rather than indicating whether the student's work was correct or incorrect.
         In addition, phrasing feedback in a constructive rather than negative way is more palatable to students (Storms
         & Sheingold, 1999). Interestingly, some students categorized as "positive" those statements that were specific
         and directed them towards improving their writing, whether it was phrased negatively or positively. That is, they
         did not find "honest criticism" to be negative (e.g., "Get to the point of your argument instead of beating around
         the bush") (McGee, 1999). Some students noted that all of their teachers' comments were positive because they
         helped them to improve their writing. We would view these comments as constructive rather than positive.
                   Kluger and DeNisi (1998) recommend using feedback in combination with goal-setting interventions,
         thereby focusing on the student's progress toward the goals. By doing this, attention is directed to the task at
         hand, and not toward self-esteem. Feedback that draws attention away from the task and towards self-esteem
         can have a negative effect on attitudes and performance.

        Specific vs. General
                   Studies found that when teachers gave very general comments, without being clear about the changes
         they wanted to see made in the paper, students did not know what to do with the feedback, resulting in either
         incorrect interpretations   or frustration with comments   (McGee,     1999; Williams,   1997; Storms   &  Sheingold,
         1999). When feedback is not specific, students find that it is not very helpful or just useless. When students in
         Ferris' study, for example, were asked if their teacher's responses were helpful, some said they were not specific
         enough to be helpful. Another study showed that students also prefer specific feedback to be personalized (e.g.,
         something that shows that the teacher is familiar with the student as a person) (Storms & Sheingold, 1999;
         McGee, 1999). Results of a survey administered to students by Lillios and Iding (1996) showed that all of the
         useful comments teachers made were also very specific in nature. In both of the classrooms Bardine et al. (2000)
         studied, they found that students want specifics and clarity in the comments they receive on their writing. A
         teacher in Bardine et al.'s study said of the results, "I realized that many of my comments were too vague.
         Terms such as `explain further,' `more details needed,' `too vague,' or `develop idea' were foreign to many
         students." Feedback can also fall short of being helpful if it is cryptic (Speck 2000). Cryptic responses often
         contain one word (e.g., "Awkward") or are abrupt (e.g., "Rewrite this"). In both of these cases, there is not
         enough information for students to understand what is intended by the comment. Zamel, too, found that teachers
         "often provide vague and abstract responses that do not enable students to revise their texts" (p. 89). It is an
         interesting irony that the teacher expects the student to develop and clarify ideas and details, while doing so
         using vague feedback. As Sommers (1982) put it, "the teacher holds a license for vagueness while the student is
         commanded to be specific" (p. 153).
                   The literature suggests that the best feedback is a combination of specific and positive. McGee's (1999)
         subjects found positive comments that specifically detail what is good about a paper to be helpful, and students
         in Ferris' (1995) research remembered the details of positive comments better than other items they were asked
         to remember. In addition, Bardine et al. (2000) found that, telling students that a part of their essay is effective is
         not enough; students want to know why it is effective, and Straub (1996) learned that students preferred praise
         only when an explanation followed as to why the writing was worthy of praise).

2-20
Amount of Feedback
         Even when feedback is positive and specific, it can still fall short of being helpful if it is too long
(Speck  2000).  Speck    advise   teachers not  to give    more  feedback   than the  student  wrote (which   can  be an
indication of the student's literacy level), as it can be overwhelming. Long comments can also tend to be diffuse
and unfocused, not giving the student good enough direction as to where to begin making revisions (Reesor,
2002).  Linking    this discussion    back to  control, Straub   (1996)    noted that, "Generally   speaking,  the  more
comments a teacher makes on a piece of writing, the more controlling he or she will likely be. (p. 233)" As
Fuller (1987) said:

         My extensive commentary, I must have thought, would solve most of the problems in one full-
         sweep. But it is clear to me now that traditional product-centered commentary is not such a
         sweeping remedy. The diverse and random responses in the `all-inclusive' commentary do not
         usually address a student in a consistent, focused, and effective manner. ... Unfortunately,
         without   a  clear  focus, the responder  usually    barrages  the student  with  a lot of conflicting
         messages. (p. 308)

         Kulhavy and Stock (1989) address the amount of feedback to present to a student from a different
perspective. They present an information-processing model of feedback and response, drawing on the results of
experiments in which different kinds of written responses are given to students as feedback on different types of
tasks. This work is more general than feedback on writing, but the results clearly have application to this domain
and others. These authors use students' "response certitude" (the level of confidence the student has in the
answer he has written or selected) in determining the amount of time he or she will spend processing feedback.
They argue that certitude judgments involve some assessment of the learners' affective and motivational states,
as well  as whether     they know   an  answer. This    is in contrast  to most  instructional design  strategies, where
feedback decisions typically depend entirely on task characteristics.
         When   students     have high  certitude  that an  answer   is correct, the   amount  of time  they  will spend
attending to feedback    will  be   small, and  elaboration   of any  type  will probably   have  a small  effect  on the
student's learning. Kulhavy and Stock's recommendation in these cases is to simply verify an answer. At the
other extreme, high certitude that an answer is incorrect increases the amount of time that students will attend to
feedback. They suggest that under this condition, elaborating on areas that need improvement makes sense since
these students are most likely to improve their work.

Summary
         Feedback is most effective when used for formative improvement, as in the case of multiple drafts of
writing. It is also most useful to the student when the locus of control is with the student. Constructivist learning
theory supports the idea that students need to be in control of their own learning. Students should be able to
relate feedback  to   their  work  products,  choose   the  pieces of  feedback  that  are important   and relevant,  and
understand what needs to be done in order to improve. There are complex connections between the way in
which  feedback    is received,   the way  that perception    motivates the  selection  of a  course of action,   and the
learning  activity that  may   or  may  not   follow.  Even   when   research  touts  positive results (e.g., "improved
performance on average"), there is often more than one way to read those results. We summarize the results of
this review in the form of recommendations.

         1.  When providing detailed feedback, do not include an overall grade.
         2.  Provide both content-level and surface-level feedback.
         3.  Align directive and facilitative feedback with student goals.
         4.  Balance control of the feedback.
         5.  Present feedback in specific rather than general ways.
         6.  Tell students both what they did right and where they need help.
         7.  Generate text appropriate to the ability level of the student.
         8.  Generate an appropriate amount of text based on student certitude.
         9.  Provide alternative feedback methods for specific characteristics of writing and other tasks.
         10. Conduct a survey to find out what types of feedback the student would like.

References
Bardine,  B.A., Bardine,     M.S.,  &   Deegan,   E.F.  (2000).  Beyond    the Red   Pen:  Clarifying  Our  Role   in the
         Response Process. English Journal. 90(1), 94-101.
Beason, L. (1993). Feedback and Revision in Writing Across the Curriculum Classes. Research in the Teaching
         of English, 72(4), 395-422.
Black, P, and Wiliam. D. (1998). Assessment and Classroom Learning. Assessment in Education. 5(1), 7-74.

                                                                                                                            2-2
        Brannon,    L. &    Knoblauch,    C.H. (1982).  On   Students' Rights  to  Their   Own   Texts:  A  Model   of  Teacher
                 Response. College Composition and Communication, 33(2), 157-166.
        Clare,  L., Valdes,    R., &  Patthey-Chavez,   C.G.  (2000). Learning  to  Write  in Urban    Elementary   and Middle
                 Schools: An Investigation of Teachers' Written Feedback on Student Compositions. LA, CA: CRESST.
        Cohen, A.D. & Cavalcanti, M.C. (1990). Feedback on Compositions: Teacher and Student Verbal Reports. In B.
                 Kroll   (Ed.),    Second Language    Writing:  Research   Insights  for the  Classroom   (pp.  155-177).   NY:
                 Cambridge UP.
        Connors,    R.   J. &  Lunsford,    A.A.  (1993). Teachers'    Rhetorical   Comments     on  Student   Papers.  College
                 Composition and Communication, 44(2), 200-223.
        Covill, A.E. (1997). Students' Revision Practices and Attitudes in Response to Surface-Related Feedback as
                 Compared to Content-Related Feedback on Their Writing. Diss. U of Washington. Ann Arbor: UMI.
        Ferris, D.R. (1995). Student Reactions to Teacher Response in Multiple-Draft Composition Classrooms. TESOL
                 Quarterly, 29(1), 33-53.
        Fuller,  D.C.  (1987).  Teacher   Commentary     That  Communicates:   Practicing   What   We    Preach in  the Writing
                 Class. Journal of Teaching Writing, 6, 307-317.
        Hedgcock,    J., &   Lefkowitz,   N. (1994).   Feedback  on   Feedback: Assessing     Learner  Receptivity  to  Teacher
                 Response in L2 Composing. Journal of Second Language Writing, 3(2), 141-163.
        Kluger,  A.N.,   &   DeNisi,  A.  (1996).  The  Effects  of Feedback   Interventions   on Performance:     A  Historical
                 Review,     a Meta-Analysis,   and  a  Preliminary Feedback   Intervention   Theory.  Psychological    Bulletin.
                 119(2), 254-284.
        Kluger,  A.N.,   &   DeNisi,  A.  (1998). Feedback   Interventions: Toward     the Understanding   of a Double-Edged
                 Sword. Current Directions in Psychological Science. 7(3), 67-72.
        Knoblauch,     C.H.,  &    Brannon, L. (1981).  Teacher  Commentary     on   Student  Writing:   The  State of  the Art.
                 Freshman English News, 10(2), 1-4.
        Kulhavy,    R.W.    &  Stock, W.A.   (1989).  Feedback   in Written   Instruction: The   Place of Response    Certitude.
                 Educational Psychology Review, 1(4), 279-308.
        Leki, I. (1990). Coaching from the Margins: Issues in Written Response. In B. Kroll (Ed.), Second Language
                 Writing: Research Insights for the Classroom (pp. 57-68), New York: Cambridge UP.
        Lillios, M.,   & Iding,    M.K. (1996).   How   Ninth Graders  Respond    to Teacher   and   Peer Comments     on Their
                 Writing. Teaching and Change, 3(3), 211-226.
        Matsumura,     L.C.,   Patthey-Chavez,    C.G., Valdes,  R.,  &  Garnier,   H.   (2002). Teacher   Feedback,    Writing
                 Assignment     Quality,  and  Third   Grade  Students' Revision    in Lower-    and Higher-Achieving     Urban
                 Schools. The Elementary School Journal, 103(1), 2-25.
        McGee, S.J. (1999). A Qualitative Study of Student Response to Teacher-Written Comments. Diss. Purdue U.
        O'Neill, P. & Fife, J.M. (1999). Listening to Students: Contextualizing Response to Student Writing. College
                 Composition and Communication, 27(2), 39-51.
        Ransdell, D.R. (1999). Directive Versus Facilitative Commentary. Teaching English in the Two-Year College,
                 26(3), 269-276.
        Reesor, M. (2002). Issues in Written Teacher Feedback: A Critical Review. The English Teacher, 5(3), 242-255.
        Sommers, N. (1982). Responding to Student Writing. College Composition and Communication 33(2), 148-156.
        Speck,   B.W.    (2000).   Grading   students'  classroom    writing: Issues   and   strategies.  ASHE-ERIC      Higher
                 Education Report (Volume 27, Number 3). Washington, DC: George Washington U.
        Storms, B. & Sheingold, K. (1999). Teachers' and Students' Uses of and Reactions to the DWS Prototype.
                 Princeton, NJ: Educational Testing Service.
        Straub,  R. (1996).    The  Concept  of  Control  in Teacher  Response:   Defining   the Varieties of  "Directive"  and
                 "Facilitative" Commentary. College Composition and Communication, 47(2), 223-251.
        Straub, R. (1997). Students' Reactions to Teacher Comments: An Exploratory Study. Research in the Teaching
                 of English, 31(1), 91-119.
        Williams,   S.E.    (1997).  Teachers'   Written  Comments     and  Students'    Responses:  A    Socially  Constructed
                 Interaction.   Proceedings    of the   Annual  Meeting  of the Conference     on   College  Composition    and
                 Communication, Phoenix, AZ.
        Winter,  J.K.,   Neal,  J.C., &   Waner,  K.K.   (1996). Student   and  Instructor   Use  of  Comments     on  Business
                 Communication Papers. Business Communication Quarterly, 59(4), 56-68.
        Zamel, V. (1985). Responding to Student Writing. TESOL Quarterly, 19(1), 86-96.

2-22
