                                 Considering Gender in Digital Games:
        Implications for Serious Game Designs in the Learning Sciences

                 Yasmin B. Kafai, University of California, Los Angeles, 2331 Moore Hall, kafai@gseis.ucla.edu

                  Abstract: This  paper   reviews the  research literature on gender    and gaming in    light of the
                  growing interest in digital games for learning. It outlines three different approaches that have
                  been developed to address gender issues in digital games: `games for girls' that build on gender
                  differences by promoting different notions of femininity, `games for change' that support gender
                  play by challenging stereotypes, and `games as designs' that position girls as creators of their
                  own learning environments. The paper then discusses implications for design methods, choices
                  of game genres and features, research in learning environments, and approaches to data analyses
                  for learning science researchers interested in designing and using games for learning.

       Introduction
                  Over the last ten years, we have witnessed some remarkable changes in the field of digital games. The
         most obvious one concerns the move of digital games into mainstream entertainment. Now people of all ages and
         backgrounds, and not just young boys and men, can be seen playing games. New gaming formats and platforms
         have expanded participation into mobile, massive online and alternative reality gaming anytime, anywhere, and
         with anyone. Equally important is the recognition of digital games for their educational benefits amplified by the
         creation of the serious games movement. But arguably one of the most significant changes has been the increased
         presence of girls and women as gamers. Recent industry reports (Entertainment Software Association, 2007) list
         over 40% of women as gamers with casual gamers consisting of over 70% women players.
                  Thus  the worry   about gender  issues in  games,  which    has  been documented   so   prominently   in the
         research literature (Cassell & Jenkins, 1998; Yelland & Rubin, 2002), might seem misplaced and could explain
         why it has been put to rest in some discussions. No other than Jim Gee (2003), who has helped popularize video
         games  as examples  of  promising  learning  environments,  articulated   that he  had "nothing  whatsoever   to  say
         about this issue" (p. 10) given the large number of existing publications. Gee admitted that videogames, like
         other popular cultural forms, overstress sexualized women in their content and usually portray them as minor
         characters but foresaw that this will change. As I will argue, this is an overly simplistic view because gender in
         digital games has always been about more than just having larger numbers of female players and fewer virtual
         bosoms in games.
                  Two different arguments have been prominent in discussions on why gender should matter in digital
         games. The technology pipeline argument has been discussed most extensively because boys' early access to
         video games presumably provided them with a home advantage (see Hayes, in press). Consequently, increasing
         girls and women's    participation in gaming    has  been  seen   as one   way  to  address the   lack   of women's
         involvement with technology. Yet, the trends seem to indicate otherwise: over the last ten years the participation
         of women and minorities in IT fields has decreased. Games as such have little changed, and women have made
         few inroads into the game design industry (Cohoon & Asprey, 2006). A second argument as to why gender
         should  matter in  digital games   concerned   the  content of    digital games,   most notably   the  violence   and
         stereotyping (Hartmann & Klimmt, 2006; Provenzo, 1991) which were seen as another deterrent for girls. While
         researchers have debated to what extent these messages are received as transmitted (Kinder, 1991), stereotyping
         continues to exist even with strong female protagonists such as Lara Croft now prominent in many games (Jansz
         & Martis, 2006).
                  These arguments have made gender in games an issue that we cannot ignore because they illustrate that
         lack of participation and bias in representations have implications far beyond mere numbers. Within industry
         and academia different proposals have been developed for addressing these issues: (1) `games for girls' that
         build on gender differences by promoting different notions of femininity and (2) `games for change' that support
         gender play by challenging stereotypes, and (3) `games as designs' that position girls as creators of learning
         environments.  In  the following   sections, I will outline the   premises  of  these  different proposals,  provide
         examples of existing game designs, and then articulate implications for the choices of design methods, game
         genres, features, research in learning environments, and data analyses for learning science researchers interested
         in designing and using games for learning.

       Gender in the Design of Digital Games
                  In the early 1990's, video games were mostly seen as toys for boys. During those years, there was little
         interest in the game industry to create and market games for girls because all the research had shown that girls
         just weren't interested in computers, and, by extension, in digital games. Yet, others wondered whether this
1-
untapped market segment could be mined by designing games for girls. These discussions crystallized in the girl
game  movement    --  an  unlikely  alliance    between academics    and  industry  (for  an extensive   discussion, see
Cassell &   Jenkins, 1998).  Within    the girl game  movement,      games  were created    for girls only  based on  the
premise of gender differences emphasizing traditional notions of feminity. This approach to gender in game
design will be called `games for girls.' In contrast, approaches under the premise of gender as a social construct
have favored   games   that  challenge  stereotypes  and   will   be called `games    for change.'    Finally, `games as
designs' position girls as creators of learning environments. The following sections will provide more detail to
the different approaches using selected games as examples that illustrate similarities and differences in game
character design, mechanics, and context.

Games for Girls: Building on Gender Differences
          A large body   of  research  has  established significant   gender differences    in  various  aspects such as
performance and experience related to video game play (for an overview, see: Greenfield & Cocking, 1996).
Other research focused on differences in game playing interests and used these as an explanation for why girls
were not playing video games (Hartmann & Klimmt, 2006; Klawe, Inkpen, Phillips, Upitis, & Rubin, 2002).
Industry designers and academics thus argued that games needed to emphasize different content, mechanics, and
characters in order to appeal to girls. The Barbie series exemplifies the characteristics of a typical girl game
aimed at 6 to 11 year olds. Barbie Fashion Designer released by Mattel in 1996 was the most popular package
produced in this series. It let players design clothes for the Barbie doll and model them on a catwalk before
printing them out on special clothes-like paper and gluing or `sewing' them together to dress an actual Barbie
doll. The software provides dozens of clothes patterns that fit the actual Barbie doll body and a large array of
different colors and print patterns. Other software packages in this series let the player via Barbie explore the
ocean environment (e.g., Barbie Ocean) or create dresses for collaborative doll play (e.g., Barbie Print `n' Play).
These  game   activities emphasized    traditional  notions of  feminity   such  as   being  beautiful  and  fashionable.
Greenfield and Subrahamayan (1998) explained the success of Barbie Fashion Designer with its focus on girls'
traditional play patterns with dolls. When Mattel released Barbie Fashion Designer, the title outsold all other
console games in the traditional boys market. This commercial success indicated for the first time that girls
could be interested in computers given the right software.
          Other efforts, most notably the Friendship series developed by Purple Moon under the direction of
Brenda  Laurel, promoted     different interests of girls, those  of social interaction   and   helping. The   Friendship
series focused on girls ages 8 to 12 years old. For instance, Rockett's New World released by Purple Moon in
1997 presented a player with the situation of moving to a new school and navigating her way through the social
maze for making friends. In the game, Rockett would face different social situations with classmates and could
rehearse answers and experience their outcomes. Rockett and her six friends were dressed in casual fashion. A
diary provided additional information about Rockett's feelings and interests (see Laurel, 1998). Other packages
in this series would allow Rocket and her friends to explore secret pathways in a forest and design friendship
bracelets. The game activities focused on gaining access and social status among peers. This group of girl games
has often been called `purple software' because of its purple packaging while the Barbie software, and others
alike, were called `pink software' because of their pink packaging. The successes and failures behind these two
developments have been extensively discussed elsewhere (Jenkins, 2003; Jenkins & Cassell, in press; Laurel,
2003). But what's important here is that this focus on gender differences in game play and interests produced
clear prescriptions on how to design games for girls: offer female player protagonists, afford realistic feature
choices, use cooperation not competition, and provide positive but not violent feedback.

Games for Change: Supporting Gender Play
          The pink   and  purple games     that appealed   to large  numbers    of  girls (based   on  their commercial
successes) and used girls rather than boys as a starting point for their designs, created considerable concern
among feminist researchers (Cassell & Jenkins, 1998; deCastell & Bryson, 1998): the promotion of traditional
values about what it meant to be a girl, the limited choices of identification with femininity, and the creation of
separate, girls-only spaces   leading  to  a possible   ghettoization  of girls (Seiter,  1993).   But  one  of the most
problematic aspects was for many the "essentialization" of girls and boys -- the assumption that all same sex
children share the same likes and dislikes. This view ignores the substantial differences that exist within a group
of girls or boys. A recent meta-analysis found that most of the observed differences between men and women in
psychological  studies   are rather small   with the exception    of motor  performances     and   views  on   aggression
(Hyde,  2005).  Many   researchers  now    focus on  contextual   factors  and  their impact    on situating gender. For
instance, a follow-up study of Kafai (1998) revealed that most of the observed gender differences disappeared in
children's  video game    designs   once   the  context for   the instructional  games    was   changed   from   teaching
mathematics to teaching science. More recently, research has expanded to focus on physical locations in which
games are played (Beavis & Charles, 2005; Bryce & Rutter, 2002; Carr, 2005; Schott & Horrell, 2000). In these

                                                                                                                             1-
         studies researchers examine the ways girls' access to and participation in game play is supported when various
         family members compete for access to consoles or how locations structure game play.
                   While games for girls movement was based on the premise that all girls are alike, games for change
         was predicated on the notion that gender is a socially constructed identity (deCastell & Bryson, 1998). Theorists
         like Butler (1990) have introduced the notion of `gender play,' meaning that both girls and boys, and men and
         women, experiment with gendered expressions within different contexts. Much of the research has focused on
         where   and  how    society   places  constraints on gender   performances    and  thus impacts    a gendered   identity
         formation. The basic premise of these games is to challenge existing gender stereotypes and provide room for
         exploration.   This  take  on  gender   obviously  leads to  games    with different  game   mechanics,    contexts, and
         characters. One example is SiSSYFiGHT 2000 developed by Zimmerman and others (2003) to illustrate how
         one can challenge norms about social interactions. SiSSYFiGHT 2000 focuses on girl groups who are all out to
         ruin each other's popularity and self-esteem. The object of the game is to attack and dis enemies both physically
         and   verbally until they   are mortified   beyond  belief. The game     involves six  online players   and  each round
         establishes who comes out as a winner or loser; the final results are published on an online board reset on a
         weekly basis. The game activities focus on abusive practices used by girls to establish popularity in their groups
         and thus explicitly challenge stereotypes that all girls are nice and supportive.

        Games as Designs: Exploring Gender Construction
                   A different approach provides room for exploration of gender by creating tools for learners to design
         games (Kafai, 2006). In her early work, Kafai (1996) found significant differences in girls and boys' game
         designs but no differences in their abilities to make the games. In the project, students aged 9 to 11 years were
         asked to design fraction games to teach other students at their school about fractions. Most of the boys' designs
         featured violent feedback, were situated in a fantasy settings and assumed a male player, while most of the girls
         designed games with no violent feedback, selected realistic settings and made provisions for players of different
         gender. An alternative interpretation of these findings would propose that the boys positioned themselves in
         their games as savvy game players by choosing established conventions that reaffirm their gender while the girls
         did the same with their choices (Pelletier, in press). A later study (Kafai, 1998), in which students were asked to
         design and implement astronomy games found no differences in game designs suggesting that context plays an
         important role in how students position themselves in relation to particular subject matters and game designs. In
         the   same  spirit,  Flanagan   (2006)    incorporated  game   mechanics     such as   cooperation,  sharing   and   fair
         representation  in   the  multi-player   game   RAPUNSEL      which    is  programmed     by  the  players   themselves.
         RAPUNSEL, aimed at 11-14 year olds, presents a multi-player game world populated by two sets of creatures
         called, Peeps and Gobblers, who like to dance. Peeps design and program dance moves while Gobblers learn
         them from copying the Peeps. Players control Peeps characters by programming increasingly complex dance
         moves   that can    be  stolen  by Gobblers.   Players  have  the  choice  of two  modes:    battle  or exploratory.  In
         exploratory mode, players can decorate their houses in their home base and make music. In the battle mode,
         players confront Gobblers and put voodoo-like spells on them to protect their moves. Players collect credits for
         their home     designs,  new   music    loops, dance  moves,   and  character  designs.   RAPUNSEL       includes    both
         cooperation and competition thus allowing players to choose whichever mode they prefer.
                   Each  of  these  approaches   incorporates   expression  of and  play   with gender   in different ways.   The
         `games for girls' approaches stress different notions of feminity: Mattel's Barbie series focuses on beauty and
         fashion while Purple Moon's Friendship series focuses on popularity and friendship. The `games for change'
         approaches   challenge   these  traditional notions:  Zimmerman's     SiSSYFiGHT       2000  explicitly asks  players to
         engage in psychological and physical attacks whereas Flanagan's RAPUNSEL allows players to choose their
         mode   of  interaction  of  being  either collaborative  or  competitive.  In `games   as designs'   girls can  position
         themselves   either  way   as  players. Each   approach  has built in challenging  or  confirming    notions of what   is
         considered to be appropriate for a girl. It is clear that multiple factors -- design, mechanics, and contexts --
         impact gender differences and performances.

       Implications for Serious Game Designs in the Learning Sciences
                   The purpose of this review was to present the quite diversified treatment that gender has received in the
         research and design of digital games. There is not one easy answer how to address gender in the design of digital
         games   for  learning   but   clearly multiple  aspects  to  consider.   The  learning  sciences   community    has  not
         extensively discussed the gender issue. For instance, the recently edited Handbook of the Learning Sciences
         (Sawyer, 2006) did not include a chapter on this topic. This may come as a surprise given that so many learning
         science studies  deal   with  technology  designs  or  interventions  in schools  where   there has  been  an extensive
         documentation of gender issues. Previous research has revealed significant gender differences in access, use,
         attitudes and achievement in regard to computers in schools (Kirpatrick & Cuban, 1998; Volman & van Eck,
         2001). Studies have documented, over and over again, that girls' access and participation with computers is not
         the same as those of boys. For instance, Schofield (1995) painted a dramatic picture of the cultural and social
1-
forces that shape girls' inclusion or exclusion in computer classrooms and school clubs. Some recent research
has also moved away from examining gender differences. Here researchers (Jenson, deCastell & Bryson, 2003)
propose  opportunities     for   girls to develop  and   experience  new  identities  as technology     experts within   their
school by allowing them to voice their concerns about inequitable access.
         While games have always been around schools, they have been used mostly for motivational rather
than academic purposes. Many teachers use board and computer games in classrooms as a reward for students
completing their assignments. We found though that gender concerns often fall to the wayside when teachers
examine serious games (Kafai, Franke, & Battey, 2002). Few teacher reviewers considered whether the design
of game contexts, activities and characters could be biased towards one group. The reviews also revealed that
most  teachers   focus     on motivational    and  not content-related   criteria when   discussing    learning with    digital
games.   Ito  (2006)    and   others    have argued   that we    cannot  neglect  the  social and   cultural    factors when
considering learning with serious games which situate when, how and who is learning what. In the following
sections, I will articulate the implications for considering gender when designing and researching digital games
in the learning sciences by focusing on the design methods, game genres, and game features, and data analyses.

Design Methods
         Since the field of the learning sciences considers the design of educational technologies and tools a central
part of  its mission,   it is particularly   important to  consider the  design   method  itself. Why   this is important   is
apparent in early research conducted by Huff, Fleming, and Cooper (1987) who asked designers to develop gender-
specific educational software, they found game designs for boys and learning tools for girls. When asked to design
generic software, designers replicated the same patterns. While this is not a comprehensive body of research, the
few studies seem to suggest that bias can come into play in the design of serious games. Several researchers have
made   proposals    for different  design    methodologies    to address this issue.  For instance,    Cassell  (1998,  2002)
proposed what she called underdetermined design for software and games encouraging boys and girls (and by
implication, men and women) to express aspects of self-identity that transcend stereotyped gender categories. In
this approach, activities involving girls and boys are not neutral or isolated acts but involve the person becoming
and acting in the world as part of the construction of a complex identity. Flanagan and Nissenbaum (in press)
called for a design approach that reveals the values designers bring to their games' designs as revealed in Huff,
Fleming, and Cooper's (1987) research findings. They argue that designers and producers need to pay attention to
safeguarding critical values in all phases of the game design process: delineation of a project, specification of game
mechanics,   implementation      and   revisions. These  two   proposals provide   concrete  suggestions    of  how   learning
science designers can prevent potential gender biases when designing learning tools and environments.

Game Genres
         Beyond the design method, learning scientists also need to be considerate what kind of game genre
they choose for their learning design. It is clear that we need to move beyond the drill-and-practice versions
often used in schools as motivational tools to reward students for completed assignments. It is only in the last
few years, since the publication of Gee's (2003) examination of cultural and social aspects of learning in gaming
environments, that the academic appeal of games has gathered more momentum. Note that these games are
obviously    not the type     of first person shooter  or  violent  games often   discussed   in  the  media   for promoting
problematic cultural values or being of less interest to girls. The multiplayer online games considered here fall
more into the category of simulation games that already have a long standing history of successful classroom
use  and learning,   with   or   without   computers.  Learning   scientists should   be aware    that there is considerable
discussion within industry and academia of what constitutes a game. For instance, within the game industry
casual games that are immensely popular with female gamers are not considered real games because they do not
require the time investment needed for participation in many commercial MMORPGs. On the other hand, in the
field of game research some find that Shaffer's (2006) proposal of epistemic games is really more a simulation
than a game. Game researchers often invoke Johan Huizuinga's (1938/1955) magic circle that describes game
play as a free and meaningful activity, carried out for its own sake, spatially and temporally segregated from the
requirements     of practical    life, and  bound  by  a  self-contained system    of rules.  While    epistemic   games    are
described    as imagined    worlds     with rules in which    the player assumes    professional   roles, their close   tie to
authentic professional practice puts them much more squarely into the field of simulations rather than games. In
addition, the proposal of epistemic games itself does not consider different epistemologies. Feminist researchers
in the  sciences    have   argued  for  a  long time to  recognize  alternative   and equally important     frameworks    and
approaches within science. From this albeit brief discussion, it becomes apparent that the choice of a particular
game genre is no trivial matter but loaded with various assumptions about what is considered a game for whom.

Game Features
         Within     actual  game   design,   there seem    to be  more  controversial    prescriptions  for  how   to address
gender within the design of particular features. When researchers examine digital games for learning they have

                                                                                                                                   1-
         considered gender differences in spatial reasoning skills (Loftus & Loftus, 1983), the impact of motivational
         factors (Malone, 1981; Rubin, Murray, O'Neil & Ashley, 1997). For instance, Malone's (1981) seminal work
         "What makes things fun to learn" investigated various motivational features of a dart game that would increase
         the learning and engagement of mathematical content. He found only one instance with significant differences
         between   boys and   girls in  what they liked   about  games:  "The    boys   seemed  to like   the fantasy   of popping
         balloons  and  the girls seemed    to dislike this fantasy. The   addition   of musical   rewards,   on  the other    hand,
         appeared to increase for girls, but to decrease for boys, the intrinsic interest of the activity" (p. 226, Malone &
         Lepper,  1987). The   dart  game   investigated  by Malone   presented    simple  graphics    on black  screens   with  no
         customization options for the players. In contrast, Rubin, Murray, O'Neil and Ashley (1997) examined students'
         interactions with Broderbund's Logical Journey of the Zoombinis, which focuses on discrete mathematics and
         logical reasoning. They found both groups were equally engaged in the game but girls tended to spend more
         time customizing the design of the Zoombini features (color and shape of eyes, mouth, hair, nose, and shoes)
         while the boys spent more time on solving logical puzzles. These results suggest that boys and girls find many
         (but not all) of the same game features appealing but that differential engagement could be consequential for
         learning outcomes when girls don't get to the core content of the game.

        Game Modding
                  Gender has been a much more prominent concern in programs that promote and study the making of
         digital games for learning, a very different paradigm that puts the players in charge of designing the game(s)
         themselves (Kafai, 2006). It was seen as a particularly promising way to get girls interested in computers and
         competent  in  technology     by asking  them   to  design  applications  rather    than to   focus  on  the   learning of
         decontextualized algorithms (AAUW, 2000). Today most commercial games are released with modding features
         or game engines that allow players to customize their avatars, levels, and interactions (Seif El Nasir & Smith,
         2006). Many games or player-generated environments such as Second Life by Linden Lab and Whyville by
         Numedeon seem to suggest that players, girls and boys alike, are drawn to these participatory features. A new
         genre of alternative reality games (MacGonigal, 2007) even uses player participation as a design directive for
         creating  the next   steps in  the  game    rather than defining  upfront    the  end    goal of  the   game.  All    these
         developments in game design and play features should be of great interest to learning science researchers. There
         is now a whole range of different game design tools under development ranging from modding to programming
         tools. But even tools that allow for the design of games can be designed to incorporate features that promote
         more equitable access as Kelleher (in press) has shown with "Alice". Here the inclusion of the popular SIMs
         characters engaged   girls in  storytelling and  connected   them to    aspects  of game   design.   Akin   to this is  the
         "RAPUNSEL" program by Flanagan (2006) discussed earlier in this paper. Similar successes have been seen
         with media-rich    environments   such  as  "Scratch"  that allow for   a range  of  game    designs  by boys     and girls
         (Peppler  &   Kafai, 2007).    While  there is  some   debate  about  the  differences    in  using  either  modding    or
         programming    tools for   making  serious  games,  in  the end both    efforts involve  interfaces  and  some    form  of
         scripting language designed to allow players to manipulate different aspects of the game.

        Data Analyses
                  Finally, the analysis of data collected from observations, surveys, tests and interviews also needs to
         include the consideration of gender. Few studies in the learning sciences actually examine gender in learners'
         interactions or artifact production. Thus it should at least be a requirement to examine gender differences as one
         way to gauge potential disparities. For instance, Nelson (2007) documented that girls ask for less instructional
         guidance in River City but otherwise little attention, if any, has been given to gender issues. More importantly,
         researchers need to pay close attention to various contextual factors that can impact learning outcomes. It might
         actually be more helpful to identify different groups of learners and how they interact with learning games than
         to resort  to the  traditional grouping    that pitches boys   versus   girls.  For example,     Steinkuehler   (2006)  is
         conducting    extended investigations   of  how    players  collaborate with    others to solve   problems,    search   for
         information, and engage in discussions. Attention to process, activities, and interactions rather than just outcome
         measures might be helpful in revealing differential uses.

       Conclusion
                  It is clear from this review that there isn't one right proposal but many different aspects to consider. For
         those who subscribe to the games for girls approach, the goal would be to offer games with more choices, and
         different game mechanics. For those who favor games as designs, the answer would be to offer game modding
         and making features that provide opportunities for players to define the meaning and personalize assets in the
         games. Other proposals have focused on criteria for educational activities and content. One way to address a
         wide range of activities and themes based on different interests is to create wide walls, not just low thresholds
         for learners to enter the game (Resnick & Silverman, 2005). Our ultimate goal should be to make games for
         learning more accessible and rich gaming experiences for all. Many of the changes in teaching and learning that
1-
came  out   of the  gender  equity  movement      improved  the  situation for  all students,  and not just for girls and
women. In any case, digital games are not stand-alone applications but should always be seen in the context of a
larger learning community. Having learners become game designers and creators is a small yet achievable step
as the examples have shown -- but one with considerable implications for those interested in closing the divide
or participation gap in the digital culture (Jenkins, Clinton, Purushotma, Robison, & Weigel, 2006). Perhaps this
will lead us to lay the foundation to achieve more equitable participation in the technology culture at large.

References
American Association of University Women (2000). Tech-Savvy: Educating Girls in the New Computer Age.
         Washington, DC: Educational Foundation of the American Association of University Women.
Beavis, C. & Charles, C. (2005). Challenging the notions of gendered game play: Teenagers playing the Sims.
         Discourse: studies in the cultural politics of education, 26(3), 355-367.
Bryce, J. & Rutter, J. (2002). Killing like a girl: gendered gaming and girl gamers' visibility. In F. Mayra (Ed.),
         Proceedings of Computer Games and Digital Cultures Conference (pp. 243-255). Tampere: Tampere
         University Press.
Butler, J. (1990). Gender trouble. New York: Routledge.
Carr, D. (2005). Contexts, pleasures and preferences: girls playing computer games. Proceedings of DiGRA
         2005 Conference. Retrieved May 21 2007 at http://www.digra.org/dl/db/06278.08421.pdf
Cassell, J. &     Jenkins, H. (1998a)     (Eds.).  From  Barbie  to Mortal    Kombat:  Gender   and    Computer   Games.
         Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Cassell, J. (2002).   Genderizing    HCI.   In  J. Jacko and   A. Sears   (Eds.), The  Handbook    of  Human-Computer
         Interaction (pp. 402-411). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum,
Cohoon, J. M. & Aspray, W. (Eds.) (2006). Women in IT: Research on Underrepresentation. Cambridge, MA:
         The MIT Press.
De Castell, S. & Bryson, M. (1998). Retooling. In In J. Cassell & H. Jenkins, H. (Eds.), From Barbie to Mortal
         Kombat: Gender and Computer Games (pp. 2-45). Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Denner, J., & Bean, S. (2006). Girls, games, and intrepid exploration on the computer. In E.M. Trauth (Ed.),
         Encyclopedia      of Gender      and Information   Technology     (pp. 727-732).  Hershey,    PA:   Idea Group
         Reference.
Entertainment     Software  Association     (2007).  2007  Essential   Facts  about   the Computer     and  Video  Game
         Industry.         Washington,          DC:        ESA.       Retrieved        May         28,      2007        at
         http://www.theesa.com/archives/2006/05/2006_essential.php
Flanagan, M. (2006). Making games for social change. AI & Society, 20, 493-505.
Flanagan, M. & Nissenbaum, H. (forthcoming). Value added design. In Author C. Heeter, J. Denner, & J. Sun
         (Eds.),   Beyond   Barbie   and   Mortal   Kombat:    New  Perspectives    on Gender   and    Computer   Games.
         Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Gee, J. (2003). What videogames have to teach us about learning and literacy. New York: Palgrave.
Greenfield,    P. M.,   &  R. R.   Cocking    (1996)  (Eds.).  Effects  of Interactive  Entertainment    Technology     on
         Development. In P. Greenfield & R. Cocking (Eds.), Interacting with video (pp. 1-5). Norwood, NJ:
         Ablex Publishing Corportion.
Hartmann,   T.    & Klimmt,   C.   (2006).  Gender   and   computer  games:   Exploring   females'  dislikes.  Journal  of
         Computer-Mediated Communication, 11, 910-931.
Hayes,   B. (in   press).  Girls, Gaming,   and   Trajectories of Technological     Expertise. In  Author,  C.  Heeter, J.
         Denner,    &   J. Sun    (Eds.), Beyond   Barbie  and   Mortal Kombat:     New   Perspectives   on Gender    and
         Gaming. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Heeter, C. & Winn, B. (in press). Design of Gender-Enhanced Games for Classroom Learning. In Author, C.
         Heeter, J. Denner, & J. Sun (Eds.), Beyond Barbie and Mortal Kombat: New Perspectives on Gender
         and Gaming. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Hyde, J. S. (2005). The Gender Similarities Hypothesis. American Psychologist, 60(6), 581-592.
Huff, C. W., Fleming, J. H., & Cooper, J. (1992). The social bias of gender differences in human computer
         interaction. In C. D. Martin (Ed.), In search of gender-free paradigms for computer-science education
         (pp. 19-32). Eugene, OR: ISTE Research Monographs.
Ito, M.  (2007).   Education   V.  Entertainment:   A   Cultural  History  of Children's  Software.   In K. Salen  (Ed.),
         Ecology of Games. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Jansz, J. & Martis, R. G. (2006). The Lara phenomenon: powerful female characters in video games. Sex Roles,
         56, 141-148.
Jenkins, H. (2006). Convergence Culture: Where Old and New Media Collide. New York: NYU Press.
Jenkins, H. (2003). From Barbie to Mortal Kombat: Further Reflections. In A. Everett & J. T. Caldwell (Eds.),
         New Media: Theories and Practices (pp. 243-254). New York: Routledge.
Jenkins, H.    Clinton, K., Purushotma,     R.,   Robison, A., &  Weigel,  M.   (2006). Confronting    the  challenges  of

                                                                                                                             1-
                 participation culture: Media education for the 21st century. White Paper. Chicago, IL: The John D.
                 and    Catherine     T.     MacArthur     Foundation.     Retrieved    on     May    28th   2007    at
                 http://digitallearning.macfound.org/site/c.enJLKQNlFiG/b.2108773/apps/nl/content2.asp?content_id={
                 CD911571-0240-4714-A93B-1D0C07C7B6C1}&notoc=1
        Jenson, J., De Castell, S., & Bryson, M. (2003). "Girl Talk": Gender equity, and identity discourses in a school-
                 based computer culture. Women's Studies International Forum, 26(6), 561-573.
        Kafai, Y. B. (2006). Playing and making games for learning: Instructionist and constructionist perspectives for
                 game studies. Games and Culture, 1(1), 34-40.
        Kafai, Y. B. (1998). Video game designs by children: Consistency and variability of gender differences. In J.
                 Cassell & H. Jenkins (Eds.), From Barbie to Mortal Kombat: Gender and Computer Games (pp. 90­
                 114). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
        Kafai, Y. B., Franke, M., Ching, C., & Shih, J. (1998). Games as interactive learning environments fostering
                 teachers' and students' mathematical thinking. International Journal of Computers for Mathematical
                 Learning, 3(2), 149­193.
        Kafai, Y. B. (1996). Gender differences in children's constructions of video games. In Patricia M. Greenfield &
                 Rodney    R.  Cocking (Eds.), Interacting with  video (pp.  39­66).  Norwood,    NJ: Ablex  Publishing
                 Corporation.
        Kafai, Y. B. (1995). Minds in Play: Computer Game Design as a Context for Children's Learning. Norwood,
                 NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
        Kelleher, C. (in press). Learning Computer Programming as Storytelling. In Author C. Heeter, J. Denner, & J.
                 Sun (Eds.), Beyond Barbie and Mortal Kombat: New Perspectives on Gender and Computer Games.
                 Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
        Kirpatrick, H. & Cuban, L. (1998). Should we be worried? What the research says about gender differences in
                 access, use, attitudes and achievement with computers. Educational Technology, 45, 56-61.
        Klawe, M., Inkpen, K., Phillips, E., Upitis, R., & Rubin, A. (2002). E-GEMS: A project on computer games,
                 mathematics and gender. In N. Yelland, A. Rubin & E. McWilliam (Eds.), Ghosts in the machine:
                 Women's voices in research with technology (pp. 209-227/248). New York: Peter Lang Publishing.
        Kinder, M. (1991). Playing with Power. Berkeley: University of California Press.
        Laurel, B. (2003). Utopian Entrepenuer. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
        Laurel, B. (1998). Interview. In J. Cassell and H. Jenkins (Eds.), From Barbie to Mortal Kombat (pp. 118-135).
                 Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
        Loftus, G. R., & Loftus, E. F. (1983). Minds at Play. New York: Basic Books.
        Malone, T. W. (1981). What makes computer games fun? BYTE, December, 258-277.
        Malone, T. W., & Lepper, M. R. (1987). Making learning fun: A taxonomy of intrinsic motivations for learning.
                 In R.  E. Snow   &  M.  J. Farr (Eds.). Aptitude, Learning and   Instruction. Volume  3:  Conative and
                 Affective Process Analyses (pp. 223-253). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum Associates.
        MacGonigal, J. (2007). The Success of I Love I Love Bees: Study in Massively Collaborative Puzzle Gaming.
                 K. Salen (Ed.), Ecologies of Games. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
        Nelson, B. (2007). Exploring the use of individualized, reflective guidance in an educational multi-user virtual
                 environment. The Journal of Science Education and Technology, 16(1), 83-97.
        Pelletier, C. & Olivier, M. (2006). Learning to play in digital games. Learning, Media and Technology, 31(4),
                 329-342.
        Peppler, K.  A. &  Kafai, Y.  B. (2007).  What   video game  making   can teach us about  learning and literacy:
                 Alternative pathways into participatory culture. In Akira Baba (Ed.), Situated Play: Proceedings of the
                 Third International Conference of the Digital Games Research Association (DiGRA) (pp. 369-376).
                 Tokyo, Japan: The University of Tokyo.
        Provenzo, E. F. (1991). Video Kids: Making sense of Nintendo. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
        Schott, G. & Horrell, K. R. (2000). Girl gamers and their relationship with the gaming culture. Convergence,
                 6(4), 36-53.
        Rubin, A., Murray, M., O'Neil, K., & Ashley, J. (1997, March). What kind of educational computer games
                 would  girls  like? Presentation at the  annual   meeting of the  American    of Educational  Research
                 Association in Chicago, Il.
        Schofield, J. W. (1995). Computers and Classroom Culture. New York: Cambridge University Press.
        Seif El Nasir, M. & Smith, B. (2006). Learning through game modding. Computers in Entertainment, 4(1), 5-9.
                 Retrieved May 28, 2007 at http://portal.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1111293.1111301
        Seiter, E. (1993). Sold Separately: Children and Parents in Consumer Culture. New York: Rutgers University
                 Press.
        Shaffer, D. W. (2006). How computer games can help us learn. New York, NY: Palgrave Macmillian.
        Steinkuehler, C. (2006). Games as a highly visible medium for the study of distributed, situated cognition. In
                 S.A.   Barab, K.E.  Hay,   N.B.  Songer,  &   D.T. Hickey  (Eds.),  Proceedings   of the  International

1-
        Conference of the Learning Sciences (pp. 1048-1049). Mahwah NJ: Erlbuam.
Subrahmanyam, K., & Greenfield, P. M. (1998). Effects of video game practice on spatial skills in girls and
        boys. In P. Greenfield & R. Cocking (Eds.), Interacting with video. Norwood, NJ: Ablex Publishing
        Corportion.
Taylor, T. L. (2006). Play between Worlds. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Volman, M. & van Eck, E. (2001). Gender equity and information technology in education: The second decade.
        Review of Educational Research, 71(4), 613-634.
Yelland, R. & Rubin, A. (Eds.) (2002). Ghosts in the machine: Women study women and technology.           New
        York: Peter Lang Publishers.
Zimmerman,   E. (2003). Play as research:  The iterative design process.  Retrieved   at on May   28th, 2007 at
        http://www.ericzimmerman.com/texts/iterative_design.htm

Acknowledgment
The work reported in this paper was supported by a grant (REC-0411814) of the National Science Foundation to
the author. The views expressed are  those of the author  and do not    necessarily represent the views  of the
supporting funding agency or the University of California, Los Angeles.

                                                                                                                  1-
