       The influence of verbal elaboration on subsequent learning:
                           An experimental study in a PBL-setting

     Floris M. van Blankenstein, Diana H.J.M. Dolmans & Cees P.M. van der Vleuten, Maastricht University,
            Department of Educational Development and Research, Universiteitssingel 60, 6229 ER.
 Email: f.vanblankenstein@educ.unimaas.nl, d.dolmans@educ.unimaas.nl, c.vandervleuten@educ.unimaal.nl
Henk G. Schmidt, Erasmus University Rotterdam, Institute of Psychology, Burgemeester Oudlaan 50, 3062 PA,
                                              Rotterdam, schmidt@eur.nl

         Abstract:     Problem-based    group   discussions    are expected   to   enhance  activation  of  and
         elaboration on prior knowledge. Some experiments reported improved recall after problem-
         based    group    discussions. However,      these  experiments    did  not   control   for  individual
         differences    in prior knowledge    and quality   of discussions.   This experiment    aimed to   keep
         these variables under control. 62 students were trained on a physical topic (waves). One week
         later, they observed a video-recorded problem-based group discussion. In the experimental
         condition,    students  observed  a   discussion   relevant   to the trained   material  and  verbally
         participated. In two control conditions, students either observed the relevant or an irrelevant
         discussion,    without  participating  verbally.   Then,  all participants   studied  a relevant   text.
         Immediate      and  delayed cued   recall   measures    were  taken. The   experimental     group  was
         expected to recall more correct propositions than both control groups. A preliminary analysis
         with   a  one-way   ANOVA      showed    a  significant  difference  between   the conditions   on  the
         delayed, but not on the immediate measure. A tentative conclusion therefore is that the verbal
         participation improved long-term recall.

Introduction
The role of elaboration and prior knowledge in learning
         In the   learning  psychology   literature, a considerable    amount  of  research describes  elaboration   as a
powerful learning facilitator (e.g. Bobrow & Bower, 1969; Dansereau, 1978; Mayer, 1980; Mayer and Cook,
1981; Slamecka & Graf, 1978). Elaboration may generally be defined as meaningfully connecting new parts of
information with each other, or meaningfully relating new information to prior knowledge (Levin, 1988; Mayer,
1980; Reder, 1980). It relates to what Craik and Lockhart (1972) call `depth of processing', where deeper levels
of   processing mean    more  thorough   and   effortful attempts   to understand   new   information,  for  instance by
connecting it with experiences from the past.
       More    specifically, Mayer   (1980)   distinguishes  three  types  of elaboration.  The  first type, associative
elaboration, is elaboration by means of meaningfully associating multiple stimuli. This type of elaboration is
based on findings with word-pairing experiments, for instance by Bobrow & Bower (1969) and Slamecka &
Graf (1978). In these experiments, participants learned pairs of unrelated words. By using both words in one
meaningful sentence, participants were better able to remember the pairs.
       The other two types of elaboration Mayer (1980) proposes are integrative and comparative elaboration.
These two are rooted in learning from prose, rather than memorizing word pairings. Integrative elaboration can
be   explained  as the  meaningful   integration   of  new   information   with  prior  knowledge,    while comparative
elaboration refers  to   elaboration  by   explaining    relations between    new  information.   Thus,  learners   either
meaningfully    relate  new  information   with   existing   knowledge    structures,  or  establish  these relations by
comparing different pieces of new information with each other.
       In two experiments, Mayer (1980) and Mayer and Cook (1981) showed positive effects of elaboration on
various learning outcomes. In one experiment, (Mayer, 1980), they provided participants with either a strategy
to enhance  their  integrative   elaboration, a strategy  to enhance   their  comparative   elaboration, or  no   learning
strategy at all. The integrative elaboration strategy entailed studying a text while relating the text passages with
familiar analogies, while the comparative elaboration strategy consisted of comparing the passages with each
other. Participants    who   used one   of the  two    strategies  solved  relatively  complex   problems   more    often.
Furthermore, participants who used the integrative elaboration strategy recalled more conceptual information,
i.e. information   that explained  the  consequences     of  the  programming    rules. In  contrast, they  recalled  less
descriptive, factual information.
         In the past decades, several elaboration-enhancing interventions have been developed (e.g. Dansereau
et al., 1978). Some of these indicate a positive effect of verbal explanation on learning (Chi et al., 1989, 1994;
King, 1990; Pressley et al., 1990, 1992; Woloshyn, Pressley & Schneider, 1992). Producing verbal explanations
has since long been known as a method to reflect upon one's own thoughts, leading to a `recoding' and change
of knowledge (Prawat, 1989). A review by Webb (1989) reported positive relations between explaining what

                                                                                                                             2-2
         one has learned to peers and one's own learning performance. Moreover, these relations are found more often
         when the produced explanations are elaborative, whereas they are less common when the explanations are non-
         elaborative (e.g. when only the answer is given). Webb (1989) argues that:

                  "In explaining to someone else, the helper must clarify, organize, and possibly reorganize the material
                  [...] In the process of clarifying and reorganizing the material, the helper may discover gaps in his or her
                  own understanding, or discrepancies with others' work or previous work. To resolve these discrepancies,
                  the helper may   search for new information    and  subsequently resolve  those inconsistencies,  thereby
                  learning the material better than before."

                  Some experiments support the notion that explaining to others particularly promotes learning when the
         given explanations are elaborative. For example, Webb, Troper and Fall (1995) let 7th graders explain math
         problems to each other, as part of a math course. Students of similar math ability were placed in small study
         groups and discussed several math problems with each other. All verbal help they provided each other with was
         tape-recorded. Also, the subsequent activities students engaged in after receiving this help was registered. Both
         the help received and the subsequent activities were evaluated according to their quality, ranging from low-
         elaborative (no constructive help or activity) to high-elaborative (an elaborate help or activity). At the end of the
         course, the students received a posttest consisting of math operations. There was no positive correlation between
         the help received   and  achievement,    but the    highest level  of constructive    activity (i.e. reworking    the   entire
         problem or explaining how to solve it to other students) did show a positive relation with performance on the
         operations. Thus, receiving elaborate explanations did not lead to a better performance, while engaging in highly
         elaborative activities did.
                  In an experiment by King (1990), university students listened to a lecture. After the lecture, half of the
         students discussed the lecture without any prior instruction. The other half had been trained to ask elaborative
         questions, i.e. specific,   thought-provoking  questions,     before  the  lecture,   such as:  "What     is  the difference
         between  ... and  ...?"  (1) Students  who    were    trained asked   more   critical  questions,    gave more    high-level
         elaboration responses and showed better understanding of the lecture than the control group. Understanding was
         measured with a combination of multiple-choice and open-ended questions.
                  Chi et al. (1989) found that students who gave high-quality explanations while studying worked-out
         mechanical problems were better able to solve problems than students who gave low-quality explanations. Also,
         Chi et al. (1994) discovered that encouraging students to explain the blood circulatory system resulted in a more
         complete understanding of this system. All students read a text passage about the blood circulatory system. Half
         of them (the `prompted' group) was encouraged to explain what they had read after each sentence. The other
         half (the control group) merely read the text twice. The prompted group showed a greater learning improvement
         about the blood circulatory system, especially on complex questions that required inference and application,
         than the control group. Moreover, the participants in the prompted group who explained most, showed more
         learning improvement    than  those  who  explained    less.  This difference  was    only significant    for the relatively
         complex questions. Thus, explaining especially seemed to improve complex understanding.
                  However,   prior   knowledge    seems  to   influence  the   positive effects  of explaining     on  learning.  For
         example, some authors argued that an elaborative strategy like asking and answering `why questions' activates
         prior knowledge, which in turn can be related to new information (Pressley et al., 1992). (2) In one experiment
         (Woloshyn, Pressley & Schneider, 1992), participants studied geographical facts about either areas their home
         country or areas in another country. After each fact, half of the participants asked themselves out-loud why it
         made sense that it was related to that particular area they had just studied. The other half was instructed merely
         to understand the information. After this task, all participants performed a matching task, in which they had to
         match the facts with the corresponding geographical areas. Participants who had asked the elaborative `why-
         questions' made more correct responses when they had studied areas of their home country than when they had
         studied areas of the other country. Thus, their prior knowledge had a significant impact on their learning, even
         while elaboration   was   promoted   for both  groups.    In  other   words,   the elaboration   strategy    was  especially
         effective when prior knowledge was present. A study by Willoughby et al. (1993) reported similar finings with
         different study topics.
                  To conclude, learning can be enhanced by elaboration in several ways. In order to create meaningful
         relations, one can integrate new information with existing knowledge schemes, or make a conscious attempt to
         draw  comparisons   between   new    concepts. Verbal   explanation    is a useful    method   for elaboration,   especially
         when the produced explanations are in-depth and prior knowledge about the subject is present.

        Elaboration and prior knowledge activation in problem-based learning
                  Problem-based    learning   (PBL) is  an   educational   approach  that   is largely  based  on  prior   knowledge
         activation and elaboration (Schmidt, 1983). Also, a large role is attributed to verbal explanation of the subject-
         matter to others. In practice, these principles are applied as follows. First of all, students gather in groups and
         analyze a problem or case that is related to their field of study. During this analysis, they collectively try to

2-2
activate as   much   prior  knowledge    as   possible. (3)  Then, they  discuss   relations between     their retrieved  prior
knowledge,     identify  what     information  is   relevant to   the  problem,    and  synthesize    the information.     This
elaborative discussion is expected to restructure their knowledge within the context of the problem (Schmidt,
1993; Schmidt et al., 1989), which constructs a foundation for self-study. Because their knowledge framework
has been restructured in a meaningful, context-sensitive way, subsequent self-study is expected to be facilitated.
           From a learning perspective, this rationale behind PBL seems to be consistent with the abovementioned
studies. PBL promotes explaining to others, which may lead to a restructuring of knowledge and better in-depth
understanding.     Also, it stimulates   the  activation of  prior knowledge      during the group    discussion.  Moreover,
students are encouraged to engage in comparative and integrative elaboration, as they exchange and compare
their prior knowledge with each other. Elaboration may be continued during self-study, when students are able
to compare new information with the synthesized information from the group discussion.
           In experimental     settings, some    evidence    has  been reported    that  supports    PBL's   assumption      that
elaboration   and    prior  knowledge    activation   facilitate learning.  Schmidt    (1984)    let participants  without   an
extensive biological background study a text on osmosis and diffusion. Prior to studying, half of the participants
(the experimental condition) discussed a problem about a shrinking and expanding blood cell in small groups.
This allowed them to activate relevant prior knowledge related to osmosis and diffusion. The other participants
(the control condition) did not engage in any discussion. Participants in the experimental condition recalled
more information from the text than those in the control condition. However, the average amount of inferences
from the text produced by the two groups did not differ. An increased amount of self-generated inferences may
be expected as a result from meaningful elaboration on prior knowledge (Schmidt, 1984).
           In a  later experiment,    Schmidt    et al. (1989)   found  that participants   who      discussed the blood     cell
problem    recalled  significantly  more    from  the  osmosis   and  diffusion   text than participants  who   discussed    an
irrelevant problem. Moreover, participants in the former condition recalled more explanatory information than
participants in the latter condition. In contrast, there were no differences in recall for descriptive, i.e. factual
information.     The authors   argued    that the   relevant (i.e. blood    cell) discussion    triggered a  context-relevant
activation of prior knowledge, which enabled participants in this condition to construct a mental model about the
subject. This model then formed a foundation for further study, which made it easier for them to process the
osmosis and diffusion text.
           The participants in Schmidt's (1984) and Schmidt et al.'s (1989) studies were high school students.
DeGrave, Schmidt & Boshuizen (2001) did a similar study in a contextually more valid environment, namely a
PBL medical curriculum. They let students engage in small group discussions about a problem from the existing
medical curriculum. As in Schmidt et al.'s (1989) experiment, half of the groups discussed a relevant problem
and  the   other  half an   irrelevant  problem.    Subsequently,  all students    read  a  text that  followed   the  relevant
problem and performed a free recall test. Students who had discussed the relevant problem recalled more from
the text   than  students   who   discussed   an irrelevant  problem.   Differences    between    recall  of explanatory     and
descriptive information were examined too, but no differences were found.
           In an even more ecologically valid setting, Capon and Kuhn (1994) conducted a PBL-study as part of a
university course. All participants received both problem-based and lecture-based education and were assessed
half-way and at the end of the course. Half of the participants started with PBL and the other half with lecture-
based  learning.   At  the  first assessment,  the  lectured  students  showed     superior  factual  knowledge,   but    at the
second assessment, the PBL students were better able to give explanations beyond the formal definitions from
the books. The authors tentatively concluded that PBL does not enhance better recall of factual information, but
does  lead    to a   better integration  of   new   concepts  in   existing knowledge      structure,  similar to  integrative
elaboration.
           In sum,   there  is some   experimental    and field-research    evidence   for  the  positive influence    of PBL-
discussions   on   subsequent     learning, especially  learning   of higher-order,    explanatory    information. However,
evidence   for   a better   recall of   explanatory  (versus  descriptive)   information    was   not  found   in  all studies.
Furthermore, learning of facts seemed to be unaffected or worsened in PBL educational formats.

Research questions and hypotheses
           Although PBL-studies provided new insights on the learning effects of PBL, they had to deal with
some  shortcomings.      First of  all, none  of the  PBL-experiments       controlled  for individual    differences  in prior
knowledge.    It  is possible  that some    of the  study   groups  in the  experiments     contained  more    knowledgeable
students than others. Therefore, collective learning of the whole discussion group may have been influenced by
one or a few individuals who knew most. Also, it is possible that some groups engaged in discussions that were
qualitatively superior to the discussions of other groups. In order to investigate the net learning effects of prior
knowledge activation and subsequent elaboration, it is necessary to control for these two confounding variables.
           The aim of this experiment is to investigate the effect of prior knowledge activation and elaboration
during   a PBL     discussion   group   on   learning.  The  research  question    is  whether   verbal   activation   of prior
knowledge and elaboration facilitates subsequent learning and hence leads to better recall of correct information.

                                                                                                                                     2-2
         It is hypothesized that activation and elaboration lead to a higher amount of correctly recalled propositions on a
         short and long-term.

       Method
        Participants
                 69   participants started the   experiment, of  which 62    finished it. All were  students  from  Maastricht
         University's Faculty of Psychology, Health, Medicine and Life Sciences, Cultural Sciences, or Economics and
         Business Administration. Their average age was 20 years (SD = 1.59). All participants reported not to have
         written a final high school examination in physics and received financial compensation for their participation.

        Materials
                 The materials were presented in Dutch and inspired by a text about radar waves used by Mayer and
         Cook (1981; also see Mayer, 1985). This text served as an example to construct two new texts. The first text
         explained the physical principles of waves. Its purpose was to create a basic understanding of waves, which
         served as a foundation of prior knowledge for understanding the second text. The second text explained, among
         other things, the basic functioning of radar, how it uses electromagnetic waves to measure distance, position and
         bearing of airplanes, why it uses electromagnetic waves, how these waves extinct under normal circumstances
         and how this extinction can be prevented (namely by focusing the waves into a straight ray).
                 For the experimental and first control condition, a problem was written that described an air traffic
         controller who  managed    the radar   system  of Amsterdam   Airport.  His    main  problem   was  to make   sure an
         adequately strong signal returned to the radar. In order to achieve this, he needed to take into consideration the
         energy loss of the electromagnetic waves. For the second control condition, an irrelevant problem about alcohol
         was written.
                 Two    group discussions   were  digitally  recorded in   a professional  studio.  In both  discussions,  three
         students questioned a fourth about issues that related to the problem. The first discussion was based on the radar
         problem and meant for the first control group to see. An edited version of this discussion, showing only the
         questions by the three students, was created for the experimental condition. The second discussion was based on
         the irrelevant alcohol  problem    and  aimed   for the  second   control   group.  Both   discussions were   scripted
         beforehand and practiced and performed by the same four students.
                 Three sets of nine MC-questions about the first text were constructed. Each question was based on one
         text passage and each set of questions covered all passages in text 1. Thus, there were nine passages, each with
         three matching   MC-questions.     In   addition, thirteen  open-ended    questions    about  the   second text   were
         constructed. All materials were presented electronically and in single-person, isolated computer rooms.

        Procedure
                 In a pre-experimental phase, all participants learned some basic physical principles about waves, in
         order to provide them with a homogenous level of prior knowledge that they could use during the experimental
         phase. All participants studied the first text for ten minutes and answered the first set of nine MC-questions.
         Based on a procedure by Chi et al. (1994), they reread the text for seven minutes if they were not able to answer
         all nine questions correctly. Subsequently, they received a `retest', a subset of questions from the second set that
         covered the ill-understood text passages. If not all of these questions were answered correctly, they again reread
         the text. This time, however, they only read those passages that were not understood (i.e. they had failed to
         answer its' matching question correctly). After this third study phase, they received a subset of questions from
         the third set that covered these passages.
                   One week after the pre-experimental phase, all participants returned and were assigned to either the
         experimental (N = 21), first control (N = 20) or second control condition (N = 22). The experimental group read
         the radar  problem and  was   subsequently    watched  the edited   version of  the radar problem-discussion,    which
         contained  only the  questions    from  three students. While   watching    the  discussion,  these participants  were
         instructed to answer the questions and to come up with as much information from the pre-experimental training
         as possible. They received 20 to 40 seconds in between each question to answer. The questions either referred to
         information  from  the first text (e.g. "What  was  the  relation between    the particles and  the wave's  speed?"),
         information from the first text within the context of this problem (e.g. "What is the difference between sound
         waves  and  electromagnetic   waves?"),  not  to  any prior knowledge   at   all (e.g. "What  is  a pulse?"). (4) The
         answers were tape- and digitally recorded.
                 The first control group read the radar problem and watched the unedited radar problem-discussion.
         Participants in this condition were instructed to watch the discussion and keep in mind information from the pre-
         experimental training. The second control group read the irrelevant problem and watched the alcohol problem-
         discussion. This group received no further instruction.

2-2
         Immediately after the group discussion, all participants read the second (radar) text for twenty minutes.
This text provided answers to all questions that were posed in the group discussion about radar. Immediately
after reading the second text, all participants answered the thirteen open-ended questions. After one month, they
answered the same 13 questions again.

Analyses
         Recall analyses were based on the second text. The author parsed this text into propositions. Following
Schmidt et al. (1989), a proposition was defined as a single idea, identified as a subject-predicate unit with
linguistic markers (like conjunctions, adverbs and adverbs) as demarcation points. Next, the author and three
independent judges scored all the answer protocols. In order to improve objectivity, each judge blindly scored
an equal amount of answer protocols from each condition. Following the same procedure as the second text, the
judges parsed the answer protocols into propositions. Initially, the inter-judge agreement between the author and
one of the judges, and between the two other judges, was calculated for a total of six completely parsed answer
protocols. This agreement was 89%. Future differences were resolved by discussion.
         Subsequently,   the author   and   judges  evaluated   the correctness  of  the propositions,   based  on
propositions from the parsed second text. The inter-judge reliability for this evaluation was initially calculated in
the same manner as had been done for the propositions, which resulted in an agreement of 79%. Again, future
differences were resolved by means of discussion. Paraphrases from the questions and repeated answers were
not scored.
         A  one-way   ANOVA     with   condition   as  independent   variable and   amount  of   false and  correct
propositions on both measurement intervals as dependent variables was used to investigate differences in correct
recall between the three experimental conditions.

Table 1: Mean   amount   of  correct propositions  per  condition and  measurement   interval (standard  deviations
between brackets).

   Condition                              Mean amount of correct propositions
                                          Direct measure                      Delayed measure
   Experimental                           63.25 (30.10)                       54.25 (26.95)
   First control                          56.40 (18.41)                       38.60 (15.01)
   Second control                         50.05 (20.83)                       41.77 (18.77)

Preliminary results and discussion
         It was expected  that the   experimental  group  produced  more   correct  propositions than  both control
groups. For the direct measure, the one-way ANOVA did not reveal any differences between the mean amount
of correct recall, F (2, 59) = 1.65, p < .21. However, there was a significant difference between the three groups
on the second, delayed measure, F (2, 59) = 3.19, p < .05. The means and standard deviations of correct recall
are reported in table 1. The mean amounts of false propositions did not yield any significant differences, F (2,
59) = 1,45, p < .25 for the direct measure, and F (2, 59) = .68, p < .52 for the delayed measure.
         Subsequent t-tests showed that, on the delayed measurement interval, there was a significant difference
in mean amount of correctly recalled propositions between the experimental group and the first control group
(i.e. the group that observed the relevant condition, but did not participate), t (38) = 2.27, p < .05. However, the
difference  between  the experimental  condition   and   second control   condition (irrelevant  discussion and no
participation) did not reach significance on the second measurement interval, t(40) = 1.76, p < .09.
         These results provide some partial evidence for the hypothesis. It was expected that the experimental
group outperformed the control groups on both the immediate and delayed recall measures. The finding that it
only seemed to do so after one month, raises several hypotheses. First of all, it is possible that the experimental
group indeed remembered the information better due to their activating and elaborative activities. Reder (1980)
argued that elaborations can lead to redundancy in memory, which may enhance long-term recall. However, this
experiment  has  not assessed  yet to what   extend   the participants in the experimental  group  activated  prior
knowledge and elaborated. Also, it is possible that the amount of participants was too low and therefore the
study's power is insufficient. Power estimates still need to be performed and perhaps the sample needs to be
increased.
         The unnatural setting in which this experiment was conducted provides a drawback, which can partly
be resolved by simulating `real life', scripted PBL discussions in future experiments. However, it is very hard to
control for confounding  variables   like differences in  group discussion and  prior knowledge,   without  adding
some degree of experimental control.

Endnotes

                                                                                                                        2-2
          (1)  This could be an example of a question that stimulates comparative elaboration.
          (2)  This strategy may be regarded one to promote integrative elaboration.
          (3)  At Maastricht University, this knowledge is written down on the blackboard.
          (4)  The questions  were not  specifically designed  to   evoke elaborative deep thinking, like  for instance  King's (1990)
               questions did (e.g. "How would you use ... to ...?).

       References
         Bobrow,    S.A.   &  Bower,    G.H. (1969).    Comprehension       and  recall of  sentences.    Journal  of    Experimental
                   Psychology, 80, 455­461.
         Capon, N. & Kuhn, D. (2004). What's so good about problem-based learning? Cognition and Instruction, 22(1),
                   61­79.
         Chi, M.T.H., Bassok, M. Lewis, M.W., Reimann, P. & Glaser, R. (1989). Self-explanations: How students study
                   and use examples in learning to solve problems. Cognitive Science, 13, 145­182.
         Chi,  M.T.H.,    De  Leeuw,    N., Chiu,    M.H.   &  LaVancher,     C.   (1994).  Eliciting   self-explanations   improves
                   understanding. Cognitive Science, 18, 439 ­ 477.
         Craik,  F.I. and  Lockhart,   R.S. (1972).   Levels  of    processing: A  framework    for  memory     research. Journal  of
                   Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 11(6), 671-684.
         Dansereau, D.F., Collins, K.W., McDonald, B.A., Holley, C.D., Garland, J., Diekhoff, G. & Evans, S.H. (1979).
                   Development     and  evaluation    of   an effective   learning    strategy program.    Journal   of  Educational
                   Psychology, 79, 64­73.
         DeGrave, W.S., Schmidt, H.G. & Boshuizen, H.P.A. (2001). Effects of problem-based learning on studying a
                   subsequent text: A randomized trial among first year medical students. Instructional Science, 29, 33­
                   44.
         King,   A.   (1990). Enhancing     peer interaction   and    learning  in the  classroom     through   reciprocal  learning.
                   American Educational Research journal, 27 (4), 664­687.
         Levin, J.R. (1988). Elaboration-based learning strategies: Powerful theory=powerful application. Contemporary
                   Educational Psychology, 13(3), 191-205.
         Mayer,    R.E.  (1980). Elaboration    techniques    that  increase the  meaningfulness     of  technical text.  Journal  of
                   Eduational Psychology, 72, 770­784.
         Mayer, R.E. & Cook, L.K. (1981). Effects of shadowing and prose comprehension. Learning and Cognition,
                   9(1), 101­109.
         Mayer, R.E. (1985). Structural analysis of science prose: Can we increase problem-solving performance? In B.
                   K.  B.  Britton &   John  B.  Black   (1985).    Understanding  expository   text:  A  theoretical   and practical
                   handbook for analyzing explanatory text. Hillsdale, N.J.: Elrbaum Associates.
         Pressley, M., Tanenbaum, R., McDaniel, M.A. & Wood, E. (1990). What happens when university students try
                   to answer   prequestions  that    accompany      textbook material?  Contemporary       Educational    Psychology
                   15(1), 27-35.
         Pressley, M., Wood, E., Woloshyn, V.E., Martin, V., King, A. & Menke, D. (1992). Encouraging mindful use of
                   prior  knowledge:    Attempting      to construct   explanatory    answers    facilitates   learning. Educational
                   Psychologist, 27 (1), 91­109.
         Prawat, R.S. (1989). Promoting access to knowledge, strategy, and disposition in students: A research synthesis.
                   Review of Educational Research 59(1), 1-41.
         Reder, L.M. (1980). The role of elaboration in the comprehension and retention of prose. Review of Educational
                   Research, 50, 5­53.
         Schmidt,     H.G. (1984).   Activatie   van    voorkennis     en   tekstverwerking.    Nederlands     Tijdschrift  voor   de
                   Psychologie, 39, 335­347.
         Schmidt, H.G. (1993). Foundations of problem-based learning: Some explanatory notes. Medical Education, 27,
                   422­432.
         Schmidt, H.G. (1983). Problem-based learning: Rationale and description. Medical Education, 17, 11­16.
         Schmidt, H.G., De Volder, M.L., De Grave, W.S., Moust, J.H.C. & Patel, V.C. (1989). Explanatory models in
                   the processing of science text: The role of prior knowledge activation through small-group discussion.
                   Journal of Educational Psychology, 81, 610­619.
         Slamecka, N.J. & Graf, P. (1978). The generation effect: Delineation and phenomenon. Journal of Experimental
                   Psychology: Human Learning and Memory, 4, 592­604.
         Willoughby,    T. Waller,  T.G.    Wood,    E. &   MacKinnon,     G.E.  (1993).   The  effect  of prior  knowledge     on an
                   immediate   and  delayed  associative    learning  task   following  elaborative   interrogation.  Contemporary
                   Educational Psychology, 18, 36­46.
         Webb,   N.M.    (1989).   Peer interaction   and   learning   in  small goups.    International   Journal   of  Educational
                   research, 13, 21­40.

2-2
Webb, N.M., Troper, J.D. & Fall, R. (1995). Constructive activity and learning in collaborative small groups.
       Journal of Educational Psychology, 3, 406­423.
Woloshyn, V.E., Pressley, M. & Schneider, W. (1992). Elaborative-interrogation and prior-knowledge effects
       on learning of facts. Journal of Educational Psychology, 84, 115­124.

                                                                                                                 2-2
