     Task-Oriented Coaching for Teaching Instructional Planning:
                             A Design-Based Research Approach
              Carmela Aprea, University of Mannheim, Chair in Economics and Business Education
                         L4, 1; 68131 Mannheim (Germany), caprea@bwl.uni-mannheim.de

          Abstract:    This    paper   is  concerned   with   the gradual   development     and  validation    of  an
          instructional model for teaching instructional planning to prospective teachers in secondary
          level business schools. The model is based on the assumptions that a) instructional planning
          can be considered as a design task, and b) learning to cope with these tasks is effectively
          supported    by   task-tailored  coaching   interventions.  Since  the  goal  of the  investigation   is to
          engineer and study coaching as an innovative form of assisting learning within the prevailing
          educational context, model development and validation activities were funded on a design-
          based research approach. These activities include 1.) a review of currently available scientific
          literature in design research and education, and 2.) a series of four formative research studies.
          The aims of the paper are to outline the general idea of the task-oriented coaching model and
          to reflect the activities that were carried out for model development and validation.

Introduction
          Creating a learning world inevitably involves instructional planning: Instructional planning is one of
the most    central   tasks in  all teaching   professions,  mainly   because  it is the   process  by   which  teachers  link
curriculum to learning. Hence, it may be viewed as a cornerstone of effective teaching. Given the importance of
instructional planning, educational practitioners as well as researchers agree that novice teachers should concern
themselves   with     learning  this   process. However,     although  this learning    requirement  is  widely    accepted, a
substantial  lack   of research     exists with   respect to  the questions  of  what   planning   abilities  novice  teachers
actually need and how these abilities could be developed. As Greta Morine (1979: 135) bluntly puts it, the
paradox of planning abilities is "that it is an area of the teacher education curriculum, for which almost no
planning has been done." The investigation that I will present in this paper tries to contribute to fill this gap by
gradually   developing      and validating     an instructional   model for  teaching     planning  abilities  to  prospective
teachers in secondary level business schools. The model is based on the following assumptions:
    a.)   In accordance     with    researchers   in teacher  cognition and  teaching     expertise (e.g., Clark   &  Yinger,
          1987),    I suppose    that  instructional   planning   may   be  seen  as    a design   task. Like   other  design
          professionals (e.g., architects and engineers), teachers are required to construct a functional product, in
          this case an effective learning environment. This assumption implies that prospective teachers need to
          develop design abilities.
    b.)   Along with Schön (1987) and other scholars in design research and education (e.g., Dinham, 1989), I
          further assume that any designlike practice must be learned by doing and that this kind of experiential
          learning is most effectively supported by task-tailored coaching interventions.
Since the goal of the investigation is to engineer and systematically study coaching as an innovative form of
assisting   learning  within   the  prevailing    educational context,  I decided    to fund the   model   development    and
validation activities on a design-based research approach. These activities included two steps:
    1.)   In order    to provide     a theoretical   baseline for  the  task-oriented   coaching    model,   I first reviewed
          currently    available    scientific literature in  design  research   (1) and   education.    This  literature was
          analyzed in view of three questions:
          i  What are the central demands of design tasks?
          ii What knowledge and skills are needed to effectively cope with these demands?
          iii What instructional means might be effective in fostering the development of this knowledge and
             these skills?
    2.)   In order to validate and further refine the task-oriented coaching model, I secondly conducted a series
          of four formative research studies. These studies focused on the question whether the task-oriented
          coaching model is an effective way for fostering prospective teachers' planning abilities.

          Given the current status of the research, one aim of this paper is to outline the general idea of the task-
oriented coaching model. Furthermore, a second intention is to reflect the activities that were carried out for
model development and validation. To this end, I begin with an overview of the theoretical background of the
coaching model. In the next sections, I will then describe the methods used for putting the design-based research
approach into practice and delineate what I have learned so far by briefly portraying the major `products' of this

                                                                                                                                 1-
       research. Finally, I will discuss the model development and validation activities in terms of `further research
       needs' and `open questions'.

      Theoretical background of the task-oriented coaching model
                 With respect to the above mentioned questions, the review of the design research literature revealed the
       following insights:

       Demands of design tasks
                 In its most  general  sense, design  can  be characterized  as "a disciplined  inquiry engaged     in for  the
       purpose of creating some new thing of practical utility." (Rowland, 1993: 80). This `new thing' or artifact may
       be material or immaterial in nature (e.g., a dwelling house, a machine component, an advertising spot, a business
       strategy). Since the artifact is required to have practical utility, or as design researchers usually say should be
       "functional", it must be both, effective in the sense that it obtains a set of intended goals and, at the same time,
       realizable with high degrees of confidence (e.g., cookware must be heat-resistant and not weigh too much for
       the average cook; an automobile must be sensitive to future customer needs such as security and velocity and fit
       into dimensional constraints of existing highways and garages). Besides this general characterization of design,
       most design researchers (e.g., Lawson, 1997) agree that design problems are ill-structured, complex and unique,
       i.e. they
           -     are uncertain and underdetermined in that they usually have only vaguely defined or unclear goals and
                 constraints, only abstractly or schematically stated evaluation criteria and no predetermined solution
                 path. Hence, they may have many alternative solutions.
           -     encompass many, sometimes conflicting needs and constraints as well as many solution variables to be
                 considered simultaneously. Thus, design solutions may never be perfect, but almost invariably involve
                 compromise.
           -     elude complete routinization.

       Knowledge and skills needed to effectively cope with design tasks
                 Given  the   above mentioned  characteristics  of design tasks, design    researchers (e.g., Lawson,   1997;
       Rowland, 1993; Schön, 1987) assume that they pose the following knowledge and skill requirements:
           -     Due to the double-barreled nature of design tasks, they presumably involve both technical skills as well
                 as creativity, rational  and  intuitive thought processes.  For example    technical  skills are   needed  to
                 analyze  the  situational constraints   and to identify requirements,  while   creativity is  important    for
                 coming up with ideas to figure out a structure of the artifact that incorporates these requirements and
                 constraints.
           -     In order to ensure effectiveness and feasibility of the artifact, designers furthermore need to be able to
                 integrate knowledge from multiple content domains (e.g., inventing a strategy for tackling the problem
                 of environmental    pollution requires   components  from   mathematics,   science,   political science   and
                 psychology,    designing  an office  accommodation   involves   knowledge     from ergonomics    as   well as
                 aesthetics).
           -     Because of the ill-structured, complex and unique nature of design problems, they require the problem
                 solver to  engage  in extensive  phases   of problem    understanding, problem    structuring   and problem
                 framing, often using graphical representation systems. They also require greater commitment and self-
                 awareness from the problem solver.
           -     Furthermore,   sophisticated  skills in argumentation   and justification are needed  in  order  to help   the
                 designer to rationalize and evaluate his design decisions.

                 As recent empirical studies from different design domains (e.g., Goel & Pirolli, 1989; Jeffries et al.,
       1981) suggest, designers are aided in the design process by experience-based design schemas that partition the
       problem into a set of meaningful tasks. These schemas include components that assure that tasks will be carried
       out properly, processes that control the generation of designs, and evaluation procedures that ensure effective
       utilization of knowledge. As with most complex tasks, these problem schemas are used to monitor and regulate
       performance.

       Instructional means to foster development of design knowledge and skills
                 As the seminal research workings of Donald A. Schön (1987) suggest, design tasks are not only hard to
       cope with but also pose severe challenges for teaching and learning. That happens to be mainly because they
       entail a  considerable   communication   gap,   which  might  not  be  adequately   bridged  by  verbal   or  graphical
       descriptions alone but additionally requires the medium of action. More specifically, Schön (1987) provides the
       following reasons:

1-
   -    Although it is possible to describe general rules, procedures or criteria to be used in skillful designing,
        the most important rules cannot be followed in a simple mechanical way. Since they are more like
        heuristics than algorithms, they must always be individualized and translated to the present case or
        design context. For example, a general rule like "find a viable problem structure" or a design criterion
        like "effectiveness" or "appeal" gain their meaning only when they are applied to a specific product to
        be designed. The processes involved in applying a general rule or criterion to fit the design context at
        hand are not easily amendable to descriptions, but might be better conveyed by actual designing.
   -    Even when design instructors do succeed in making descriptions of designing that they perceive as
        relatively   full, accurate  and  useful, beginning  students  are  likely  to   find  them   confusing,   vague,
        ambiguous or incomplete. Thus, the meanings they initially construct from these descriptions might be
        incongruent with their instructors' intentions. The clarification of intended meanings and the discovery
        and   resolution   of incongruities  between   instructors'  intentions and  students'   understandings      again
        might be best achieved through action.
   -    Last but not least, substantial difficulties for design educators result not only from unclear description
        or understanding, but from the creativity inherent in designing. Since design means to create a new
        thing  or artifact,   it cannot  be described in advance;   otherwise   it would  not  be  new.    Likewise,   the
        required learning processes must be mediated by action.

For any or all of these reasons, Schön concludes that

        "[d]esigning must be learned by doing. However much students may learn about designing
        from lectures and readings, there is a substantial component of design competence ­ indeed
        the heart of it ­ that they cannot learn this way. A designlike practice is learnable but is not
        teachable    by classroom    methods.  And    when  students  are  helped   to   learn to design,     the
        interventions most useful to them are more like coaching than teaching." (Schön, 1987: 157)

        Coaching in this sense has much in common with current constructivist learning approaches such as
"Cognitive Apprenticeship" (Collins, Brown & Newman, 1989), "Problem-based learning" (Schwartz, 2002) or
"Anchored Instruction" (Bransford, 2001). It is a highly interactive and flexible process that emphasizes the
mutual flow of information between coach and student. More specifically, it involves that they gradually make
transitions of meaning by joining in a particular communicative enterprise - a dialogue which is centered on
authentic design tasks. In this dialogue, coach and student "convey messages to each other not only, or not even
primarily, in words  but   also  in the  medium   of performance."   (Schön,  1987:  163).    When    it works  well, this
dialogue takes the form of a reciprocal and reflective learning circle.
        However, as Schön (1987) as well as other researchers in design and professional education (e.g., Akin,
2002; Kirschner   et al.,  1997;   Rowland,  Fixl  &  Yung, 1992)    point out,  teaching   design    within  a coaching
approach is not simply a matter of trial-and-error but a demanding design endeavor in it self. In particular, it
involves creating a learning setting which at least should address the following issues:

   1.   Providing    structure   and basic  knowledge   support: As  already  figured    out, designing    is hardly  ever
        learned without being practiced within the context of a particular design task. However, in order to
        enable students to initiate in the process of learning by doing and to join in the task-oriented dialogue,
        some prerequisite knowledge at a higher level of generalization (e.g., central definitions of the field or
        essential chains of reasoning) might be needed. Thus, the coach must provide structures to integrate
        this  knowledge     within   the  process of  task-oriented  learning and   teaching.   Furthermore,      he  must
        carefully analyze what basic knowledge this might be and decide how the acquisition of this knowledge
        can be effectively supported.
   2.   Identifying and arranging authentic design tasks: Furthermore, design educators need to identify real
        or at least realistic design tasks and cases suitable for demonstration and training. These tasks should
        incorporate substantive issues of designing, be representative for the design domain at hand and be
        realizable within the scope of an institutionalized learning context. Besides this, they preferably must
        be drawn up and arranged in such a way that students are challenged but not overwhelmed and that the
        burden of task performance gradually shifts to them over time.
   3.   Modeling   of   experts'   design strategies: Given that the  ultimate  aim  of  the   coaching   approach    is to
        initiate learners into the actual strategies used to solve authentic design problems, design educators are
        required to explicitly model these strategies so that their students can observe, enact and practice them.
        Since  these  strategies    involve thinking  processes that usually  are  tacit or   covert, they  have   to find
        adequate means for externalization and demonstration.
   4.   Tailoring guidance and feedback: As elaborated above, students' initial attempts of design learning are
        very  likely  to   produce   confusion  and   misunderstandings.   In order  to  avoid    or  at  least minimize

                                                                                                                               1-
                 detrimental  effects of this learning        predicament     (e.g.,  sense of loss  or thoughtless               activism)                 and to
                 direct students learning by doing into the right channels, design educators need to be able to constantly
                 monitor and evaluate students' understandings and progress. Given the results of this assessment, they
                 furthermore  have    to particularize        their subsequent    guidance     and  feedback                 to the  problems                 that
                 emerged.

                 In sum,  these  insights  from design         research  offer   both   a   first impression  of                what  generic                skills
       competent design actually involves as well as a tentative set of guidelines or general framework to develop
       instruction for supporting their learning. However, they raise the question of how this general framework might
       be filled out within the scope of learning how to plan instruction in the context of secondary level business
       education. In order to more fully explore this question and thus sustain model development and refinement, a
       series of formative research studies was carried out. These research studies will be addressed in more detail in
       the following two sections.

      Methods of the design-based research

       Research design
                 In accordance with the tenets of design-based research (e.g., Barab & Squire, 2004; Collins, Joseph, &
       Bielaczyc, 2004; DBRC, 2003; Edelson, 2002), the exploration and further development of the coaching model
       entailed  the creation  and    gradual refinement         of  an instructional     intervention   that instantiates                              the above
       mentioned general framework within the prevailing context of educating teachers in secondary level business
       schools. This instantiation was realized by designing, implementing and evaluating a master's level university
       course over four iterations. The course, which is part of a university teacher education program at the University
       of Mannheim (Germany), was delivered as a collaborative endeavor of two instructors, Professor Hermann G.
       Ebner, and me. The four course deliveries took place from winter semester 2002/03 to summer semester 2004.
       Consistent with a case study approach, each course delivery is regarded as "a phenomenon ... occurring in a
       bounded context" (Miles & Huberman, 1994: 25), and hence is defined as the unit of analysis. As depicted in
       figure 1, the evaluation results of one course delivery (i.e. concept instantiation) were used to inform design
       decisions of the next course. Moreover, data from the four deliveries were submitted to a comparative cross-case
       analysis.

                                                                        EVA 4

                                  *CI four                           Design
                                                                     Case 4

                                                                                 EVA 3
                                                                                            *CI three
                                                               Design
                                                               Case 3

                                                       EVA 2
                                *CI two                              DesignCase 2
                                                                                EVA 1
                                                                                            *CI one
                                                             Design
                                                             Case 1

                          Concept-
                          Idea
                                                                                                                           * CI = Concept instantiation

                                                   Figure 1. Research design

       Participants
                 Participants of the  four case studies        include  64    students  (50  percent  female)                enrolled at                the above
       mentioned university teacher education program. All students had already mastered their basic economics and
       business administration courses and had done some first work experience in this field (e.g., as trainees). Their

1-
                                                                                                         Cross-Case Analysis
experiences as a teacher ranged from no experience at all to modest teaching experience (e.g., as private tutors).
The allocation of the participants to the cases was as follows: C1: n = 23, C2: n = 5, C3: n = 20, and C4: n = 16.

Course description
        The syllabus of the master's level university course encompasses 14 class meetings each semester with
one and a half contact hours per week and additional homework. Due to the specific objectives of the coaching
model, the course is focused a) on basic planning knowledge (e.g., competence-oriented curricula, cognitive
models of learning), and b) on the planning process and its different stages. To make this process salient to the
participants, we created a specific procedure for planning instruction in secondary level business schools. This
procedure is intended to capture the above mentioned demands of design tasks and to put them into context with
contemporary cognitive and activity theoretical conceptualizations of learning and instruction (e.g., Jonassen &
Land). Furthermore, the procedure reflects current reforms in national curriculum frameworks, which provide
that instruction in the domain of secondary level business education should be centered on representative work
assignments of prospective employees in this field. The procedure involves three interrelated planning phases:
1. task analysis, 2. goal setting, and 3. instructional framework construction and elaboration.
        In order to flesh out the task-oriented coaching model, each of the four course deliveries incorporated
decisions on the above mentioned instructional elements, i.e. (1) course structure and basic knowledge supports;
(2) authentic planning tasks; (3) modeling of planning expertise, and (4) guidance and feedback on students'
responses to the planning tasks. For the purpose of reassuring traceability and comprehensibility of the design-
based research (e.g., DBRC,   2003),  pre-course planning               decisions as well as planning   decisions  during              the
semester were entered into detailed working protocols. Furthermore, e-mail contact between the instructors was
collected. All of the data was summarized and condensed into chronological course log files. A summary of the
design decisions in the four cases is depicted in table 1 (for a detailed description cp. Aprea, 2007).

Table 1: Summary of the design decisions in the four cases.

                 Case 1                  Case 2                               Case 3                 Case 4
                 (Winter 02/03)          (Summer 2003)                        (Winter 03/04)         (Summer 2004)
                 (n = 23)                (n = 5)*                             (n = 20)               (n = 16)
 Course          - Dual structure        Integrated course                    Same as Case 2         Same as Cases
 structure &     - texts, "mini-         structure was                                               2&3
 basic            lectures" &            developed
 knowledge        reflective activities
 support          on planning-related
                  facts & concepts
 Authentic       - Supplier selection    Heuristic tool for                   Same as Case 2         Heuristic tool for
 planning        - Personnel             developing learning                                         inventing
 tasks            recruitment            goals was added                                             instructional
                 - Contractual                                                                       strategies was added
                  arrangement &
                  sales order
 Modelling       - Structured            Worked-out example                   Process-related texts  Same as Case 3
                  overview               was added                            were added
                 - Concept mapping
                  tool for task
                  analysis
 Feedback &      Individual feedback-    Individual feedback-                 Collective feedback    Same as Case 3
 guidance        conferences             conferences                          and additional phase-
                 (30 min per person)     (1 h per person)                     related exercises
                                                                              were added
  * Due to the relatively small group size, which resulted from a change in study regulations, case two was excluded from quantitative
  statistical analyses as elucidated in the following paragraph.

Evaluation dimensions, instruments and procedures
        To provide    a sound basis for decision-making                and to ensure   trustworthiness and credibility  of             the
research results, proponents of design-based research (e.g., Collins, Joseph, & Bielaczyc, 2004; Reigeluth &
Frick, 1999; van den Akker, 1999) advocate the principle of triangulation, i.e. to consider multiple aspects of the
intervention, to include diverse perspectives and to combine various research methods. With this in mind, each
course delivery was evaluated with respect to two dimensions. The first dimension, learning output effects,

                                                                                                                                              1-
       addressed the question    to  what  extent  participants     of the course   achieved    the  intended  learning  goals,   i.e.
       acquired basic planning knowledge and were able to create adequate instructional plans. The second dimension,
       learning process effects, aimed to find out whether the course and its elements assisted students and instructors
       to initiate and sustain those processes that are necessary to achieve these goals. Moreover, each dimension was
       further differentiated as follows.

       Learning output effects
                This dimension      was subdivided      into a)  objective   (i.e.  test-based) learning    output effects,  and   b)
       subjective (i.e. student-rated) learning output effects.
           a.)  To measure objective learning output effects, two assessment tasks were used:
                i. For the purpose of measuring students learning outputs in terms of basic knowledge acquisition, they
                 were    asked   to complete   a Concept     Mapping    Task.   This   task was  administered   at the   end  of  the
                 course   and  dealt  with   the topic   of  "Effective  Learning     and  Teaching  in   Business  Schools".    The
                 student-generated maps were analyzed with respect to how elaborated the central concepts of the
                 course   (e.g., goals  of   competence-oriented       curricula,  components   of  instructional  strategies)   were
                 depicted and how well they were organized. Single concepts were scored by using an assessment
                 rubric  with  four  performance      levels  (4 =  proficient;   3 =  satisfactory; 2 =  limited; 1   = deficient).
                 Moreover, a total sum score (unweighted arithmetic mean) was calculated for each map.
                ii. In order to determine how well students are able to create instructional plans, they were asked to
                 individually practice upon an Authentic Planning Task in the form of a take-home final. Since this
                 planning task encompassed that the students gradually stride through the above mentioned planning
                 phases, their responses to this planning tasks, i.e. their evolving instructional plans, are assessed with
                 respect to the completeness, accuracy and sophistication of how each phase was performed. As with
                 the  Concept    Mapping     Task,    a  four performance     level    assessment    rubric (4  =  proficient;   3 =
                 satisfactory; 2 = limited; 1 = deficient) was used to determine single scores for each phase. Single
                 scores were then added up to phase-related total sum scores (unweighted arithmetic means).
           For each course delivery, single and total sum scores of all learning output measures were submitted to a
           descriptive analysis. Furthermore, the concept map sum score as well as the sum scores for each planning
           phase were compared in the cross-case analysis by using the Student's t-test.
           b.)  To determine subjective learning output, a final evaluation questionnaire was applied. With respect to
                this sub-dimension, the questionnaire included three rating questions. These questions asked students to
                indicate on  a four-level    scale (4  = fully   agree; 1  = do    not agree)  whether    they think   that (i.) their
                theoretical planning    knowledge,      and   (ii.) their  practical   planning    skills might    have  increased.
                Furthermore, they were requested to estimate (iii) whether they will be able to prospectively apply
                what they   have    learned. As  with   the  objective  learning    output  measures,  students'   ratings  of   these
                questions were first submitted to a descriptive analysis for each case and then compared via t-tests in
                the cross-case analysis.

       Learning process effects
                This dimension was elicited from two perspectives, namely a) from the perspective of the instructors,
       and b) from the perspective of the students.
           a.)  To estimate learning process effects from the instructors' perspective, we continuously kept record of
                our  own  experiences    and  observations    of    (individual   and  collective)  student-instructor-interactions
                during the course, made notes from our weekly instructor meetings and gathered informal feedback
                from students    by asking   simple   questions  such   as "How     did   this work?"  or   "How   could    you  have
                learned more effectively from this?". All of the data was entered into working logs and categorized and
                assessed  with   respect  to  perceived     strengths  and   weaknesses     of  the  course  and   its instructional
                elements.
           b.)  To assess learning process effects from the students' perspective, the final evaluation questionnaire was
                used  again.   Depending     on    the  particular     arrangement     in the   different  course  deliveries,    the
                questionnaire contained four to six rating questions. Each question addressed a specific instructional
                element  of the  course   (e.g., modeling     of the   planning    process, feedback   and   guidance)   and    asked
                students to indicate on the already mentioned four-level scale how helpful the respective element was
                for their learning process. Students' answers to the rating questions were processed in the same way as
                the objective and subjective learning output measures. Besides the rating questions, the questionnaire
                contains two open-ended questions which asked students what they liked and disliked in the course.
                Any students' comments on this form were transcribed and, again, analyzed with respect to perceived
                strengths and weaknesses of the course and its instructional elements.

      Products of the design-based research

1-
        Thus far, the design-based research yielded three kinds of `products': 1.) A functional prototype of the
task-oriented coaching model, 2.) a set of common challenges in learning how to plan instruction, and 3.) a
number of suggestions for prospective improvements of the model. These products will be described in more
detail in the next paragraphs.

Functional prototype of the task-oriented coaching model
        The evaluation of the last iteration, case four, yielded the following objective learning outputs:
With respect to the Concept Mapping Task, 61 percent of the participants in this case (n = 16) demonstrated a
performance that was satisfactory or better (M = 2,44; SD = 0,58, with `4' indicating a proficient or excellent
performance). The same applies to 78 percent of the participants with respect to the task analysis phase of the
Authentic Planning Task (M = 3,02; SD = 0,65) as well as to 71 percent with respect to the goal setting phase of
planning (M = 2,90; SD = 0,70). Moreover, 64 percent of the participants were able to adequately tackle the
phase of instructional framework construction and elaboration (M = 2,78; SD = 0,71).
        Besides this, cross-case analysis comparisons demonstrated that subjects from case four outperformed
subjects from the other cases in terms of all objective output measures, with statistically significant differences
between the cases one and four for the three Planning Task performance scores (2).
        Albeit with a somewhat different nuance, the results concerning objective learning output effects are by
and  large mirrored  by  the   subjective  learning  output   measures.   In  this respect, all participants   in  case four
(n = 16) consented that they have expanded their theoretical planning knowledge (M = 3,67; SD = 0,49, with `4'
indicating full agreement). Moreover, 80 percent stated that their practical planning skills might have increased
(M = 3,20; SD = 0,94). However, with regard to these estimates only the mean differences between the cases
one and three proofed to be statistically significant in favor of the last-named.
        Last   but not  least, the indicators    of  objective and  subjective    learning  output effects seem    to be  in
compliance with the data concerning learning process effects. In this respect, for example, nearly all participants
of the case studies (n = 64) expressed their esteem for the individual feedback conferences, uttering that they
were very  helpful  (58 percent)   or  at  least helpful (38   percent)   for their learning   (overall M  for this  course
component = 3,49, SD = 0,70, with `4' indicating full agreement). Concerning the element `authentic planning
tasks' (i.e. working out of students' own instructional plans), the same applies for 54 and 41 percent of the
sample, respectively   (overall   M  = 3,48;     SD  =  0,65).  Likewise,    the data   support   the assumption   that  the
elaborated modeling element as from case two was beneficial in sustaining development of students' planning
abilities (overall M = 3,16; SD = 0,73).
        To sum up, even though lack of statistical significance for the subjective learning output measures in
case four  urges to  be cautious,    these results,  on the whole,    encourage    me   to suggest that   the design-based
research activities so far have lead to a functional prototype of the task-oriented coaching model.

Common challenges in learning how to plan instruction
        According to our observations during classes and/or individual feedback conferences as well as to the
analyses of students' responses to the assessment tasks, there seem to be the following common challenges in
prospective secondary level    business school teachers' learning how to plan instruction:
     x  Some    students  had   a  rather  naïve    way of  approaching      the planning   task. They   initially found  it
        unfamiliar   to systematically     plan  by  figuring  out task   demands,    learning  goals  and frameworks     of
        instruction. Quite often, they struggled with linking the different phases of planning and/or got stuck in
        one phase.
     x  Moreover,    students   occasionally     had difficulties  in providing    appropriate  reasons   for  their design
        decisions and/or to clearly articulate what they are going to do.
     x  In addition, students sometimes got in trouble with the ambiguity of the design task at hand, and with
        the fact that learning to cope with this task inevitably involves errors and mistakes.
As empirical findings in design research and education (e.g., Goel & Pirolli, 1989; Rowland, 1993) suggest, this
(non-exhaustive) list of challenges in learning how to plan instruction mirrors ubiquitous learning predicaments
of novices in other design professions.

Suggestions for model improvements
        As   a third `product'    of the   design-based  research,    the results  of the  formative   studies particularly
suggest improvements of the task-oriented coaching model with regard to two aspects:
     x  One aspect which students frequently complained about in their answers to the open-ended question of
        the  evaluation   questionnaire    concerns  the   expenditure    of time  that learning  in  the planning   course
        deserves.   As  a possible   solution    to tackle this problem,     they  proposed  to   `gain learning   time' by
        prospectively linking contents of the course with other courses in the teacher education curriculum.
     x  The other improvement aspect pertains to students' doubts regarding the question whether they think
        that they will be able to apply what they have learned. As the results of the cross-case comparisons

                                                                                                                                1-
                 demonstrated,   mean    values for  this subjective  learning output  measure  constantly  remained    on a
                 relatively low  level  of  about 2,70 (SD  between   0,35  and  0,58, with `4' indicating  full agreement).
                 Obviously, none of the mean differences between the four cases proofed to be statistically significant.
                 One possible interpretation of this evaluation result might be that students feel insecure about their
                 abilities, and that we, consequently, have to offer them further possibilities to practice the to be learned
                 knowledge and skills.

      Discussion
                 Given the previously described products of the design-based research, I feel that the research activities,
       all in all, essentially promoted the concern of studying what learning to plan actually involves and how this
       learning could be supported effectively. However, they unavoidably remained incomplete in the sense that they
       point out a range of issues that need to be addressed by further research. In particular, these issues comprise:
           x     The expansion and exploration of the task-oriented coaching model with other instructors, universities
                 and institutions in teacher education, respectively.
           x     The inclusion of `online-measuring' of students' learning processes (e.g. via think aloud protocols).
           x     The supplementation of the design-based research with experimental studies (e.g. regarding the fine
                 tuning of the instructional elements `authentic planning tasks', `personal feedback and guidance' and
                 `modelling of the design process').
       Besides this need for further research, the research activities raised two questions for me, which are related with
       the methodology of design-based research:
           1.    Perhaps as other users of this methodology, I firstly asked myself what might be sound and feasible
                 guidelines to help researchers deciding upon which parts of the usually fairly huge sets of collected
                 data should be included in the process of constructing viable claims.
           2.    In  doing  this kind   of research, I secondly wondered    how  to determine   the end  of a design-based
                 research   project or,  in other words,  how   to formulate   reasonable `stopping  rules' for  design   and
                 development iterations.
       I would be very grateful to discuss these and similar questions within the community of scholars in the learning
       sciences and in design-based research.

      Endnotes
       (1) To avoid misunderstandings, I would like to point out that the term `design research' is used to denote
           conceptual and empirical works in the design professions whereas `design-based research' is used to label a
           specific methodological approach to educational research.
       (2) D = .05 for `task analysis' and `instructional framework' sum scores; D = .01 for `goal setting' sum score.

      References
       Akin, Ö. (2002). Case-based instruction strategies in architecture. Design Studies, 23(4), pp. 407-431.
       Aprea, C. (2007). Aufgabenorientiertes Coaching in Designprozessen. München.
       Barab, S.,   & Squire,    K. (2004).  Design-based   research: Putting  a stake in the ground.  The  Journal    of the
                 Learning Sciences, 13(1), pp. 1-14.
       Bransford, J. D. (2001). How people learn: Brain, mind, experience, and school. Washington, DC.
       Clark, C. M., & Yinger, R. J. (1987). Teacher planning. In J. Calderhead (Ed.), Exploring teachers' thinking
                 (pp. 84-104). Salisbury, Wiltshire.
       Collins, A., Joseph, D., & Bielaczyc, K. (2004). Design research: Theoretical and methodological issues. The
                 Journal of the Learning Sciences, 13(1), pp. 15-42.
       Collins,  A., Brown,  J.S.,  &   Newman    S.E. (1989). Cognitive apprenticeship:    Teaching the crafts  of  reading,
                 writing and mathematics. In L. B. Resnick (Ed.), Knowledge, learning and instruction: Essays in Honor
                 of Robert Glaser (pp. 453-494). New Jersey.
       Design-Based    Research     Collective  (DBRC)    (2003).  Design-based    research:  An  emerging    paradigm    for
                 educational inquiry. Educational Researcher, 32(1), pp. 5-8.
       Dinham,   S.  M. (1989).   Teaching   as design:   Theory,  research and  implications for design   teaching.  Design
                 Studies, 10(2), pp. 80-88.
       Edelson, D. C. (2002). Design research: What we learn when we engage in design. The Journal of the Learning
                 Sciences, 11(1), pp. 105-121.
       Goel, V., & Pirolli, P. (1989). Motivating the notion of generic design within information-processing theory:
                 The design problem space. AI Magazine 1989, pp. 18-36.
       Jeffries, R., Turner,  A.    A., Polson, P. G.,  &  Atwood,   M. E.  (1981). The   processes  involved    in designing
                 software. In J. R. Anderson (Ed.), Cognitive skills and their acquisition (pp. 255-283). Hillsdale, NJ.
       Jonassen, D.H., & Land, S. M. (2000) (Eds.). Theoretical foundations of learning environments. Mahwah, NJ.

1-0
Kirschner, P. A., Vilsteren, P., van Hummel, H., & Wigman, M. (1997). A study environment for acquiring
       academic and professional competence. Studies in Higher Education, 22(2), pp. 151-171.
Lawson, B. (1997). How designers think, completely revised 3rd edition. Oxford.
Miles M. B., & Huberman, A. M. (1994). Qualitative data analysis, 2nd edition. Thousand Oaks, CA.
Morine, G. (1973). Planning skills: paradox and parodies. Journal of Teacher Education, 19, pp. 135-143.
Reigeluth, C. M., & Frick, T. W. (1999). Formative research: A methodology for creating and improving design
       theories. In C. M. Reigeluth (Ed.), Instructional design theories and models (Vol. II), pp. 633-651,
       Mahwah, NJ.
Rowland, G. (1993). Designing and instructional design. Educational Technology Research and Development,
       41(1), pp. 79-91.
Rowland, G., Fixl, A., & Yung, J. (1992). Educating the reflective designer.    Educational Technology,  Dec.
       1992, pp. 36-44.
Schön, D. A. (1987). Educating the reflective practitioner. San Francisco.
Schwartz, P. (2002). Problem-based learning: Case studies, experience and practice. London.
van den Akker, J. (1999). Principles and methods of development research. In J. van den Akker, R. M. Branch,
       K. Gustafson, N. Nieveen & T. Plomp (Eds.), Design approaches and tools in education and training
       (pp. 1-14). Boston.

                                                                                                                 1-1
