                                                Learning from Krumping:
                        Collective Agency in Dance Performance Cultures
         Yasmin B. Kafai, UCLA Graduate School of Education and Information Studies, 2128 Moore Hall, Box 951521
                                     Los Angeles, California 90095-6293, kafai@gseis.ucla.edu
                  Kylie A. Peppler, Indiana University, 201 N Rose Ave, Wright 4024, Bloomington, IN 47405,
                                                           kpeppler@indiana.edu

                  Abstract: The recognized importance of collaboration has driven the development of learning
                  environments    and      technologies.   Instructional efforts   have    concentrated    on  supporting
                  students' development of collaborative agency ­ knowing how to collaborate in small groups.
                  Much    less emphasis     has  been  placed    on students'   collective  agency   that  would   involve
                  participation in large groups prominent in today's social networking sites and online cultures.
                  Here we use our observations in an urban community technology center where groups of 30-
                  40 youth self-organized their dance performances called Krumping and/or Clowning to inspire
                  rethinking from collaborative to collective agency in learning. Our analysis is based on four
                  years  of ethnographic      field  work   that helped     us articulate  different aspects   of  activity
                  structures that promote collective agency, distributed leadership, and the role of performance.
                  We use these findings to reflect on our conceptions of learning and the design of learning
                  technologies and environments.

       Introduction
                  Perhaps one of the most pervasive changes in the last twenty years of learning research and practice has
         been the shift from seeing learning as an individual activity to learning as socially situated activity (Bransford,
         Brown,   &    Cocking,   2000).    Cognitive    and social-cultural    theories   alike  emphasize    the   importance   of
         collaboration for learning albeit with different implications: while cognitive researchers tend to focus on the
         contributory role that conflict and discussion has on helping individual learners to articulate their understanding,
         socio-cultural  theorist tend     to stress the   importance    of social contexts    and   norms   that  situate  learners'
         interactions in authentic practices (Sfard, 1998). This change has also been driven by demands of the work place
         in which people often work in teams and not alone. For that reason, many national standards and reform efforts
         stress the importance    of helping   students  to develop    what  we  would    like to call collaborative  agency  ­  the
         ability to participate and perform in groups. Hundreds, if not thousands of research studies have investigated
         various aspects of collaboration and associated issues: the nature of various group arrangements, interactions
         with members of different gender, race, ability, and experience, and causes for success and failures of group
         work (Webb & Palincsar, 1996).
                  There is, however, one aspect of collaboration that has been readily assumed in all these efforts, which
         is the idea that collaboration happens in small groups of say, two to four people. We have numerous examples of
         efforts that promote collaborative arrangements such as reciprocal teaching (Brown & Palincsar, 1984), jigsaw,
         cognitive  apprenticeship   (Collins,   Brown   &   Duguid,   1989),   communities    of  learners (Brown    &  Campione,
         1994), to name but a few. There are few examples that consider the learning of collaboration within the context
         of a larger group, even a classroom of 20 or 30 students. Even if those happen, in school settings it is often the
         teacher who then directs interactions among all members and assumes the leadership that students otherwise
         bring to bear in small group collaborations. Recent observations of social networking and gaming communities
         though  suggest  that collaboration     among   hundreds   if not  thousands  of  members     can  also  be productive  for
         learning resulting in  collective    intelligence (Levy,   1997).  We   have  chosen   to call this  type of collaborative
         learning collective agency because it emphasizes aspects of collaboration needed to participate and perform in
         collectives and thus might be different from interactions in small groups.
                  Our   fieldwork    in a  Computer    Clubhouse,   a  community      technology   center   in one   of the poorest
         neighborhoods in Los Angeles provided us with multiple unexpected opportunities to observe such collective
         agency  in action. While    small    group  collaborations  were   definitely part of   the everyday    interactions in the
         Computer Clubhouse (see Peppler & Kafai, 2007), the Krumping dance performances were organized by 30 to
         40 clubhouse members at a time and promoted very different arrangements. Krumping is a dance style that has
         originated in South Los Angeles; it references African dance forms and is commonly intended as a positive
         expression of anger or a release of pent-up emotion. This new form of dance is popular among the youth in the
         area and   is characterized    by free, expressive  and    highly  energetic  moves.   The  documentary     "Rize"   (2005)
         illustrates the history of different forms that have emerged in South Los Angeles since the last riots in 1992.
         While Krumping is a local practice little known outside of Los Angeles, the efforts of urban youth to find an

1-0
artistic outlet for  their concerns   can  help  us understand    better how  such    spontaneous  collectives    form and
perform. We also believe that paying attention to such local funds of knowledge (Moll & Gonzalez, 1994) can
turn our attention to successful practices in low-income communities that so often are portrayed as deficient in
resources and agency. Thus learning from Krumping, as the title of our paper indicates, turns the tables and
positions them as a source of inspiration for learning science researchers and designers.
          The   goal of our  analyses   is to provide   a richer  description  of  collective agency   by  examining    the
affordances of the dance activity, the nature of distributed leadership, and the role of performance. While this is
only  one  example     of  collective  activity, we  think  that  a  better  understanding     of how     interactions  and
collaborations  are  structured  in larger  groups  can   provide the    insights for designing   the next  generation  of
networked   learning   technologies    and environments.   More   importantly,    we  are interested  in  rethinking   how
collaboration in classroom environments in general can be structured in different ways to facilitate collaborative
and collective agencies. In the next sections, we will situate the concept of collective agency within existing
learning theories, review examples of learning environments that embody some aspects of it, and then outline
features that will help us analyze different aspects of collective agency in youth dance practices.

Background
          Our   notion  of collective  agency    borrows  its  meaning    from Goffman's      work   (1959) in    which he
describes how people negotiate and validate identities in face-to-face encounters and establish ways to evaluate
the meaning of these encounters. Goffman proposed to think about everyday life as a stage in which we perform
"face-work" (1974) which may be defined as "the positive social value a person effectively claims for himself
by the line others assume he has taken during a particular contact." Dance performances like Krumping provide
valid stages    where  local community     members    represent   themselves   and    express  their  emotions.   In  these
performances we can begin to understand the interplay between individual agency (i.e., what the dancer intends
to accomplish) and social structures (i.e., the constraints imposed by community expectations) that impact the
dance performance. In Krumping performances, the social constraints come in the form of shared understanding
of the dance itself and the drive to incorporate old moves into new ones. Thus Krumping is not just about the
perfection of one's moves but also about the constant adaptation of one's performances to those of others. The
face painting that is a derivative of an older form of Krumping, called Clowning, provides an explicit illustration
of Goffman's notion of face-work.
          We    extended   Goffman's   notion   of  individual  agency   to incorporate   collective  aspects  because  in
performance-based      happenings   like Krumping    (not  all dance  art   forms  have  these situative  responses),   the
contributions   of  an individual   to the artifact are   part of a larger   social enterprise,   hence   collective.  Each
performance alone does not make Krumping; it is the constant interplay between different dancers that shapes
the performance. An analog in the networked world would be the Wikipedia, which is not constituted by one
single entry of one author; instead it is the collective effort of hundreds of authors and their respective editorship
that creates the content and the entity, or performance, of this information repository. The skills and knowledge
needed to perform in such contexts are different from what is required of learners in small collaborative groups
not only because the artifact itself changes but also because no member alone can assume the full responsibility
of creating the artifact.
          There are, of course, examples of learning environments and initiatives that have brought collective
agency into classrooms and after school programs. For illustrative purposes, there are two that we would like to
discuss in more detail: City Building education (Nelson, 1984) and the RoBallet (Cavallo et al., 2004). City
Building Education uses the whole classroom to build a city of the future that is actually centered on the actual
real estate of the school community's neighborhood. The yearlong curriculum encompasses all subjects from
reading,  writing,   mathematics,   science,  art   and social   studies. Students    organize  themselves     in different
commissions that govern and negotiate different aspects of the city while designing the transportation, social
services and building infrastructure. We selected this example because it illustrates how the whole class is in
charge of the project, rather than small groups that work on subtasks of the problem at large. Leadership is
shared and distributed over the course of the year and students actually have to live in their class through the
consequences of a despotic mayor. The performance aspect of the city highlights another key element: while in
the beginning of the school year, the land plots are empty, they start filling up with streets and building designed
out of   recyclables as   do the government     infrastructures  where   students  write the  laws   that will govern   the
interactions in their city of the future. Each interaction depends on and influences the next one.
          In contrast, the Roballet performance is more squarely located within the field of dance and illustrates
how the design and interaction with robots can get dancers to think about their dancing in different ways. Here
children design a dance performance not just using their own bodies but also by building in connections with
robots whose movements they have design and control with their own body movements during the performance.
The aspect that resonates mostly closely with Krumping is the interactivity between the dancers and the robots
that mimics aspects of what Krump dancers do when they join the circle and interact with other dancers in their
performances. These performances are not isolated acts but always in dependency to each other and thus enacted

                                                                                                                              1-1
         emotions take on the veracity of role play. These examples provide us with pointers on what to pay attention to
         in  our  analysis   of collective  agency     in the  Krumping    performances      of urban    youth. For   one   the  activity
         structures illustrate that the design and implementation of the activity has multiple opportunities for entry in a
         time cycle and that activities are expandable and that there is room for innovation. For instance, each cycle of
         CityBuilding Education results in a different city or in the case of RoBallet, in a different ballet.
                   While the Krumping performances are based on collective interactions in which all members contribute
         as spectators and participants, there are two other features that are worthy of consideration: the cross-gender and
         cross-age   participation.   Krumping     performances     as  observed   in the Computer       Clubhouse,     but also  in   the
         community and theaters, involve all members of the community even though they are often portrayed as a youth
         phenomenon. Young and adult dancers join in the circle to share their energetic moves.                   Boys and girls alike
         participate in Krumping. From the outside, many of the dance moves appear to be aggressive, but the meaning
         assigned    to the  interactions   varies  with   local contexts:   community    members      use  Krumping      to   vent  their
         frustration and anger about the oppressive living situations in their neighborhood. Thus what may appear as
         aggressive to outsiders is in fact a reaction to oppression as the lived experience of insiders.

       Context and Participants
                   Over a period of four years, we have engaged as mentors and researchers at the design studio in South
         Los   Angeles,   California,  seeking   to  better  understand    creative production,    youth  organizing,    and    the  local
         culture. The Clubhouse is situated at a storefront location in one of the city's poorest areas and annually serves
         over  1000     high-poverty   African  American    and   Hispanic   youth,   mostly  between    the ages    of 9   and 16.    The
         Computer Clubhouse is not a stand-alone center; it is part of a local community organization and a world-wide
         network     of over 100   design   centers  funded   by  the  Intel®   Corporation,    designed  to embody     constructionist
         principles that acknowledge that youth learn best when they are actively engaged in design activities (Resnick,
         Rusk  &     Cooke,  1998).   Although   each   center   shares some    similarities with  others  in   the  network,   they   are
         uniquely adapted to the local context through the help of the partnering community organization and Clubhouse
         coordinators.   At  this  particular clubhouse,    there  is a rich  assortment  of    creative software    and  various   other
         artistic materials,   such   as digital cameras,    microphones,    and   musical   instruments,    that are   utilized  by   the
         Clubhouse      members    in  an   integrated  fashion,   oftentimes    building on    work   created    or recorded     in   one
         environment     and   altered in  another.  Youth   have   access   to an  impressive   variety of  software,    including    the
         Microsoft Office suite, Bryce 5, Painter 7, RPG Maker, and video, photography, and sound editing software.
         Additionally, designers can create or incorporate existing sound files, video, and other input/output devices,
         such as with homemade input/output devices, making design projects truly media-rich.
                   South Los Angeles is also the site where Krumping and Clowning originated . The mainstream media
         was   first exposed    to  Krump    in  the   2005  movie,    Rize, which    documented     the founders    and    other   initial
         practitioners during the infancy of Krump as an art form. This new form of dance is popular among the youth in
         the area and is characterized by free, expressive and highly energetic moves. Youth will also elaborately paint
         their faces,   dress,  and obtain  special   haircuts  for the  dance   performances    ­ even   those   performances      at the
         Computer Clubhouse. Krump has now spread internationally but still continues to evolve in the streets of South
         LA. It seems only natural then that the Clubhouse culture would be permeated by the local Krump culture at
         times. Indeed, as this paper documents, the Krump culture evolves in the Clubhouse space as youth merge their
         technology     practices  and their  dance   practices  ­  each  informing   the other.   The   youth  regularly   created    and
         filmed hundreds of dance videos at the Clubhouse (n > 250), moving from dance to other aspects of production
         including   recording,    editing, and    staging these   events.   The findings    section of  this   paper   documents      and
         describes their work in greater detail. This paper serves to counter some of the common misperceptions of the
         community and showcases the Krump dance movement serves as one example of how the local community
         successfully   orchestrates   large, collective   events.  We  will  examine   the  Krumping     performances      in regard   to
         three aspects: the nature of the activity itself, the division of labor in organizing and documenting performances,
         and the insider/outsider perspectives.

       Clubhouse Krumping
                   In   the following,   a  series of  smaller   vignettes are   used to  describe   how   Krumping     brings   out   the
         collective agency of the Computer Clubhouse members. The various facets of collective organizing are explored
         and presented with excerpts from the field notes and screen captures from the videos that the youth made and
         from videos made of the youth engaged in making the dance videos. The following is an edited version of
         several field notes that were written by four different mentors, describing the same day's events (05/02/06) at
         the Computer     Clubhouse.     These   field notes  provide   a  rich description  of  the Krumping       Dance   Videos     and
         provide the context in which we want to discuss our notions of collective agency. In this first field note excerpt,
         the mentor comes into the room and notices a group of students around the computer. The mentor then discovers
         that the youth are working on editing a dance video from one of their previous dance performances. Kaylee

1-
takes on the role of the editor, in part because she is the only one at the site with the technological know-how to
do this.

         Viewing and Editing the Artifact. When I first came into the clubhouse I noticed around 7 of
         the younger members crowded over one of the computers. They were all watching a dance
         video that they created last Thursday. I walked around and noticed that Kaylee wanted to look
         through the dance video and edit certain clips out. In the video, I saw a circle of members with
         one member dancing in the middle.        The youth took turns coming into the middle of the circle
         to dance in front of the camera. The dances ranged from Krumping, to breaking, and other
         styles. The kids seemed really interested in the movie because they were debating what clips
         to keep and how to improve it.

         One  of the key   organizational attributes   of the  dance   is the   idea of the  circle.  The  circle has  been
prominent in dance cultures around the world but nevertheless is an important way for the youth to organize. By
forming a circle while dancing, it places everyone on an equal plane until someone chooses to take the center of
the circle, at which point they take the lead. This places an importance on individual agency. The editing of the
video, additionally, becomes   an important     site for learning. The    youth  critique  the  performance,     the camera
angles, and the best way to edit the video. The contribution of the technology to this activity is twofold: (1) as an
artifact for documentation and reflection beyond the ephemeral dance performance; (2) as an additional mode of
expression  beyond   the dance  itself, allowing   for additional     youth to  participate  in the   viewing and    editing
process that may or may not have been in the original dance production.

         The  Dance  Performance.   After   painting   their   faces, the youth  were   ready   to record  again.
         When the DJ played the song "Gimme That" by Chris Brown. ... two members, one African-
         American right around age 7 or 8 and another member...initiated the video and the rest were
         soon to  follow.  Each   member   went    in front  of the   camera    and  started dancing.    They all
         performed   individually with   different   styles of  break  dancing,   while   the   girls focused on
         incorporating the hip-hop like dance moves that were completely different in comparison with
         the boys. When they started recording, the younger members were very intrigued at being able
         to see  themselves  on screen   and   for others   to see them   as  well.  The  younger     ones would
         constantly take turns going in front of the camera, making funny faces or posing at different
         angles.  I  asked the  older   girls, "So   what role  do    you serve in   this project?"   and  Ebony
         answered, "Well we have to make sure that the younger ones know what they are doing. We
         can't have them screwing up our dances by them just doing whatever. We have to keep them
         in line." It was clear that these two knew their roles in the project, yet the group was still
         flexible enough to accept new members. I saw a brand new member getting in line with the
         other dancers.

         The field notes point to some important aspects of collective agency. First, just as in the well-known
Samba Schools in South America, there are multiple opportunities for apprenticeship. In this example, the older
members    show  the  younger   ones    how    to participate  and    structure the  activity   through    their  efforts to
choreograph the dances and keep the younger members in line. However, in one of the later field note excerpts
the reader will see that this type of top down mentorship isn't always the case. Breona, one of the youngest
members, is actually the star dancers and the other members learn from and are inspired by her dance moves.

Critique & Expertise
         The  judgments   of the  quality of    dance  invite  critique   ­ for better  of   worse    of how  successful   a
particular dance move or how expert the member is in Krump technique. This next excerpt demonstrates that the
younger members have a valuable contribution to the innovation in the activity.

         Critique, Expertise & Self-Confidence. While the younger members were performing the older
         ones watched and critiqued, giving opinions or laughing at the boys who "danced funny" or
         "looked retarded." After the song was over they decided to ask one African-American girl,
         named Breona to participate in the video. She mentioned that she needed to hear a different
         song and suggested a song by Missy Elliot called "Lose Control." She was so good, it was no
         wonder why the guys were so intimidated by her. The other members also acknowledged the
         younger  members    that were   good   dances.   Breona   was  complimented      on her   dance   moves.
         She received comments like "dang that girl can dance," from the older members. Her dance
         moves were more crisp and fluid that the other 2 girls. I was greatly impressed at how talented
         Breona was. She was way more proficient at dancing and had more confidence than any of the

                                                                                                                                1-
                 other girls. One of the other girls, Ebony, who was in charge of the choreography for the girls,
                 was very outspoken and seemed like she could dance really well, but when it came down to
                 performing for the music video, she became very self conscious and seemed to dance poorly
                 on purpose. Ebony was older than Breona, yet because of Breona's carefree viewpoint she was
                 able to perform with ease.

                 This  excerpt   points to the   multiple opportunities for   innovation ­  a highly  valued contribution  in
         Krump culture. The activity itself is open enough to allow for infinite degrees of innovation both in the filming
         and in the choice of dance moves ­ a high ceiling ­ and yet allows for new members without much experience
         to be involved as well ­ a low floor. The structure of several consecutive dances, each only a few minutes in
         length, allows for members to enter and leave the activity as needed. This feature also allows for multiple entry
         points, in case it takes the kids a while to warm up to the activity. In addition, the Krump culture, similar to what
         was found in the Samba Schools initiative, allows for and encourages cross-gender and cross-age participation.
         The youth are united by their shared goals: the performance and the documentation. Finally, the activity itself is
         easily expandable from a group of 6-7 youth to a group of 30 youth at times and leads to multiple ways to
         contribute to the activity.

        Division of Labor
                 The   Clubhouse     dance video  activity presents multiple  opportunities   for  youth to draw   upon  their
         individual areas of expertise  and  take  on strong  leadership  roles (see  Figure  1). In the following field note
         excerpt, the division of labor is explored. Several of the youth take on leadership roles, including Dwight and
         Javan, as the producer and director respectively. In addition, there are several other roles that youth step up to
         fill, including the role of DJ (FAFA), make-up artist (Javan), choreographer (Ebony), and editor (Kaylee), and
         dancers (e.g., Breona and several College mentors). Each of these roles is interdependent on the other.

                 Roles. The dance group included only 3 girls, all of whom were African-American. The rest of
                 the group contained 6 boys, both African-American and Latino. One of the older members,
                 Javan, took on the role of the director. I talked to Javan earlier and he said that he did all the
                 planning and face painting. All of the boys in the group had their face painted with different
                 designs by Javan. Though Javan organized the sequence of events for the music video, each
                 member involved had their own role. There was a designated role for each member: One was
                 the DJ in charge of the music, another was in charge of recording the video, another was the
                 producer, another the choreographer, another was the editor, and the remainder were dancers.

                 Although    the collective activity  can  take place in  the   absence  of any   one member,  beacause   the
         leadership is distributed,  each  member  plays   an important  role in shaping  the project. Roles are divided  up
         according to interest and ability. For example, Kaylee's knowledge of the video editing software facilitated her
         involvement in the group as the editor.

         Figure 1. Three images demonstrating the division of labor the Clubhouse Krump Culture. From left to right, the
          first image is of Javan downloading the music, the next is of Dwight who directed some of the production and
                             controlled the camera, and final image is of Kaylee editing the videos.

        Insiders vs. Outsiders and Aggression in the Dance Culture
                 Learning to Krump and participating in the dance events requires some basic cultural knowledge and
         an understanding of the shared importance of the event. Despite being a fairly open group, and this is where a
         sense of agency comes in when an individual chooses to participate in the dance activity or not, the activity is
         not necessarily understandable to cultural outsiders. In fact, the aggressive qualities of the dance and the acted
         battling that sometimes takes place during dance offs or visual displays of anger can be frightening to outsiders
         that don't  understand   the   cultural meaning   behind   these activities. The    members   themselves  share  an
         understanding of the importance of the activity and accept these displays of violence as a form of expression and

1-
not of aggression. In sum, Krumping knowledge is situated and context-specific: insiders in the activity see the
visual displays as countering feelings of oppression while outsiders see it as a form of aggression. While the
context varies, this seems to be the case with most collective activities. Members join together because of a
shared   interest and  knowledge    of an   activity that  is not  shared    by  everyone (e.g.,   World  of  Warcraft),    and
outsiders to the activity see it as deviant or unhealthy (e.g., videogame addictions and violent proclivities). This
tension  between   insiders   and  outsiders in  collective   activities  is highlighted  in  the  following  two  field  note
excerpts, both written by Latino males that were Undergraduate mentors at the field site during this same time.

         Insider. I was especially surprised when I saw her dancing as if she was calling out one of the
         members to battle her...Breona got right in Dwight's face and pretended to be slashing him
         and ripping him apart through her battling. This whole idea of women being nice, and sweet
         and  not  really   showing   hostility but  tranquility  was    completely  false.   This  young   girl was
         ready to challenge any male who challenged her way of dancing because she knew that she
         confident enough to challenge the boys to dance. At one point I decided to come into the film
         and  relive   my   youth.  I did a  few break-dancing      moves.   The   kids seemed     to have   enjoyed
         watching me dance because they were cheering me on.

         Outsider. One of them asked me if I could dance, I just nodded my head (to signify "no").                 I
         tried to get FAFA's attention but I called him FAT FAT. (O.C. I guess that I misheard his
         name because Kaylee and her friend laughed at that and repeated what I had said.                    FAFA
         seemed embarrassed. He smiled but he wasn't laughing and he seemed quieter than usual). I
         then noticed that the kids were dancing.         They formed a circle, like in the video. I then saw
         two members, Daniel and FAFA play fighting.              I wasn't sure what to do at that point, but I
         noticed   that   Clubhouse   Coordinator    looked   over, laughed,     and remarked,    "Those   boys  are
         crazy."   Her reaction made me feel that it was okay that they were doing this. I love the fact
         that   they  are  bringing    music  into   the clubhouse     in this   manner   but  it  makes    me   feel
         uncomfortable that they were play fighting.          I guess I didn't say anything because it seemed
         okay with the Clubhouse Coordinator.

         The mentor that is characterized as the insider uses terminology specific to the event (e.g., battling),
participates by   dancing   (albeit breakdancing     and  not Krumping),      and  reads  Breona's    aggressive  gestures   as
empowering her as a female. By contrast, the mentor that is characterized as an outsider in this activity system is
unsure of how to read the social context, relies on cues from an authority figure to know what is and is not
appropriate, does not participate in the dance, and mistakenly calls the youth by an insulting version of his
rapper name. Surprisingly, this mentor has been involved for over a year at the Clubhouse while the insider
mentor   is new    to the  Clubhouse   activities.   Ironically, this  activity, in  contrast to   most  of  the work    at the
Computer Clubhouse which can sometimes end in frequent feuds and hurt feelings, did not inspire and verbal or
otherwise   fighting  amongst   the   members.   In  fact, the   field notes  revealed   that the  dance  videos   rallied  the
members     and   created a sense   of community     in  the  space.   During   the  peak of  the  dance   video   movement,
attendance was at an all time high, the place was filled with music, and all of the youth were engaged in some
aspect of creative production related to Krumping.

Discussion
         In this section, we return to the initial mission of this paper which was not only to describe and analyze
features of collective agency but also to consider what kind of insights we can gather for designing collaboration
in larger groups, hence collectives. Our observations and analyses of Krumping and clowning indicate several
distinct features  from    traditional small  group   collaboration.     For  one,  we  observed    that members      assumed
multiple roles, and did so fluidly as they shifted from participants to observers to directors to editors and back.
At least on the outset, there seemed to be less a hierarchy based on authority of age even though some club
members pointed out that they needed to make sure that the younger ones knew what they were doing. Instead,
more full forms of participation seemed to derive also from the dance performance itself and so even younger
members could assume authority they otherwise would be denied in more traditionally organized settings. Most
small group collaborations have roles assigned even if participants cycle through them; here members adopt
whichever    role  is needed  and   available   like when    they move    in  and   out the  circle   during their Krumping
performances.
         Based on these observations we can say that one aspect of collective agency is to assume multiple
roles; these roles    are not prescribed  though     members   are  valued   and  recognized   in  the community      for their
particular abilities (see Dwight the producer). Such changes in participation (see Rogoff, 1995) are also part of
communities     of practice   and  often  assumed    for successful    collaboration  in  small   groups.   Perhaps   it is the
prescriptive nature of assigned roles in small group collaboration that seem to make it difficult for members to

                                                                                                                                  1-
         adopt the fluidity needed to function and perform and larger collectives. In fact, we have little research if any
         that focuses on unstructured group collaborations as observed in the Krumping community (Cohen, 1994) in
         contrast to the hundreds of studies that focus on various features of structured group arrangements.
                  The    adoption  of multiple   roles   also brings  another    factor  into  play that  is   the  learning  benefits
         associated with this arrangement. Part of Krumping performances is not just a repetition of one's established
         routines but a constant integration of other people's moves. As such performances are never the same but vary
         and are sensitive to the local context and time. Learning from others is thus built into the performance. This
         form of learning requires paying careful attention and being responsive to what others are doing. This stands
         very  much   in contrast to  the  often formulaic    strategies  promoted    in collaborative   groups    that, for instance,
         divide text comprehension into smaller components and then have learners practice every single one of them
         (Brown & Palincsar, 1986). In Krumping the "text" is always changing as members invent and modify their
         moves. The history of this dance form is a testament how different variants have developed from Clowning to
         Krumping and continue to change (Rize, 2005).
                  Finally,  we  also  need  to address   the  performance     aspect  of  Krumping     because   it  is  in the actual
         emactment that moves are generated and modified; these changes are not practiced or determined beforehand.
         The idea that learning needs to result in tangible products is surely not new and has garnered much credence
         with the advent of project-based learning and its focus on authentic practice. A key idea in these projects that are
         often worked    on in  smaller   groups  is  that the final  outcome     is an  artifact that   bears some     connection   to
         professional practice.  One  may     wonder   whether  here  is  the  dividing   line between    the  arts and    sciences: in
         Krumping    (which  is not  like all forms   of dancing)    the artifact is  in constant   flux while   in science-oriented
         projects artifacts may   differ  but result in  some  stable   form  at  the end.   Perhaps   newer   forms    of  knowledge
         constructions such as the Wikipedia tap more into similar types of final products that are never finished; each
         entry is under constant observation as members add new content and then remove other content. While there is
         considerable debate in the scientific community about the sourcing and correctness of these entries compared to
         more  traditional  authoritative  handbooks,    the  reception  and  contributions    speak to  the   success   of  collective
         authorship and editorship. Researchers like Amy Bruckman already experiment with these new forms of writing
         collaboratives ­ or collectives ­ for science learning (Bruckman & Forte, 2006).
                  Our observations at least seem to suggest that it might be worthwhile for Learning Scientists to pay
         attention to collective agency in addition to collaboration. From our analyses it is clear that it's not just a simple
         matter of involving larger number of participants but also of considering the nature of activities, the roles that
         participants will assume, and the performances or artifacts that present the culmination of efforts. In the same
         way that Lave and Wenger (1991) stepped outside of school to understand learning by examining different types
         of apprenticeships, we suggest that learning sciences researchers consider subject areas other than mathematics
         and science to broaden their applications. The learning technologies, activities, and environments that we design
         are greatly influenced by how we think about learning as a socially situated activity.

       References
         Bransford, J., Brown, A., & Cocking, R. (2000). How people learn. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
         Brown,   A., &   Campione,    J. (1994).  Guided     discovery   in a community       of learners.   In K.  McGilly    (Ed.),
                  Classroom    lessons:   Integrating  cognitive   theory and  classroom     practice  (pp.  229-290).     Cambridge,
                  MA: MIT Press.
         Cavallo, D.,  Sipitakiat,  A.,  Basu,   A., Bryant,   S., Welti-Santos,     L., Maloney,    J., Chen,   S., Asmussen,     A.,
                  Solomon, C., & Ackermann, E. (2004). RoBallet: Exploring Learning through Expression in the Arts
                  through Constructing in a Technologically Immersive Environment. In Y. B. Kafai, B. Sandoval, N.
                  Enyedy, A. Nixon, & F. Herrera (2004) (Eds.), Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on
                  the Learning Sciences (pp. 342-349). Mawhaw, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
         Cohen,   E.  G. (1994).   Restructuring     the classroom:      Conditions   for productive     small   groups.    Review   of
                  Educational Research, 64, 1-35.
         Collins, A., Brown, J. S. & Newman, S. E. (1989). Cognitive apprenticeship: Teaching the crafts of reading,
                  writing, and mathematics. Educational Researchers, pp. 35-42.
         Forte, A. & Bruckman, A. (2006). From Wikipedia to the classroom: exploring online publication and learning.
                  In  S. Barab,  K.   Hay, &   D. Hickey     (Eds.), Proceedings     of  the 7th  International    Conference   of the
                  Learning Sciences. Bloomington, IN.
         Goffman, E. (1959). The representation of self in everyday life. New York: Anchor.
         Goffman, E. (1974). On face-work: An analysis of ritual element in social interaction.             IN B. G. Blount (Ed.),
                  Language, culture and society: A book of readings. Cambridge, MA: Winthrop Publishers, Inc., 224-
                  249.
         Lave, J. (1987). Cognition in practice. New York: Cambridge University Press.
         Levy, P. (1997). Collective intelligence. Cambridge, MA: Helix Books.

1-
Moll, L. and Gonzalez N. (1994). Lessons from Research with Language-Minority Children. Journal of Reading
         Behavior 26.4, pp. 439-56.
Nelson, D. (19xx). City Building Education. Los Angeles, CA: Center for City Building Education.
Palincsar, A. &  Brown,    A.  (1984). Reciprocal  teaching  of   comprehension-fostering    and comprehension
         monitoring activities. Cognition and Instruction, 1(2), 117-175.
Peppler, K. &  Kafai,  Y. (2007). From  SuperGoo   to Scratch:    exploring creative digital media production  in
         informal learning. Learning, Media, and Technology, 32(2), 149­166.
Resnick, M., Rusk, N., and Cooke, S. (1998). The Computer Clubhouse: Technological fluency in the inner-city.
         In Schon, D., Sanyal, B., And Mitchell W. (Eds.), High Technology and Low Income Communities, pp.
         266-286. MIT Press.
Rogoff,  B.  (1995).  Observing   socio-cultural activity on   three  planes:  Participatory   appropriation and
         apprenticeship. In J.V. Wertsch, P. Del Rio, & A. Alvarez (Eds.), Sociocultural studies of the mind (pp.
         139-163). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Sawyer, K. (Ed.), Cambridge Handbook of the Learning Sciences. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Sfard, A. (1998). On two metaphors for learning and the dangers of just choosing one. Educational Researcher,
         27(2), 4-13.
Webb,   N. &  Palincsar,  A. (1996). Collaborative learning.   In D. Berliner  (Ed.), Handbook   of Educational
         Psychology (pp. 345-413), New York: Macmillan.

Acknowledgments
The views expressed are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily represent the views of the supporting
funding agencies or the University of California, Los Angeles.

                                                                                                                    1-
