             Rethinking Pedagogy: Using Multi-User Virtual Environments to
                                        Foster Authentic Science Learning
                       Diane Jass Ketelhut, Temple University, Philadelphia, Pa, diane.jass.ketelhut@temple.edu
                              Jody Clarke, Harvard University, Cambridge, Ma, clarkejo@gse.harvard.edu
                            Brian C. Nelson, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, Brian.Nelson@asu.edu
                            Geordie Dukas, Harvard University, Cambridge, Ma, dukasge@gse.harvard.edu

                    Abstract.   Science as it is portrayed in the typical K-12 classroom bears little resemblance to
                    science as practiced by scientists, relying heavily on presentational pedagogies.         To counter
                    this, the   American   Association   for the    Advancement    of Science,   the  National   Research
                    Council,    and the National   Science   Teachers    Association    have all   called for  a   stronger
                    emphasis on having students perform scientific inquiry in the classroom.         Yet this has proven
                    challenging to do.  How can schools replicate authentic science experiences in the classroom?
                    This paper reports on the benefits of using Multi-user Virtual Environments to create authentic
                    science experiences for middle-school students that allow them to engage in the processes of
                    scientists. Our research indicates that low self-efficacy students and those with poor initial
                    knowledge do as well as those with average self-efficacy and better than those learning with
                    more traditional inquiry pedagogies. High self-efficacy students, however, do better with the
                    traditional inquiry methods.

       Introduction
                    Despite movements within the past twenty years to change how science is taught in schools, science
         education in the United States is still in crisis.      Recent reports reveal that high school students are still not
         enrolling in science courses, the US trails other countries on national tests, and that minorities and women are
         not  opting   for  doctorates  or  careers   in science    (National Science   Foundation,    2001;   Grigg,  Lauko,    and
         Brockway,     2006;    Committee   on Prospering    in the  Global   Economy    of  the 21st  Century:    An  Agenda     for
         American Science and Technology, National Academy of Sciences, National Academy of Engineering, Institute
         of Medicine, 2007).      These reports tell a story of students' declining level of interest and expertise in science
         that has implications for learning science across the globe.
                    One possible contributing factor is pedagogy.        A glimpse into typical K-12 classrooms reveals that
         current science teaching and learning still bear little resemblance to science as practiced by scientists (Chinn &
         Malhotra, 2001).       While the  American    Association   for  the Advancement    of  Science   (AAAS),     the  National
         Research Council (NRC), and the National Science Teachers Association (NSTA), amongst others, have all
         called for a stronger emphasis on inquiry, replicating authentic science experience in the classroom has proven
         difficult. This is partially due to the lack of teacher understanding of what inquiry is and how to implement it,
         and partially due to the lack of the intense resources needed to conduct high-quality inquiry activities in the
         classroom     (The  National   Academies,    2005;  Nelson   &   Ketelhut, 2007).   Thus,    students are   deprived  of a
         pedagogy      that has  been   shown  to  improve    content-based    test scores   even  for   traditionally low-scoring
         subpopulations (Marx, Blumenfeld, Krajcik, Fishman, Soloway, Geier, et al., 2004).
                    In an effort to address these issues, we are exploring an emerging pedagogical approach for teaching
         authentic science as inquiry: multi-user virtual environments (MUVEs). MUVEs are online digital worlds where
         multiple   participants  can  collaborate on    shared experiences.   MUVE     participants  take  on   the identity of  an
         avatar, one's digital persona in a virtual world, and communicate with other participants via gestures and text
         chat. In the graphical virtual worlds within MUVEs, participants also interact with digital objects modeled after
         their real-world counterparts and computer-based characters.
                    MUVEs have been used in science education to offer professional development for teachers (Annetta
         and  Park,  2006);   develop   science-based    activities that promote   socially responsive    behavior   among  student
         participants  (Kafai,   2006;  Barab, Arici,  &  Jackson,   2005);   mentor  students on  science    fair projects (Corbit,
         Kolodziej, Bernstein, & McIntyre, 2006); and support situated opportunities for students to develop and practice
         scientific inquiry skills (Nelson & Ketelhut; 2007; Clarke, Dede, Ketelhut, Nelson, 2006).
                    In this paper,  we  describe  the  ways  in which    we   are using one  educational   MUVE,     River  City, to
         engage  students    in  authentic  practices of  science.   After  presenting  the  design   of  our MUVE     and   how  it
         replicates the real-world practices of scientists, we will examine recent research findings indicating that students
         with  low  self-confidence     in scientific inquiry make    significantly larger   gains in content  mastery     using the
         MUVE than those using a paper-based equivalent.         Additionally, we will examine the journey of a single student
         from "sleeper" to scientist.

1-
Context
Scientific Inquiry
          The goal   of classroom  scientific   inquiry   has been   articulated by  multiple  state and federal policy
doctrines (AAAS, 1990, 1993; NRC, 1996). Despite this, access for many students to inquiry-based science
curricula has been limited by numerous factors, including poor teacher preparation in inquiry, lack of laboratory
space and supplies, uncertified science teachers, and a culture of high stakes testing in the United States (Nelson
& Ketelhut, 2007).
          Further complicating the situation are the students themselves.        By middle school, many students have
turned off from science, believing that they cannot `do science' (Ketelhut, 2005).             This belief, termed self-
efficacy, affects student behavior in the classroom, with high self-efficacy students more likely to persevere and
be engaged (Pajares, 2000).      Thus, even if they were offered scientific inquiry-based curricula, students with
low self-efficacy would be less likely to take advantage of this opportunity.
          Therefore, what  is  needed  are   curricula  that  can help  students  learn   content standards via inquiry,
model inquiry for struggling teachers, and enable inquiry with little reliance on costly supplies.          In addition,
these curricula need to include experiences that interest students and help them build a belief they can succeed,
regardless of their initial self-efficacy. One possible approach that shows promise is to deliver scientific inquiry
curricula via multi-user   virtual environments.       These   game-like     computer   environments  are   familiar and
engaging to students, and there is some indication that curricula embedded in them can successfully model good
scientific inquiry practices for teachers (Nelson & Ketelhut, 2007).         Here, we present one such MUVE, River
City, as an example.

Inquiry and the River City MUVE
          The River   City MUVE     is  a   middle   school   science curriculum    designed   around  national  content
standards and assessments in biology, ecology, epidemiology, and scientific inquiry.          In the curriculum, students
work in teams of three to collaboratively investigate why the residents of River City are falling ill.          Students
travel back in time--in the virtual world--to the period in history when scientists were just discovering bacteria
(for further information, see Ketelhut, 2007).
          Students learn to become scientists by engaging in the inquiry practices of scientists.      In the River City
MUVE, students engage in all aspects of inquiry as defined by the National Science Education Standards (NRC,
1996). These aspects are listed in Table 1 below, with descriptions of how they are manifested in the River City
curriculum (Ketelhut, 2007; Nelson & Ketelhut, 2007).
Table 1: How River City Objectives Map onto Inquiry (as defined by the NRC, 1996).

 Making                 Throughout the curriculum students are asked to make observations and draw inferences
 Observations           about what they see and hear as they move around the world.
 Posing Questions       Students are prompted to pose questions about the problems in River City.           They record
                        these  and reflect   on  them  as they   gather data  and   make  observations  and  inferences.
                        Students can also pose questions of the 32 computerized residents of River City and elicit
                        short sets of information.
 Planning               Students are guided through a generalized process of the scientific method, where they
 Experiments            learn how to turn their questions into hypotheses and to design procedures to test those
                        hypotheses.
 Conducting             Students conduct their experiment in River City.       They visit a `control world' (controlled
 Experiments            part  of their experiment    for  gathering   data), then  they visit the  `experimental world'
                        (where their independent variable has been changed and recollect the data from the same
                        sources).  They     then compare     the data gathered   in the two   worlds and write  up   their
                        results using graphs and charts.
 Using    tools    to   Students use virtual microscopes (see Figure 4) to examine water purity and numbers of
 gather data            mosquitoes.    In addition, River City has an Environmental Health Meter which indicates
                        a relative level of healthiness of an area.
 Communicating          Students   write   up their  results  in  a report to  the  Mayor   of River  City.  They    also
 Results                participate in a research conference where they present and share their findings with their
                        classmates.

          Students form and test their hypothesis by applying a classic controlled experimental design.         They are
able to gather data in two identical virtual worlds that differ by only a single factor, their independent variable,
which they choose.    First, they enter the unchanged River City in what is termed the "control world."          In this
world, they   not only  gather   baseline  data  but tell the  software what     variable they want  to  change.   After
gathering their control data, students then enter an "experimental world" that is identical in all aspects to the

                                                                                                                             1-
         control world except for one factor, their independent variable. For example, if students think the illness they
         identified in River City is spreading because of mosquitoes breeding in the town's bog, they might choose to
         drain the bog and investigate its impact on illness.    Thus, when they enter the experimental world the bog will
         appear to have been drained (see Figure 1).    Students must then gather data from the same sources as they did in
         the control world in order to see the effects of draining the bog.

         Figure 1. Student avatar observing the bog in the control world (on left) and the dried up bog in the experimental
                                                         world (on the right).

                  After running their experiment, students write up their findings in a report to the mayor of River City.
         The report, based on the concept of a lab report, describes their experiment, research findings, conclusions, and
         recommendations for how the mayor can stop the spread of illness in River City.         Each team of students then
         presents its research and findings to the entire class.  The purpose of this sharing day is to model the real-world
         practice of scientists while helping students see the multivariate nature of the problem in River City.

       Research Design
        Research Question
                  In  this  comparison   study,    we  investigated whether   students who    participate  in  a MUVE-based
         curriculum demonstrate greater gains in understanding the practices of scientists than students who participate in
         a similar   paper-based   curriculum. In  the same  study, we  also  conducted an    analysis of  the  extent to which
         students develop a conception of themselves as inquiry learners.

        Methodology
                  The    study implementation    was   held in a northeastern city in  spring of 2005   in five  middle   school
         classes taught by a single teacher.   Three classes were assigned to River City while two used the non-computer
         control treatment.    To determine the relative efficacy of using MUVEs to deliver authentic science instruction
         versus a well-designed classroom-based project, we developed a paper-based control curriculum to match each
         feature  of the   curriculum except   for the delivery  method. The   control curriculum   is similar   in content, yet
         delivered   via a  paper  workbook.     Activities and  timing  were  matched  closely  between     the two,  with  the
         associated lab books based on the same outline.       Both curricula contain disease transmission problems; both are
         set in a historical framework--River City is based in the mid-1800s while the control curriculum is based during
         the plague epidemic.    River City uses virtual experimentation, however, and the control curriculum uses physical
         experimentation.      For example,   in River  City,  students make   observations   using  virtual  microscopes    and
         dissecting scopes.    In the control curriculum, students make observations of real objects using hand lenses and
         microscopes.
                  A multiple-choice instrument was used to assess student knowledge of and self-efficacy in scientific
         inquiry, and    a random  subset of   students were   interviewed  before and  after implementation.    Students    also
         generated a drawing of themselves in science class at the outset and a letter to the mayor at the end that were
         analyzed qualitatively and rated for quantitative analysis.     Additionally, students in River City generated data
         including chat transcripts, online notes, and usage log files.
                  The    content instrument  consisted  of  multiple-choice  questions assessing  student  understanding     and
         knowledge of biology and scientific inquiry (estimated reliability = .86); twenty-two of the questions were on
         conceptions of scientific inquiry.    These    twenty-two  questions  ranged  from   asking   students  to differentiate
         between observations and inferences to interpreting experiment scenarios.      Scores were computed by adding up
         the number   of   correct responses,  which   ranged  from 0 to 22   with higher scores  representing    more  content
         knowledge.

1-0
              scientific inquiry knowledge post test score
         Since,                                            as indicated earlier, self-efficacy  can mediate  behaviour  and   effort, we  chose to control   for
students' entering levels of self-efficacy in scientific inquiry.                                           This was assessed via a twelve-item subscale on
the affective measure. Students rated each item on a scale from 1 (low) to 5 (high) as to how well that item fit
them.   Overall                                            scores were  computed    by  averaging   the  student's responses  across  the twelve items   of  the
subscale, with  high                                            scores representing high   self-efficacy to perform  scientific inquiry.  The measure    has an
estimated internal consistency reliability of .86 in a population of middle school students (Ketelhut, 2007).

Findings
         Figure 2 illustrates the effect of being in the MUVE treatment versus the control on scientific inquiry
post scores, controlling for self-efficacy in scientific inquiry and scientific inquiry pretest scores. For ease of
viewing, we have only graphed low, average and high values of the pretest scores, however, this is a continuous
linear variable and thus, the reader can interpolate between these values. Students who entered the project with
low   levels of self-efficacy                                           did, on  average,  significantly better with the MUVE      as  opposed  to the   control
curriculum (p<.05), regardless of their entering pretest scores.                                            As self-efficacy increases to the mean, there is no
difference between MUVE students and the control curriculum at any level of initial science inquiry knowledge.
However, this reverses as students with high self-efficacy in the control treatment did better than those with high
self-efficacy in the MUVE. Also of interest is the fact that River City students who entered with low initial
knowledge of scientific inquiry and low self-efficacy did as well or better than all students with low to average
starting pretest scores, regardless of self-efficacy.
                                                                                                                     High self-
                                                                                                                     efficacy
                                                           20

                                                           16                              Average self-efficacy
                                                                    Low self-
                                                                       efficacy
                                                           12
                                                                                                                                       river city
                                                                                                                                       control
                                                              8

                                                              4

                                                              0
                                                                   2    9     16           2    9    16            2   9     16
                                                                       Scientific inquiry knowledge pretest score

 Figure 2.   The effect of treatment on scientific inquiry knowledge post test score, controlling for self-efficacy
                                                                                       and pretest score (n=93).

         These results are both intriguing and surprising.                                               We  predicted   that students  with low  self-efficacy
would participate less and thus learn less than those with higher self-efficacy.                                              However, while this is true for
the control  curriculum,                                           the  exact opposite  is true for the  MUVE      curriculum with low    self-efficacy students
showing more improvement than their control peers.                                                We began our research on MUVEs in an attempt to find a
way to level the playing field for all students.                                           That low self-efficacy students score nearly the same on the post
test regardless of their entering knowledge indicates that MUVEs like River City have the potential to do just
that. However, the lack of growth by high self-efficacy and by high pre-content achievers, especially given the
strong growth shown by the control counterparts is troubling.                                               While we expect that with any given pedagogical
approach some students will do well and some will do poorly, these results indicate that our design needs to be
modified to include alternate pedagogical strategies that engage high pre-content achievers.
         Integrating MUVE curricula such as River City with more traditional approaches might offer different
students  the   avenues                                           they  need  to excel.    However,   MUVEs     also  have the  capability   to offer   multiple
pedagogical approaches simultaneously. For example, in order to address our findings above and explore ways

                                                                                                                                                                   1-1
         to keep high achievers engaged, we recently developed an additional story line we call "Powers." This is based
         on the idea of videogame design where you can secretly unlock content. River City Powers is directly linked to
         curricular objectives. When students complete curricular goals they are teleported to a Mansion that contains
         information related to a previous epidemic in River City. This information is meant to be engaging and pull
         students into the narrative as they look at pictures and read stories about children their age who used to live in
         River City. We also have a crystal ball that lets them see into the future and view microscopes from different
         time periods.   This is just one design strategy we are currently testing to see if we can keep all students engaged.

        How does one student develop his conception of himself as an inquiry learner via a
        MUVE?
                  Why do low self-efficacy students under go this change illustrated above? What features of the MUVE
         support students' inquiry learning? Being able to solve an emerging problem in an environment where they
         could virtually walk around and explore helped students better understand abstract concepts such as hypothesis
         and procedure. Most of the students had learned about these concepts previously, however through River City
         they were able to "see" and experience rather than just "imagine" them (Clarke, 2006).
                  As mentioned above, 10 students were selected randomly and interviewed pre-post intervention. To
         enrich the quantitative relationships shown in the section above, we offer a case study of a typical student who
         prior to the curriculum had low achievement, low self-efficacy, and low motivation in science. The goal is to
         show this student's trajectory of participation in the MUVE and how that participation helped shape his identity
         as a scientist. In this particular case, Larruge (not his real name) sheds his identity as a "student failing science"
         and takes on the identity of a "scientist" solving a problem (Clarke, 2006).
                  Larruge is a 12 year old male in the 7th grade for whom English is a second language.    By traditional
         measures, Larruge is a low-achieving student. He flunked the 7th grade and will repeat it next year. He does not
         think he is "good at science," has low self-efficacy, and describes the practices and activities of his science class
         as "boring." When asked to draw how he participates in science class, Larruge draws himself sleeping at his
         desk while his teacher stands in the front of the class (see Figure 3).

                                           Figure 3. Larruge doing science in school

                  In this study, teachers were asked to rate their expectations of student participation with the River City
         project on different dimensions: behavior, engagement, and content mastery. Larruge's teacher rated him a 3 out
         of 5 for both content mastery and behavior and a 2 for engagement.       Larruge's non-participation in science and
         with his teachers places him at a peripheral role in science class. Would participating in River City change any
         of that?
                  Generally,  students spend the first day of the project    getting  acclimated to the virtual world and
         figuring out how to communicate with each other and with the River City residents. However, Larruge starts
         atypically. He enters River City and immediately starts organizing his teammates:

                  Larruge:    Hey Tk2 since were team mates we need to decide where to meet so we can work
                              together okay write back.

         On his second day in River City, Larruge organizes his team again and starts to engage in practices of a scientist:
         making observations and inferences and sharing this research with his teammates:

                  Larruge:    Hey, I think that people are getting sick during the summer more than winter.

1-
        Jessica:    Did you guys talk to anyone?
        Larruge:     I got it from Miss Howell
        Larruge:    Ya and
        Jessica:    What did they say
        Larruge:    She told me that people get better in the winter. It's maybe because people don't go
                    out in the summer.
        Larruge:    So people what did you find out?
        Jessica:    I talked to Nurse Jensen she's in the hospital
        Larruge:    Ohh, what did she say
        Jessica:    She said that the people in the hospital are complaining of a bad cough

In addition to sharing   observations   and inferences, Larruge and    his team  become    curious and act on   their
curiosity:

        Tk2:        The cook said people are really liking his food now
        Larruge:    I know I talked to him
        Larruge:    Hey so what you find out Tk2
        Jessica:    Dr. Wright said that most of the people that are sick because of insects
        Tk2:         Erica has a bad fever and her mom thinks it's from the bog
        Larruge:    Bog? Who's Erica
        Tk2:        I am going to the bog
        Larruge:    Hold on I'm going with you okay
        Larruge:     Jessica we're going to the bog

        Through his interactions with the environment and then his teammates, we see how Larruge struggles
with the problem and makes sense of complexity.       In the experimental world, Tk2 is confused about where the
trash went,   and Larruge    explains   what  happened.    Through    this interaction, Larruge    demonstrates    his
understanding of their problem solving:

        Larruge:    Okay so that happened; the streets are clean and so is the river
        Tk2:        The trash goes to the sea
        Larruge:     No No
        Larruge:     Its so clean
        Tk2:        Yeah but why
        Larruge:    Because the people cleaned the city
        Tk2:        The ocean?????/
        Larruge:    No the city and because the city was clean when it [trash] doesn't go in to the water
        Larruge:    So I'm going to the hospital

        Real scientists participate within a community of scientists where they discuss and build ideas. We see
this team  of students   participating as a community,  sharing ideas   and  identifying ineffective strategies.    In
further discussion, Larruge offers an explanation and ties it back to their experiment, offering a causal reason
that the trash is no longer going into the water.
        Science   advances   through   curiosity, and thus  fostering scientific habits of mind involves   fostering
curiosity (AAAS, 1993). While there is often little room for curiosity in traditional schooling, MUVE-based
environments like River City can foster this. Through the chat transcripts, we see that Larruge's path is often
driven by his curiosity. This frames his transformation to a scientist who is engaged in inquiry.      This is quite
different from his pre-interview, when Larruge said he was often "bored" in science class. In the post-interview,
Larruge says that River City was so "fun" that he did not feel like he was "in class."

        Like, we were learning stuff without trying a lot.    So, I learned what a thing was, what's it
        called, not an    observation  but..[an inference].  Yeah. It's um what you think is happening
        when you make an observation.

Although he said he was "learning stuff without trying a lot," later in the post-interview, Larruge says he was
"trying so hard to figure out why they were getting sick."  He further elaborates that he felt like a "scientist":

        Oh, I don't know, I guess that um the reason I liked it I guess cause you know I got to be a
        scientist in it. (Laughs). So, I am not really that smart either so it was kind interesting.

                                                                                                                          1-
                 While Larruge still does not think he is "smart," he does say he felt "a little more" different about his
         ability to do science.   Not only does he want to go to science class, but it "got students thinking" and "interested
         in science." "Thinking more" provided a challenge--it was not too easy--and also gave a sense of ownership for
         what his team "thought" about the problem.
                 As illustrated through his trajectory, Larruge's participation in the valuable social practice of River City
         leads to the development of his identity as a self-directed learner (Greeno, 1997). Additionally, according to the
         pre-post content measures, Larruge improves his biology knowledge by 20% and his inquiry skills by 22%; his
         letter to the mayor receives a score of 7 out of 9.      These results support what we are seeing by mapping his
         trajectory of participation in the River City project.  This is the same student who, when asked to draw a picture
         of science class in the pre-interview, drew himself sleeping in class and stated, "I'm slow at this stuff."

       Conclusions
                 Creating a generation of students who find science interesting and a potential career path involves re-
         thinking how we teach science in K-12 classrooms.         MUVEs are not a panacea, nor is River City. However,
         what we have shown is that MUVEs, when designed around inquiry and science standards, have the potential to
         engage students in participating in the processes of science, particularly low-achieving students.
                 Bruce M. Alberts, chair of the National Research Council, stated in 1995, "We've managed to turn
         people off of science by making it some kind of rote learning exercise" ("Panel Urges Shift of Focus for School
         Science Courses," 1995).      Unless we find a way to reverse this, the situation will continue to get worse.      We
         need to explore new pedagogies, such as River City, to make science more accessible for all.

       References
         American Association for the Advancement of Science. (1990). Science for all Americans. New York: Oxford
                 University Press.
         American    Association  for  the Advancement     of Science. (1993).  Benchmarks    for science  literacy:  A  Project
                 2061 report. New York: Oxford University Press.
         Annetta, L. & Park, J.C. (2006). Video Games in Science: A Model for Students and Teachers Creating 3D Role
                 Playing Games.      Paper presented at the Annual Conference of the Society for Information Technology
                 and Teacher Education, Orlando, FL.
         Barab,  S.,  Arici, A.,  &  Jackson,  C.  (2005).   Eat your  vegetables  and do   your  homework:     a design   based
                 investigation of enjoyment and meaning in learning. Educational Technology, 45(1), 15-20.
         Brown,  J.  S., Collins,  A., &   Duguid.   (1989). Situated Cognition   and  the Culture   of Learning.    Educational
                 Researcher, 18(1), 32-42.
         Chinn, C. A., & Malhotra, B. A. (2001). Epistemologically authentic scientific reasoning. In K. Crowley, C. D.
                 Schunn,     &  T.  Okada   (Eds.),  Designing   for science:  Implications  from  everyday,    classroom,  and
                 professional settings (pp. 351-392). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
         Clarke, J. (2006). Making Learning Meaningful: An Exploratory Study of Using MUVEs to teach Middle School
                 Science.     Unpublished     Qualifying Paper   presented to  the Harvard   Graduate    School   of  Education,
                 Cambridge, MA.
         Clarke, J.,  Dede,   C., Ketelhut,   D. J., &  Nelson,  B.  (2006).  A  design-based  research   strategy   to promote
                 scalability for educational innovations. Educational Technology, 46 (3), 27­36.
         Committee on Prospering in the Global Economy of the 21st Century: An Agenda for American Science and
                 Technology, National Academy of Sciences, National Academy of Engineering, Institute of Medicine.
                 (2007).     Rising  Above  the  Gathering    Storm:  Energizing   and  Employing    America     for a  Brighter
                 Economic Future. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.
         Corbit, Margaret, S. Kolodziej, R. Bernstein and C. McIntyre. (May 2006) Student Project Virtual Worlds as
                 Windows      on   Scientific Cultures   in  Proceedings   of the  9th International    Conference    on Public
                 Communication of Science and Technology, Seoul, Korea.
         Greeno, J. G. (1997). On claims that answer the wrong question. Educational Research, 26(1), 5-17.
         Grigg, W., Lauko, M., and Brockway, D. (2006).          The Nation's Report Card: Science 2005 (NCES 2006-466).
                 U.S.    Department    of  Education,  National   Center  for Education  Statistics.  Washington,    D.C.: U.S.
                 Government Printing Office.
         Kafai, Y. B. (2006). Playing and making games for learning: Instructionist and constructionist perspectives for
                 game studies. Games and Culture, 1(1), 36­40.
         Ketelhut,  D.   J. (2007).  The  Impact  of  Student  Self-Efficacy  on  Scientific Inquiry    Skills: An   Exploratory
                 Investigation    in River  City, a  Multi-User   Virtual Environment.   Journal   of   Science  Education  and
                 Technology, 16(1),     99-111.
         Ketelhut, D. J. (2005, April 4-8). Assessing Scientific and Technological Self-efficacy:       A Measurement Pilot.
                 Paper presented at the National Association for Research in Science Teaching, Dallas.

1-
Marx, R. W., Blumenfeld, P. C., Krajcik, J. S., Fishman, B., Soloway, E., Geier, R., et al. (2004). Inquiry-based
         science in the middle grades: Assessment of learning in urban systemic reform. Journal of Research in
         Science Teaching, 41(10), 1063-1080.
National Research Council. (1996). National Science Education Standards: observe, interact, change, learn.
         Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
National Science Foundation. (2001). Characteristics of Doctoral Scientists and Engineers in the United States,
         2001, [internet]. National Science Foundation. Available:
http://www.nsf.gov/sbe/srs/nsf03310/pdf/tab6.pdf [2004, March 19].
Nelson, B., Ketelhut, D. J.  (2007). Designing for Real-World Inquiry in Virtual Environments. Educational
         Psychology Review 19(3), p. 265-283.
Pajares, F. (2000). Schooling  in America: Myths, mixed messages,      and good intentions (Lecture):    Emory
         University, Cannon Chapel.
Panel Urges Shift of Focus for School Science Courses. (1995, December 7). New York Times.
Piaget, J. (1930). The child's conception of physical causality. London: K. Paul, Trench, & Trubner.
The National Academies. (2005). U.S. High School Science Lab Experiences Often Poor, But Research Points
         Way         to        Improvements.         Available:            http://www4.nationalacademies.org/
         news.nsf/isbn/0309096715?OpenDocument [2005, August].

                                                                                                                     1-
