        Introducing a representational tool of the trade in middle school

                         Erica de Vries, Alix Geronimi, Jacques Baillé, Laboratory of Educational Sciences,
                                  University of Grenoble, BP 47, F-38040 Grenoble cedex 9, France
            Email: erica.devries@upmf-grenoble.fr, alix.geronimi@ac-grenoble.fr, jacques.baille@upmf-grenoble.fr

                   Abstract: How to introduce computer-assisted design (CAD) as a representational tool of the
                   trade in the classroom? This paper deals with the tension between the authenticity of design-
                   based learning  situations    that is often strived  at and  the   inherent complexity    of the  design
                   process and  CAD    as  a representational   tool   of  the trade. We   describe  a  three-dimensional
                   framework for comparing innovative project-like scenarios in technology curricula to more
                   traditional instructional     sequences  for  science   learning.    We    subsequently   developed    a
                   dissociated  geometry-oriented      and  an  integrated     technology-oriented     CAD   training   and
                   studied their influence on the way pupils engaged in a design task. Although the results show
                   evidence of the complementary roles of different types of representations, no effect of type of
                   CAD training is found. In the discussion, we propose potential explanations for these findings,
                   by relating back to our framework, and make a suggestion for future research.

       Introduction
                   In this paper, we develop the idea that creating conditions for learning about technology is essentially
         different from  constructing      situations for  science   learning.  In  our   view, technology    refers  to the   set of
         procedures and knowledge for imagining and producing artifacts, such as sewing machines, mobile phones, data
         processing software or algorithms for calculating interest, which are all objects, created by humans, to satisfy
         needs  and  extend    capacities. Whereas    the rationale  of   science  is epistemic,   the enterprise of  technology   is
         largely pragmatic and this may have important consequences for the construction of learning situations in those
         spheres of human activity (Vérillon & Rabardel, 1995). More specifically, design ­ in a way comparable to
         research  in  science  ­ is  considered   to  be  the essential   process  by  which   knowledge    grows   in  technology.
         Therefore,  we  take  professional    design    situations as a  reference   for the  construction  of  authentic  learning
         situations in technology.
                   Design is about the construction of representations, internal and external, of a future artifact before its
         actualization and  nowadays       often takes   place through   computer     modeling.  Drawing     further the parallel, in
         science,  (computer)   models constitute     the intermediary    between   the theoretical  and  empirical   level (see   for
         example   in  Tiberghien,    1994).   In  technology,      models  constitute    the intermediary   between     design   and
         manufacturing   (de   Vries,  Baillé,   & Geronimi,    2006).    Although    studies  on  classroom    design   projects  are
         emerging in the literature (Hmelo, Holton, & Kolodner, 2000; Lebahar, 2001; Roth, 1996), they have as yet not
         specifically focused on students' construction of design representations. In this paper, we present an inquiry into
         ways of introducing computer-assisted design (CAD) into the classroom as one of the important representational
         tools of  the design   trade. This      presents an   extraordinary   challenge   because   of  the  complexity    of  these
         professional computer tools. Our secondary aim is to shed light on the relations between three dimensions of
         innovative learning situations corresponding to an analytic-synthetic, an epistemic-pragmatic, and an authentic-
         pedagogic distinction.

       A three-dimensional space for characterizing learning situations
                   Design-based learning situations are an example of the project-like scenarios that have been developed
         for teaching in technology. The aim of such scenarios is to allow and encourage pupils' active participation in a
         sequence of organized activities with a specified goal (Lebeaume & Martinand, 1998). In order to distinguish
         these scenarios from traditional teaching sequences, we came to understand the orthogonality in principle (see
         Figure 1) of three dimensions of learning situations: nature, method, goal (de Vries, Baillé, & Geronimi, 2006).
                   The nature of a learning situation can be more authentic, resembling some professional practice, or
         more formal, pedagogic, specifically designed for learning (Lave & Wenger, 1989; Brown, Collins, & Duguid,
         1989). It can have a more epistemic goal ­ acquire knowledge and skills ­ or a more pragmatic one ­ produce
         artifacts (Vérillon & Rabardel, 1995). They can be analytic ­ students need to decompose the full task into
         subtasks  ­  or more   synthetic   ­    students need   to  recompose    subtasks    into the  full task (Greeno,   1997).
         Traditionally, instructional design produced more epistemic, synthetic, pedagogic situations, such as teaching
         decompartmentalized knowledge and skills in science learning and evaluating performance by retention and
         transfer tests. Recently, there has been a rising interest in more authentic, analytic, pragmatic situations, such as
         in classroom design projects. However, we must keep in mind that it is possible to envision other combinations
         on the three dimensions, such as the designing to learn approach (Hmelo, Holton & Kolodner, 2000). In science,

2-
nature and goal are congruent for researchers and for learners: the authentic situation has an epistemic goal. In
technology, according to Vérillon and Rabardel (1995), the pragmatic approach has to be applied by postulating
that growth of knowledge is a result of acting upon the world. Such an approach reverses relations between
knowledge and action, and authenticity can be achieved by focusing on material and semiotic tools. However,
the difficulty with design and its associated tools of the trade is that it is not feasible to produce full-blown
authentic, analytic, and pragmatic learning situations because of critical complexity of design tasks and tools.

                                                   Authentic

                                                                        Analytic

                       Epistemic

                                                                               Pragmatic

                               Synthetic

                                                   Pedagogic

                Figure 1. A three-dimensional framework for characterizing learning situations.

The notion of generic design
          Goel and Pirolli (1992) argue that there are essentially similar characteristics of design tasks across
domains and crucial differences between design and other cognitive activities. We stress three of the defining
features as identified by de Vries (2006). First, design is a creative process; design problems are so-called ill-
structured problems   (Simon,  1973,  1981).  Task  goals have   to be elaborated  at   the same  time   as possible
solutions. As a result, design tasks, goals, processes and products cannot be described or prescribed in advance.
Second, the ultimate design products are functional objects; they have to fulfill some need. Therefore, the form
of the future artifact has to satisfy constraints related to manufacturing, use and maintenance. This articulation
of form and function implies using knowledge from both the geometrical and technological domains. Third,
design, essentially, is about the construction of internal and external representations prior to the making of the
artefact itself: "An artifact is imagined and drawn at the same time; it is constructed through its representation
and represented through   its construction"   (de Vries, 2006).  Such  design  representations,  both    internal and
external, have  also been labeled   cognitive artifacts (Visser, 2006). The    external representations   (i.e. texts,
drawings, schemas, mock-ups, cardboard and computer models) of the future artifact play an important role in
social professional interactions.

A representational tool of the design trade
          There has been much research into learning with multiple representations and the use of interactive
learning  environments. Our   work   is about  multiple  representations, about   constructing   (rather  than  mere
interpreting) representations, and about an existing professional tool (rather than one especially designed for
educational purposes). The professional tool is used in its entire complexity from the start, which requires an
instructional sequence in which students gradually get familiarized with its functionalities.
          We developed  a framework     on mixed   multiple external representations  in design  (de  Vries,    2006).
More specifically, constructing and interpreting design representations involves knowledge of three domains
(Rabardel, 1989): geometry, technology and code. The geometry domain involves knowledge of the artifact's
form in terms of concepts such as "cylinder", "cube", "tangent", and "concentric", as well as knowledge of
projection techniques. The domain of technology concerns aspects that have to do with manufacturing, use and
maintenance  in terms  of structures, components,   behaviors  and   functions of the   future artifact. Finally, the
domain of code refers to knowledge of design drawings and discourse as representational systems, for example
the association of lines, dots, patterns and their meaning in terms of material, shade, and spatial configurations.
Nowadays, much of this third domain is taken care of by computer assisted design (CAD) programs. Because of
its complexity, CAD needs to be introduced in the classroom prior to actually using it in a classroom design
project.

                                                                                                                         2-
             Figure 2. CAD example of part of a coin holder (left: 2D sketch, right: 3D model, with their construction
                                                        hierarchies in French).

                  We   use  Ainsworth's  (2006)    framework   for   exploring  the potential  functions   of multiple   design
         representations in CAD. First, CAD allows constraining interpretation by familiarity that is by applying one's
         knowledge of one representational format to interpret a non-familiar format, or by the virtue of the inherent
         properties of representations.  For   example,  in  everyday    life, descriptive texts  and figurative   pictures are
         comparably familiar, but they do not posses identical inherent properties. As Bertin noticed (1967), figurative
         pictures use an inherent spatial medium and descriptive texts use an inherent temporal medium. Thus, a picture
         might be used for spatial (graphical) constraining, such as when interpreting the sentence "the knife is next to
         the plate". And vice versa, a sentential description, such as "They had dessert and coffee", might be used for
         temporal   constraining   when  interpreting a  picture  of  a  dinner  table. In the   case of  CAD,    a variety  of
         representations  coexist, namely  two  and   three-dimensional     CAD  line and  wireframe   drawings,    projections,
         renderings  and   animations,  and a   textual construction    hierarchy  (see  Figure  2),  which   are  all different
         appearances of an underlying mathematical geometrical model. In learning to operate a CAD program, the more
         familiar formats, for example renderings that look like real objects, can constrain interpretation of less familiar
         ones, such as for example wireframe models.
                  Second,   multiple   design   representations    complement     each   other   regarding    geometrical   and
         technological information.   Building  a CAD    model    necessarily  involves selecting geometrical  aspects   of the
         future artifact. A CAD    program  forces  its user  to  obey   to the laws  of geometry,    but it does  not  enforce
         technological constraints. Thus, you cannot create a geometrically impossible shape like those found in Escher
         drawings, but you can create models of unusable objects such as those found in Norman's design of everyday
         things (1988). Although some technological information can be represented in the construction hierarchy, such
         as functions of subparts of a model (e.g. base_volume, coin_space, ring_hole, and ejection_hole in French in
         Figure 2), CAD typically under-represents technological information and under-supports decisions regarding
         technological aspects. For example, one cannot know the appropriate size of an ejection hole before actually
         creating the  object and   trying  it out in   real-life circumstances.   Moreover,   one    has to  rely  on  another
         representational medium, some form of discourse, for representing decisions regarding manufacturing, use and
         maintenance. This type of discourse is more commonly known as design rationale: "A design rationale (DR) is a
         representation of the reasoning behind the design of an artifact" (Buckingham Shum, 1996, p. 95). Learning to
         design with (or without) CAD involves balancing the geometrical and technological aspects in the construction
         of external representations.
                  Third, the last function of multiple representations for learning relates to the idea that their combination
         and articulation  contribute to deeper   understanding.   In some     domains, such as  mathematics   (Duval,   1995),
         external representations are our only access to the objects and phenomena at hand. In science domains too, we
         rely on multiple representations, such as spectra, chemical equations, structural diagrams, electron dot diagrams,
         molecular  formulae  and   computer   models,  for developing    deeper  understanding   of  objects and   phenomena
         without being able to directly observe them (e.g. in chemistry, Kozma, Chin, Russell, & Marx, 2000). Design
         tasks  can be considered   another special   case, since  it is about  imagining  future artifacts   not available for
         observation and manipulation. This process requires multiple external representations contributing to the full
         specification of the object before it can be manufactured and used (see also Gero & Reffat, 2001).

       A study into design drawings and texts
                  Two main issues motivated the current study. The first issue concerns the difficulties encountered when
         introducing CAD in the classroom. We developed two different introductions to CAD use, focusing on either
         geometrical or technological aspects, taking into account the complexity of design tasks and tools. We paid
         attention to the fact that for use in actual classes, project-like scenarios need to meet a number of practical
         requirements. The second issue relates to the evaluation of the products of a design process. This cannot be
         achieved by a comparison of student-produced representations to some ideal solution; such a comparison would
         ignore the multiplicity of possible solutions, domains and representations. Moreover, traditional learning tests

2-
are incompatible with the authentic and pragmatic dimensions of the teaching situation since, in the real-life
situation, the end products of a design process are not the texts, drawings, and computer models, but the object
once it is manufactured so that one can evaluate its actual use. We argue however, that it is possible to gauge the
extent to which the knowledge domains of geometry, technology and code have been invested in elaborating
design drawings and texts. In other words, rather than evaluating learning in a strict sense, we administered a
simplified  design  task to measure   the  extent to  which  pupils mobilize  different types  of knowledge    as a
manifestation of the way in which pupils deal with this type of task. The results then will allow to study the
balance between types of knowledge and types of representations in design products and to answer the question
as to whether type of CAD introduction influences this balance.

Method

The context
          The study was   carried out in  a  junior high or middle  school (Collège) in   the Grenoble suburbs.   It
involves six Eight Grade classes (age 13 to 14). The French national curriculum for technology courses at this
level prescribes an introduction to CAD/CAM (Computer-Assisted Design and Manufacturing). Three groups,
each consisting  of two  technology   classes, were   formed  (36, 34 and  25 for a total of  95  pupils) that were
sufficiently homogeneous according to the teachers. The different phases were approximately the duration of
classroom sessions (alternating sessions of one hour and two hours).

The CAD training
          Two different versions of a six hour CAD course were created: the integrated function-oriented and
dissociated geometry-oriented training. The dissociated training consisted of a step-by-step construction of a
model (Figure 3a) decomposed into elementary geometrical forms with familiar shapes and proportions without
any mention of functional aspects. The integrated training introduced a technology context from the start by
presenting  the forms  according  to their  functions (Figure 3b)  without however   disregarding  the geometrical
analysis necessary for CAD modeling.

a)                                                        b)
Guided construction of the model of a rectangular box     Guided construction of the model of protecting foam
with extruded cuts, one from a rectangle and one from     with spaces for holding a CD-player and instructions
a circle.                                                 for use booklet.
     Figure 3. CAD models: a) dissociated geometry-oriented, b) integrated technology-oriented training

The design task
          The following design task was given as pre and post-test: "The manager of a student residence has to
decide upon the lay-out of the bedrooms. He disposes of a catalogue with available furniture. He asks you to
help him. You have 40 minutes; you can use sheets, pens, pencils, eraser, ruler, scissors, and glue. Propose at
least two different lay-outs using the pieces of furniture of your choice. Do not change the given dimensions of
the room, its openings and the furniture. Look for possible lay-outs, represent them on the sheets of paper,
explain   every lay-out  and give  advantages   and   inconveniences."  A  three-dimensional   projection  drawing
showed the form and dimensions of the room and the available furniture.

Coding scheme
          The   coding  scheme    (Table  1) distinguishes   between  two  knowledge     domains,   geometry    and
technology, and four knowledge types or levels: concept, function, behavior, structure. Both texts and drawings

                                                                                                                       2-
         (see Figure 4 for an example) were segmented into the smallest meaningful elements allowing a classification
         according to knowledge domain and type. A blind coding procedure on 30 test texts and drawings was repeated
         with a three weeks interval and judged sufficiently reliable (Kappa = .87).

         Table 1. Coding scheme for texts and drawings

                                                                        Domain

         Type                        Geometry                                            Technology

         Concept                                                                     Propose arrangement

         Function                                                      Target life style             Take into account givens

         Behavior        Adapt to geometrical features          Define means and activities        Adapt to technical features

         Structure           Geometrical composition                Choice of furniture               Technical composition

        Procedure
                  Table    2 shows   a summary    of the study.  All   three  groups completed    the paper-and-pencil     student
         residence design task (45 minutes). They subsequently had technology classes in which one group received the
         dissociated geometry-oriented training, one group followed the integrated technology-oriented training, and the
         third  control group    had regular technology   lessons   (a  total of six hours   per  group). Hereafter,   all groups
         completed the post-test in the same way as the pre-test. Student productions of both pre-test and post-test were
         scored for the number of geometry and technology units according to the above mentioned coding scheme.

         Table 2. Summary of the setup

             Pre-test ­ design task                      CAD training sessions                       Post-test ­ design task
            Number of geometry and             Dissociated geometry-oriented (n = 34)              Number of geometry and
          technology units in design           Integrated technology-oriented (n = 36)            technology units in design
               texts and drawings              Regular technology class control (n = 25)              texts and drawings

        Results and interpretation
                  In  this section,  we relate on  the  general accomplishment     of this   type of design  tasks, examine   the
         influence of   type  of CAD    training, and   investigate on  the   representation  of geometrical and    technological
         aspects in texts and drawings.

        Prototypical design products
                  All (or almost all) pupils represented pieces of furniture in the two-dimensional drawing by indicating
         occupied space on the floor plan (category: geometrical composition in drawing), added the names of the pieces
         of furniture on   the drawing  and  mentioned   them   in  the accompanying     text (category:  choice of furniture  in
         drawing and text). This corresponds to a minimalist understanding of the design task as a puzzle or mere brick
         game. However, we can infer that pupils took into account some user constraints, since there are no drawings
         with seemingly random positioning of furniture in the room which would have indicated a non-design strategy,
         namely not paying attention to functionality and usability at all.
                  Still, very few pupils (about 8%) represented technological information in the drawings, such as for
         example drawing a pillow on the bed as in Figure 4 (category: define activities in drawing). However, this same
         category appeared in about 74% of the textual productions. Pupils mentioned activities in their texts such as
         "rest", "work", "leisure", "store", "dress", "move around". Thus, the predominant interpretation for the student
         residence problem is one of choosing and placing furniture in both pre and posttest.
                  From this overall qualitative picture, it seems that texts and drawings are used to complement each
         other. Drawings     are principally used    to express  spatial  geometrical    aspects;  texts seem to    be the  more
         appropriate for expressing functional aspects.

2-0
  Number of units
                                        Figure 4. An example of a design drawing and text

Effects of CAD training condition
                    Figure 5 shows  the total number   of units in texts and drawings   for both pretest and  posttest.   An
increase in the total number of units contained in texts and drawings can be observed from pretest to posttest
(F(1,92) = 11,58, p > .01). This can be considered a rather surprising result, since one might as well expect
pupils to consider the task less interesting and challenging the second time; but they then would have produced
less elaborate            texts and drawings.  Figure  6  also shows   the results for each CAD   training condition:     the
integrated technology-oriented training, the dissociated geometry oriented training and the control group. No
effect of CAD training condition was found (F(2,92) = 1,66, ns), nor was any interaction with the other factors
(time of testing, representation type, and domain). As mentioned above, the size of both texts and drawings
increased from pretest to posttest for all groups.

                  30
                  25
                  2015                                                                                              Pretest
                  10                                                                                                Posttest
                   5
                   0
                           Text       Drawing          Text        Drawing          Text       Drawing

                              Integrated                  Dissociated                    Control

                        Figure 5. Size of text and drawings as a function of training condition and time of testing

Geometrical and technological information
                    We studied the complementary roles of text and drawing in representing information in the geometry
and technology domain through calculating the total number of units. Figure 6 shows the means in pretest and
posttest            for each domain and  each  type of representation. The  overall balance  was in favor  of representing
aspects in the technology rather than in the geometry domain (F(1,92) = 125,98, p > .01), confirming the idea
that pupils did not just consider this task a kind of a brick game. Moreover, the increase from pretest to posttest
has to be attributed more to an increase in technological rather than geometrical units (F(1,92) =         5,37, p > .05).
Finally, whereas the technology domain was more substantial in texts, drawings showed more geometrical units
(F(1,92) = 220,98, p > .01), which constitutes quantitative evidence confirming our first impression.

                                                                                                                                 2-
            Number of units
                            20

                            15
                            10                                                                                                  Geometry
                                                                                                                                Technology
                             5

                             0
                                         Pretest              Posttest                 Pretest            Posttest

                                                    Text                                        Drawing

                                                    Figure 6. Complementary roles of texts and drawings

                               These  results confirm   the   complementary      roles of texts and  drawings    regarding   geometrical  and
         technological aspects. We speak of complementary roles rather than constraining interpretation since drawings
         and   texts            are   equally familiar  to  the pupils.  We  could     however  consider   it to be a  case   of constraining
         interpretation to the extent that it is also a consequence of the inherent properties of drawings ­ a spatial medium
         more suitable for geometrical aspects ­ and those of texts ­ a temporal medium that allows enumerating the
         functions that have been considered in elaborating the solution.

       Conclusions and discussion
                               In this paper, we initiated an approach for introducing professional tools of the trade in middle schools
         as prescribed                by the  national curricula.  We   presented   a  three-dimensional   framework    for  looking at  these
         situations and developed two essentially different ways of introducing CAD as a representational tool of the
         trade              in the  classroom. The    study   showed  the relevance    of applying  scientific knowledge     of learning with
         external representations to the field of design-based learning situations. More specifically, students at this level
         produced elaborate text and drawings and managed, in addition to dealing with the geometrical aspects of a
         problem, to mobilize technological knowledge. Moreover, this particular design field lends itself to the study of
         students' production of multiple representations suitable for expressing different types of domain knowledge.
                               We found no impact of type of CAD training, nor could we differentiate CAD training from regular
         technology courses. We attribute these failures to an apparent contradiction when describing both the design
         task and the CAD training with the help of our three-dimensional framework. In fact, we characterize the design
         task  as              the more  authentic, referring   to a  professional  practice,  pragmatic,  aiming   at the  production   of an
         artifact, and analytic, confronting learners with the complex task from the start. Due to complexity of the tool,
         the CAD training turned out to be more pedagogic, referring to a training situation, epistemic, aiming at the
         learning of a skill, and synthetic, learners execute a serious of actions in order to accomplish a task. However,
         focusing on the mere tools that are used in the two situations, the CAD training would, on the contrary, appear
         to be the more authentic, whereas the paper-and-pencil design task would seem to be the more pedagogic. As
         foreseen by Vérillon and Rabardel (1995), the design task and CAD training may have been experienced by the
         pupils as two entirely separated activities. Research in educational technology has also shown how teaching
         with complex computer programs, such as microworlds like Logo, Cabri and Tarski's world, carries the risk of
         students learning the program rather than the cognitive skills aimed at in the first place. In other words, when the
         computer tool becomes instructional content in its own right, the ultimate goals that founded the decision of its
         development                and  introduction  get  overlooked.   Future  research  should   concentrate  on   these  dimensions,   the
         positioning               of particular project-like   scenarios in technology    teaching,  and  their  effects on  student  design
         processes and strategies.
                               Finally, despite the fact that, on a computer screen, CAD models appear to be real objects; they are in
         fact virtual objects. As such, they embody both sides of the equivocal meaning of the term "model" (Bachelard,
         1979): original and copy, archetype and exemplar, norm and figuration. Taking this into account, it might be
         beneficial             to  characterize  CAD    models    in terms  of  an alternative  typology   of  external  representations   for
         teaching              and  learning.  Current  advances    on  external  representations   for learning  are  accomplished   mostly
         without               questioning   the origin  of    representational  formats   used  in  pedagogical    material.   For  example,
         multimedia                learning  research  relies heavily on  figurative   pictures and  text according  to  the  iconic-symbolic
         distinction. Most of science learning research focuses on existing representational formats (e.g. tables, charts
         and graphs), but also on domain-specific formats that have evolved as a consequence of the introduction of ICT
         (e.g.              professional programs   for  designing    electrical circuit  diagrams). Finally,  learners   are nowadays    also
         confronted with emergent representational formats, such as those used in graphical modeling languages and in
         visualization techniques. Future research founded on alternative ways of characterizing external representations,

2-2
such as for example in terms of signification modes (de Vries, Demetriadis, Ainsworth, forthcoming), may shed
light on the new field of the introduction of representational tools of a trade in the classroom.

References
Ainsworth, S. E. (2006). DeFT: A conceptual framework for learning with multiple representations. Learning
         and Instruction, 16, 183-198.
Bachelard, S. (1979). Quelques aspects historiques des notions de modèle et de justification des modèles [Some
         historical aspects of the notions of model and of justification of models]. In P. Delattre & M. Thellier
         (Eds.), Elaboration et justification des modèles (pp. 9-21). Paris: Maloine.
Brown, J. S., Collins,  A., & Duguid,    P. (1989). Situated  cognition and  the  culture of learning. Educational
         Researcher, 18, 32-42.
Buckingham    Shum,  S.  (1996). Design  argumentation    as design rationale. In  A. Kent   & J.  G.  Williams The
         Encyclopedia   of  Computer    Science and Technology,    vol. 35,  supp. 30  (pp.  95-128).  NY:   Marcel
         Dekker Inc.
De Vries, E.  (2006).  Students' construction   of  external representations in  design-based  learning   situations.
         Learning and Instruction, 16, 213-227.
De Vries, E., Baillé, J. & Geronimi, A. (2006). Quelles situations pour l'introduction de la conception assistée
         par  ordinateur (CAO)    en  technologie   au collège   ? [Teaching   situations for  the  introduction of
         Computer-Assisted   Design   (CAD)    in technology  in middle  schools]  Dans   P. Dessus    &  E. Gentaz
         (Eds.), Apprentissages et enseignement : Sciences cognitives et éducation (143-160). Paris : Dunod.
De Vries E., Demetriadis, S, & Ainsworth, S. (forthcoming). Learning with external representations: Headed
         towards a  digital culture. In N.  Balacheff, S. Ludvigsen,  T. de  Jong, A.  Lazonder,    S. Barnes &  L.
         Mondandon (Eds.) Technology Enhanced Learning ­ Principles and Products. Springer.
Duval, R. (1995). Sémiosis et pensée humaine [Semiosis and human thought]. Bern: Peter Lang.
Gero, J. S.  & Reffat,   R. M.   (2001). Multiple   representations for  situated  learning  systems   in designing.
         Knowledge Based Systems, 14, 337-351.
Goel, V. & Pirolli, P. (1992). The structure of design problem spaces. Cognitive Science, 16, 395-429.
Greeno, J. G. (1997). On claims that answer the wrong questions. Educational Researcher, 26, 5-17.
Hmelo, C. E., Holton, D. L., Kolodner, J. L. (2000). Designing to learn about complex systems. The Journal of
         the Learning Sciences, 9, 247­298.
Kozma, R., Chin, E., Russell, J., & Marx, N. (2000). The roles of representations and tools in the chemistry
         laboratory and their implications for chemistry learning. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 9, 105-
         143.
Lave, J. & Wenger, E. (1989). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. Research report No IRL
         89-0013. Palo Alto, California, Institute for Research on Learning.
Lebahar, J.-C. (2001). Approche didactique de l'enseignement du projet en architecture : étude comparative de
         deux cas [Didactical approach to project-teaching in architecture: a comparative study of two cases].
         Didaskalia, 19, 39-77.
Lebeaume, J. & Martinand, J. L. (1998). Enseigner la technologie au collège [Teaching technology in junior
         high school]. Paris: Hachette éducation.
Norman, D. A. (1988). The design of everyday things. NY : Doubleday.
Rabardel, P. (1989). Recherche en psychologie et en didactique : un exemple d'interaction dans l'enseignement
         du  dessin technique   [Research   in  psychology   and didactics : an  interaction  example   in  teaching
         technical drawing]. Revue Française de Pédagogie, 89, 55-62.
Roth, W.-M. (1996). Art and artifact of children's designing: A situated cognition perspective. Journal of the
         Learning Sciences, 5, 129-166.
Simon, H. A. (1973). The structure of ill-structured problems. Artificial Intelligence, 4, 181-201.
Simon, H. A. (1981). The sciences of the artificial (2nd ed.). Cambridge MA: MIT Press.
Tiberghien, A. (1994). Modelling as a basis for analysing teaching-learning situations. Learning and Instruction,
         4, 71-87.
Vérillon, P. & Rabardel, P. (1995). Cognition and artifacts: a contribution to the study of thought in relation to
         instrumented activity. European Journal of Psychology of Education, 10, 77-101.
Visser, W. (2006). The cognitive artifacts of designing. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

                                                                                                                        2-
