          Designing an Augmented Reality Game-based Curriculum
Mingfong Jan, Jim Matthews, Chris Holden, John Martin, University of Wisconsin at Madison, 225 N Mills St,
Madison, WI 53706, USA
mingfongjan@gmail.com, jmmathews@gmail.com, chris.l.holden@gmail.com, regardingjohn@gmail.com

    Abstract: This research investigates the potential of using Augmented Reality Games on Handheld
    Computers (ARGH) in inquiry-based science learning. This paper presents the design and study of a
    game-based curriculum for scientific argumentation and conceptual change. The result suggests that
    the desired learning outcome have been partially achieved and most students were positive about the
    designed experience. We conclude with informed design decisions for the next design iteration.

Introduction and Conceptual Framework
    Augmented reality games are augmented reality simulations designed with game-based pedagogies, such as
role-playing. In our games players carry a Personal Digital Assistant (PDA) that displays items such as photos,
video clips, and text documents. These items, which appear on a GPS-guided (Global Positioning System) map
in the PDA,    are triggered when  players   walk   near pre-determined  physical   locations. For  example,    students
playing an ecological game can trigger data related to runoff as they walk near a storm sewer. Players use the
information they gather from the game to identify points of view, develop hypotheses, and defend conclusions.
Though Augmented Reality Games on Handheld Computer (ARGH) demonstrate great potential in teaching
inquiry-based science (Squire and Klopfer, 2007), its potential in facilitating conceptual change is less explored.
    Teaching for conceptual change is a shared challenge for many science educators because misconception is
resilient to change  and  can be found    in students  and well-educated  adults.   One   way  to  facilitate conceptual
change is to design authentic experience that challenges students' erroneous beliefs. The designed experience
provides opportunities for students to reevaluate personal belief against alternative theories. However, in order
to evaluate personal beliefs, one must be able to coordinate theory and evidence. Kuhn (1989) argues that the
coordination of theory and evidence, or scientific argumentation, is essential for conceptual change to take root.
      ARGH      provides opportunities to    design  experience that  may   lead to conceptual     change in   authentic
problem-solving context. To investigate the potential of ARGH for facilitating conceptual change, we enacted
Mad    City  Mystery  (Squire  and   Jan, 2007),    an  augmented   reality game    designed    to  facilitate scientific
argumentation.   Mad   City   Mystery  (MCM)      is designed   as a  3-4   hours   field trip that consists    of three
components: briefing, game play and debriefing. While playing MCM, each participant takes on one of three
professional roles in a team to investigate the mysterious death of Ivan. The investigation unveils Ivan's life
history which is intertwined with local environmental issues. Looking for justifiable account for Ivan's death,
participants need to develop evidence-based hypotheses and revise their hypotheses as new evidence emerges.
The results of this study indicate that the game system challenges participants' prior knowledge and participants
are motivated to modify their beliefs and theories based on emerging evidence. MCM falls short in two major
aspects. First, as a game that lasts 3-4 hours, it fails to engage learners in a deep enough experience through
which conceptual change can be grounded. Second, it excludes the reality of schooling. Since our ultimate goal
is to generate  domain-specific  instructional   theories (diSessa and  Cobb,    2004),   we need  to tackle   curricular
standards, logistics, reading difficulties and school culture.

Research Questions
      Following a design-based research methodology (Brown, 1992), we designed the Saving Lake Wingra
(SLW)   game-based   curriculum   to teach   scientific  argumentation and  conceptual    change.   Viewing    the SLW
curriculum   as an  intermediate product     in the design iteration, we  wish   to understand    how  the    curriculum
functions as an integrated system so that informed decisions can be made at the next design iteration. With these
in mind, we ask: (1) What are the major design principles informed by MCM in the game-based curriculum? (2)
How may the design principles be translated to curricular units to facilitate scientific argumentation/conceptual
change? (3) What have students learned (i.e. content knowledge, concept change) as the result of the curricular
enactment? (4) What changes can be made in the next design iteration?

Design and Research Method
      We identify the following design features from MCM as the guiding design principles for SLW: role-
playing, place-based learning, creating cognitive conflict, field research and team work. By integrating these
principles with inquiry-based learning, we wish to design an authentic science inquiry curriculum that focuses
on  scientific argumentation  and conceptual     change.  Organized   around the  central  inquiry  question   "Is Lake
Wingra Healthy," the SLW curriculum is a 10-15 days curriculum designed for middle school science. Students
spend forty-five minutes a day to investigate the environmental and sociocultural issues around Lake Wingra, a

                                                                                                                            3-
       mixed-recreational lake. The curricular unit begins with a discussion about "what makes a lake unhealthy" in
       order to make explicit students' prior knowledge/misconception. In day 3, much effort is devoted to shaping
       students' identity as a team of three professionals hired by a stakeholder group to promote its vision for the
       future of Lake Wingra. Students apply for jobs and name their teams. In day 4, students play SLW game for 2-3
       hours by Lake Wingra. In the game, students visit virtual people and collect virtual artifacts that reveal the
       ecological  and sociocultural  issues around  Lake    Wingra,  such  as  invasive  species,  road salt  and stormwater
       runoff. In day 5 and 6, students reconvene with their team to debrief findings in game, develop theories and
       conduct research if they find the data acquired via game is insufficient. No frameworks are yet provided to the
       students regarding  how    the health of a lake   can be judged.   Our  design  seeks    to provide contextualized  and
       situated understanding    before   imposing   expert  frameworks    that  tell students  how   information   should  be
       organized.  At  day  7   students  receive an  "ecological    indicators" handout    that   provides a   framework   for
       organizing their thinking and research. Students are asked to synthesize their research based on the ecological
       indicators in a "technical report" to their stakeholders at day 8.  At day 9 and 10, students look into the future by
       proposing an articulated plan for the future of Lake Wingra in a mock city council meeting.
            The    implementation    and  study included  twenty-four   8th  graders   from   a private  middle  school  and a
       science teacher with three-years teaching experience. The sample was chosen for convenience. A researcher
       videorecorded each class and kept field notes to code for emerging themes. The researcher also met briefly with
       the teacher before   and   after each class   for planning  and  reflection.   Pre and   post-curriculum   performance
       assessments   were  administered   to investigate  student  learning.  A  post-game    survey   and  a  post-curriculum
       survey were also administered.

       Findings and Implications for Re-Design
            The primary goal of this study is to reflect on our design so that informed decisions can be made for the
       next design iteration. With that in mind, we interpret the learning and affective outcome as indicators of how
       well the curriculum was designed and executed as well as what redesign decisions should be foregrounded.
            The pre- and post-performance assessments indicated that most students' content knowledge grew much
       richer compared with their prior knowledge. Naïve conceptions (Kuhn, 1989) (such as "the lake is dirty because
       there is litter") were replaced by new concepts ("the water was polluted by runoffs and chemicals") provided by
       the SLW game. We also witnessed that students' misconception were reinforced by the curriculum. Students
       who argued that Lake Wingra was unhealthy at the beginning had a tendency to emphasize negative data instead
       of developing a more balanced and critical view of the data they received. The affective survey indicated that
       role-playing, field research   and team  work   made   the entire   curriculum  more   meaningful    to students. Many
       students expressed that they cared about Lake Wingra and complained that no actions were taken during the
       curriculum. Over    all, most  students  were motivated  to   learn more  about    the lake  and  their reaction can be
       represented from the comment of a student: "Lake Wingra has always been an important place to me, but now I
       see how it affects EVERYONE, and the game helped me realize how delicate it really is."
            Though the desired learning outcome might have been partially achieved by our design and most students
       were positive about the experience, we feel that our design can be improved with the following modifications.
       1.   Challenge   students'   prior knowledge    by  asking  students  to  develop   and   modify  personal  theories  at
            different stages. Students may propose theories about the health of the lake after they play the game.       Then
            we will provide a different data set and ask students to modify their theories based on the data.
       2.   Expand the place-based nature of the game beyond the one-day field experience: The game provided an
            embodied experience that contextualized the rest of the curriculum. Students' first-hand experience during
            the game increased their awareness of issues affecting the lake. The rest of the curriculum could leverage
            this connection to place through additional site visits, local history, photography, and field observations.
       3.   Provide opportunities for students to turn their learning into action. Providing students with opportunities
            (perhaps as extensions to the game) to develop real-life strategies for improving the health of the lake may
            be a better end of the unit activity than the City Council meeting.

      References
       Brown,   A. L.  (1992).   Design  experiments:    Theoretical and   methodological     challenges in creating complex
              interventions in classroom settings. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 2(2), 141-178.
       diSessa, A. and Cobb, P. (2004) Ontological Innovation and the Role of Theory in Design Experiments. The
              Journal of the Learning Sciences (13)1:77-103.
       Kuhn, D. (1989) Children and adults as intuitive scientists, Psychological Review, 96(4): 674-89.
       Squire, K. D., & Jan, M. (2007). Mad City Mystery: Developing scientific argumentation skills with a place-
              based augmented reality game on handheld computers. Journal of Science Education and Technology.
              16(1), 5-29.
       Squire, K. D., & Klopfer, E. (2007). Augmented Reality Simulations on Handheld Computers. Journal of the
              Learning Sciences, 16(3), 371 - 413.

3-
