     Argumentation in Web-based Collaborative Inquiry Learning:
        Scripts for Writing and Scripts for Talking Aren't the Same

         Ingo Kollar & Frank Fischer, University of Munich, Leopoldstr. 13, D-80802 Munich, Germany
                               Email: ingo.kollar@psy.lmu.de, frank.fischer@psy.lmu.de
                    James D. Slotta, Ontario Institute for Studies in Education, Toronto, Canada
                                                  slotta@oise.utoronto.ca

          Abstract: We use the script concept to describe knowledge structures that help individuals
          understand and act in specific contexts as well as scaffolds structuring collaborative learning.
          External scripts can be presented in different ways, e.g. as written text. For internal scripts, it
          is not clear whether they have identical effects on collaborative argumentation processes in
          oral vs.   written   discussions.  We   empirically   investigated  the  effects  of   two  differently
          structured external scripts on the structural quality of written and oral arguments produced in
          dyads with either low or high structured internal scripts. External scripts were presented in a
          written   mode    at specific instances  in  a web-based    inquiry  learning    environment.   Results
          indicate that the high structured external script strongly improved the structural quality of the
          written   arguments,    but  had hardly  any  effects on orally  produced     arguments,   which  were
          instead more strongly influenced by the learners' internal scripts.

Introduction
          The phenomenon of argumentation in collaborating groups has attracted a wealth of researchers in
recent  years, especially   in  science education   and  inquiry learning  (e.g., Driver,  Newton,   &  Osbourne,   2000;
McNeill, Lizotte, Krajcik, & Marx, 2006). Inquiry learning has been described as a well-developed pedagogical
approach  in   science  education   which    puts learners in the  role of scientists   to solve  science problems  (e.g.,
Quintana  et   al., 2004;   Slotta,   2004). Learners  are  usually   provided   with   authentic science   problems and
empirical data or rich simulations that help them in their inquiry. During inquiry learning, students engage in a
variety of knowledge-generating and knowledge-monitoring activities such as hypothesis generation, modeling,
searching  for   empirical   evidence,  conducting    experiments   and   collaborative    argumentation.  When   inquiry
learning  is to  be    conducted   collaboratively, students    often require  instructional  support   for collaborative
argumentation. As one promising instructional scaffold, collaboration scripts have been described (e.g., Fischer,
Kollar, Mandl & Haake, 2007). One design issue of collaboration scripts is related to how the script instructions
should be presented to students ­ either in a written or oral mode or through some other modality. It is yet
unclear whether there are differential effects of different types of presentation used to provide learners with such
collaboration scripts. Further, the effectiveness of collaboration scripts is likely to interact with the learners'
prior argumentation skills, which we conceptualize as "internal scripts on collaborative argumentation" (Kollar,
Fischer, & Slotta, 2007). Another interesting open question with regard to these internal scripts is concerned
with the  extent    to which   they differentially influence  students'   collaborative  oral or  written argumentation.
Therefore, the main research question for this study was: How do differently structured internal and external
scripts interact in    the process  of evoking  particular argumentative   discourse    patterns  in dyadic collaborative
inquiry learning?

The role of the structural quality of arguments in collaborative inquiry learning
          Descriptive models about the logical and conversational structure of argumentation mainly come from
psycholinguistics (e. g., Toulmin, 1958; van Eemeren, Grootendorst, & Henkemans, 1996). These models have
been used by learning theorists to both analyze and facilitate collaborative argumentation in learning tasks. In
related research,   collaborative   argumentation   has  been   analyzed  on  at  least two  dimensions   ­ an  argument
structure dimension     and    an argument   sequence  dimension   (e.g., Stegmann,     Weinberger,   Fischer, &  Mandl,
2004). In this paper, we focus on the structural aspect of arguments.
          The most prominent model for analyzing the structure of arguments has been developed by Toulmin
(1958). In its original version, the model distinguishes between six structural components that can be part of an
argument. First, an argument usually consists of a claim that represents the speaker's position with respect to the
topic at hand. Second, an argument may be backed up with data that support the claim. Third, a warrant may
specify in what way the data support the claim. To support the warrant further, a speaker may fourth refer to
some general law or principle, which is called backing. Fifth, a speaker may constrain the validity of his or her
argument by introducing a qualifier such as "maybe" or "mostly". Finally, a speaker may be more explicit in
constraining his or her argument by including a rebuttal that specifies concrete circumstances under which the
claim is not true. In practice, it has been shown that some of the argument components are not easy to segregate.

                                                                                                                             1-
         In empirical studies which analyzed the structural quality of single arguments that were produced by learners,
         therefore very often a simplified Toulmin-like model has been used (e.g., Driver et al., 2000; McNeill et al.,
         2006; Stegmann et al., 2004). In the same way, in the empirical study we report here, we also constrain the
         structural model to three components: claims, data, and reasons (which comprise both warrants and backings).

       The role of scripts in collaborative argumentation
                  Within psychology, the script concept has been used in at least two different ways. On the one hand,
         cognitive psychology uses the term to describe cognitive schemata that guide people in understanding and acting
         in particular sequential events such as going to a restaurant (e.g., Kolodner, 2007; Schank & Abelson, 1977).
         These scripts can be described as "internal" because they are regarded as being located inside the cognitive
         structure of a particular individual (see the restaurant script in Schank & Abelson, 1977). On the other hand,
         instructional psychology has used the term "script" to describe a specific type of scaffold, namely "collaboration
         scripts" which provide, distribute and sequence specific activities and roles among members of a collaborative
         learning group  (Kollar,  Fischer, &  Hesse,   2006).   Those scripts can  be described as   "external"  because  they
         usually are externally presented as a group starts working on a particular collaborative task. However, parts of
         an external  collaboration script  may   be continuously  internalized.  In sections below,   we  describe how    both
         internal and external scripts can influence collaborative argumentation, which will be described in the following.

        Internal scripts for collaborative argumentation
                  From a cognitive perspective, scripts are internal knowledge structures that individuals develop over
         multiple similar experiences    of events (e.g., Kolodner,  2007;   Schank  &  Abelson,    1977). For  example,   most
         people have a grocery store script. This script puts the activities "getting a shopping cart", "choosing items",
         "putting items in shopping cart", "going to the cash desk" etc. in a meaningful sequence that allows us both to
         act properly in the grocery store and to understand stories others tell us about a grocery store event.
                  Let us consider how the script notion can be transferred to collaborative argumentation. Just like we go
         through multiple grocery store episodes over our life course, we also go through a number of situations in which
         collaborative argumentation is the key activity to engage in (see Reznitskaya, Anderson, McNurlen, Nguyen-
         Jahiel, Archodidou,    &  Kim,   2001).  For   example,  collaborative  argumentation   is necessary    when   we  are
         negotiating with our partner about who is doing the dishes, when we are discussing with colleagues how to
         approach a new work project, or when we are debating with an insurance company about an insurance fee. Thus,
         it can be assumed that students will use internal argumentation-related scripts they have developed elsewhere
         when they come to a collaborative inquiry learning episode (see also Sandoval & Millwood, 2005; Stein &
         Albro, 2001). In that respect, argumentation-related scripts can at least partially be defined as having a domain-
         general character. Yet, it can be assumed that individuals will vary in the degree to which their argumentation
         scripts comply with a Toulmin-like argumentation model. While one individual may hold a script specifying
         that arguments should always be backed up with data and reasons, others may have developed argumentation
         scripts that stipulate to  produce    striking arguments  with   plausible  claims  without  backing   them    up with
         evidence. In compliance with Schank (1999), we assume that internal scripts for collaborative argumentation are
         not completely culturally shared and thus partly idiosyncratic in nature. For the sake of a first investigation, we
         hope to be able to identify at least two different types of learners: learners with rather high-structured internal
         argumentation scripts (i.e., whose internal scripts exhibit a rather high compliance with a simplified model of
         argument structure quality) and learners with rather low-structured internal argumentation scripts (i.e., whose
         internal scripts exhibit a rather weak compliance with the model of argument structure quality).
                  One open question is whether internal scripts on collaborative argumentation are equally important for
         oral and written argumentation.    It is possible  that individuals hold  different internal scripts for situations in
         which   oral argumentation   is required  and  for situations in which  written argumentation     is required. This is
         especially   important since existing  web-based    inquiry learning  environments   such    as WISE    (Slotta, 2004)
         sometimes require students to argue orally and sometimes in a written mode.

        External scripts for collaborative argumentation
                  From an instructional psychology perspective, scripts are scaffolds that structure collaboration between
         two  or more  learning  partners.  Originally  developed  for face-to-face  groups  (e.g., O'Donnell    & Dansereau,
         1992), collaboration scripts have extensively been used in the context of Computer-Supported Collaborative
         Learning over the last years (e.g., Fischer, et al., 2007). In contrast to content-specific scaffolding techniques
         such as providing learners with worked-out examples (e.g., Atkinson & Renkl, 2007), collaboration scripts do
         not provide content-specific support, but rather directly modify the collaboration process.
                  In a recent literature review, Kollar et al. (2006) identified five conceptual components of collaboration
         scripts. First, collaboration scripts are always designed towards a specific pedagogical goal. For example, they
         can be designed to facilitate the acquisition of domain-specific knowledge (e.g., about Newtonian physics) or of
         domain-general knowledge (e.g., argumentation strategies). Second, collaboration scripts always induce certain

1-
activities to be conducted by the learners (e.g., summarizing, explaining, constructing arguments). Third, a script
always more or less explicitly puts these activities into a particular sequence (e.g., first "summarizing", then
"questioning",   then "arguing").   Fourth,  collaboration  scripts  always either  imply     or  explicitly specify and
distribute specific collaboration  roles  among   the  learners (e.g., "summarizer"    vs. "questioner").    And  fifth, a
collaboration script is always characterized by a specific type of presentation, i.e. the modality in which the
script instructions are presented to the learners (e.g., in a written or a oral mode).
         When reviewing empirical literature on collaboration scripts, at least two aspects are important for this
paper. First, it appears that collaboration scripts can vary a lot concerning the degree of structuredness they
impose on the collaborative learning process. While some scripts provide learners with rather rough guidelines
on the phases of collaboration without giving specific guidance on how to act in the single phases (such as the
ArgueGraph script developed by Dillenbourg & Jermann, 2007), other scripts are way more prescriptive and
sometimes even ask learners to use sentence starters or text prompts to perform specific discourse activities. For
example,   with  respect  to   collaborative   argumentation,   Stegmann   et  al. (2004)    have  developed    different
collaboration scripts that were used in a text-based asynchronous learning environment, in which students were
supposed to analyze authentic problem cases on the basis of a psychological theory. In one script, when learners
were to  compose    a new    message,  they  were demanded    to (a)   name the   claim they   want   to make,   (b) give
evidence that supports the claim and (c) give a qualifier that specifies under which circumstances the claim is
valid (see Toulmin, 1958). In another script, the messages of the learners were pre-structured by a pre-defined
title such as "argument", "counterargument", or "reply" (see Leitao, 2000). The empirical results indicated that
both scripts alone significantly improved the dimension of argumentation they had been designed for. The first
script improved the construction of formally complete arguments in the sense of the Toulmin-like argumentation
model, and the second script raised the number of counterarguments and replies during discourse in comparison
to an unstructured control condition. From these experimental results, it can be concluded that collaboration
scripts can be designed to facilitate argumentation processes within collaborating groups. However, it is yet
unclear,   how   much   structure  an  argumentation-related    collaboration   script  should    provide    to facilitate
collaborative argumentation and whether the potentially positive effects of a high degree of structuredness can
only be expected for learners with specific internal scripts.
         Second,    there is hardly   any  research  concerning  the   effects of  different  types   of presentation    of
collaboration  script instructions on  learning   processes  and outcomes.     However,    in literature  on  multimedia
learning, it has been demonstrated that the modality in which instruction is presented to learners can have strong
effects on outcomes such as retention and transfer performance (e.g., Ginns, 2005). Therefore, in this study we
want to  take  a closer   look at whether   differently well-structured  collaboration  script   that are  designed  in  a
written mode have differential effects on written and oral argumentation processes within collaborating dyads.

Goals of the study
         The present paper presents in-depth process analyses of a quasi-experimental study by Kollar et al.
(2007), which had a focus on individual knowledge acquisition through collaborative argumentation. In contrast,
in this paper we focus on two process-related research questions: 1. What are the effects of two differently well-
structured external scripts that give written instruction for collaborative argumentation on the structural quality
of arguments produced in dyads with differently well-structured internal scripts on collaborative argumentation?
2. To what extent do differently well-structured internal and external scripts have differential effects on written
and oral collaborative argumentation? Concerning the first question, we set up two competing hypotheses ­ an
additive effects hypothesis and an interactive effects hypothesis. The additive effects hypothesis predicts that
holding a high structured in contrast to a low structured internal script and being provided with a high structured
in contrast to a low structured external script will have positive effects on the structural quality of the produced
arguments). The positive effects of high structured internal and external scripts will be additive. In contrast, the
interactive effects hypothesis predicts that the high structured external script will especially help learners with
low structured   internal scripts to produce   more  arguments   with  a  high  structural quality  because    only  these
learners require additional support. Learners with high structured internal scripts will be better off with a low
structured  external  script   because    they already  are  capable   of  engaging    in  high-quality    dialogue  and
argumentation. Imposing unnecessary constraints with a high structured external script on them, will at best
have no effect, but may even be detrimental for these learners. With respect to the second question, we set up an
undirected  hypothesis,   since prior research   has not yet  investigated  whether  there    are differential  effects  of
internal and  external  scripts on   oral and  written  discussions: Internal  and  external  scripts  for   collaborative
argumentation will have differential effects on the structural quality of arguments that are produced either orally
or in a written mode.

Method
         Participants and design. As described in Kollar et al. (2007), participants were 90 students from grades
8 to 10 from two German secondary schools (MAge = 15.3 years; SD = 0.99). They collaborated in dyads on a

                                                                                                                              1-
        biology module of the Web-based Inquiry Science Environment WISE (Slotta, 2004). 48 students were female,
        42   were male. We     established a 2x2-factorial design  with the structuredness of the learners'  internal  scripts
        (high vs. low) and the external script (high vs. low) as independent factors. All dyads were homogeneous with
        respect to gender and internal scripts. Dyads were randomly assigned to either the low or the high structured
        external script condition. Unequal distribution over the four cells of the experimental design (see Table 1) was
        due to the fact that the study was conducted over two sessions, with some students missing on the second day.

        Table 1: Overview over the experimental design.

                                                                                     External scripts
                                                                       Low structured             High structured
              Internal scripts             Low structured                  N = 22                      N = 20
                                                                          (11 dyads)                  (10 dyads)
                                           High structured                 N = 24                      N = 24
                                                                          (12 dyads)                  (12 dyads)

                  Setting. For the purpose of this study, students were taken out of their class and seated in a separate
        room. During collaboration, a teacher was not present. All dyads collaborated on a German version of the WISE
        module "The Deformed Frogs Mystery" (Shear, Bell, & Linn, 2004). During collaboration, the two learning
        partners shared one laptop computer. We used screen capturing software that recorded both screen actions and
        talk over the course of collaboration. Parts of student dialogue were later transcribed and used for discourse
        analysis. Also, we recorded every written utterance that occurred over the course of collaboration (see below).
                  Learning environment. Dyads collaborated on the WISE "Deformed Frogs" module. In this module,
        students learn that huge numbers of frogs with missing or multiple limbs, shrinked heads, deformed jaws etc.
        have been found in the late 90's and that science has not yet found a commonly agreed explanation for this
        problem. The module presents dyads with two hypotheses (a parasite hypothesis and an environmental-chemical
        hypothesis) they are to discuss throughout their work on the module by looking at different sorts of background
        information (such as maps, photographs, journal articles). The module is segmented into five content-specific
        activities ("The Problem", "Where can these frogs be found?", "What's in the water?", "Why study frogs?",
        "Summary") with several steps (e.g., "Take a note", "What kinds of deformities have been found?", "Discuss
        the two hypotheses" etc.) attached to each activity.
                  Procedure. The experiment was conducted in two sessions. In the first session, learners were asked to
        fill in a questionnaire   on   demographic   variables,  domain-specific prior knowledge,     and several individual
        learning prerequisites. Also, the students completed a test to assess the structuredness of their internal scripts
        (see below). Within the two weeks before the second session (collaboration session) took place, these tests were
        analyzed  and   each   learner was   identified as holding either a high  or low structured   internal script. Then,
        homogenous dyads were established. In the second session, students collaborated on the WISE module for 120
        minutes followed by a post test phase in which we assessed domain-specific and domain-general knowledge (for
        these results, please see Kollar et al. 2007), motivation and acceptance..
                  Independent variables. The two versions of the external script were implemented at several identical
        points in the Deformed Frogs module. At the end of each activity, the final step asked students to discuss the
        two hypotheses on the background of the evidence they had gathered in the particular activity and to type their
        arguments into designated text boxes. In the low structured external script condition, learners were asked to
        orally discuss and write their arguments into a blank text box. In the high structured external script condition,
        dyads were also told to orally discuss and write their arguments down, but received written instruction on how
        the noted arguments should look like. In compliance with the simplified argument structure model introduced
        above, the script presented learners with nine text boxes which were pre-specified in that they put learner A into
        the role of an advocate for the parasite hypothesis, requiring to first provide data upon which to base her or his
        argument, then name a claim he or she was going to make, and then to give a reason specifying why the data
        would support the claim. Each component was to be typed into a separate textbox, each of which was further
        pre-structured with a sentence starter (e.g., "I observed that..." for the "data" component). Then, in compliance
        with the model of argument sequences developed by Leitao (2000), learner B was to give a counterargument
        (again including the three structural components "data", "claim", "reason" including the sentence starters), and
        finally both partners were to collaborate to find an integrative argument (again with the three components). Then
        learner B was to advocate the environmental-chemical hypothesis, and A had to give a counterargument. Again,
        the analogous supportive functions of the script were implemented. Over the course of the dyad's collaboration,
        roles were switched several times in order to avoid biased information processing. Also, in correspondence with
        claims   made   for example    by  Pea  (2004),    the script was continuously   faded out    during the  course  of
        collaboration.  For example,    in a later "Discuss  the two  hypotheses"-phase, students were    no more  asked  to
        specify the structural components of their arguments, and finally were even free to write their argumentation in

1-
a completely   unstructured  way.   At several  instances   during oral discussions,  learners  were reminded   of the
argumentation rules specified in the high structured external script, but not explicitly forced to follow them.
         The learners' internal scripts on collaborative argumentation were assessed in the first session. In this
test, students were provided with a fictitious protocol of a science-related discussion between two girls. This
protocol included both complete and incomplete arguments (with respect to the argument structure model) and
both complete and incomplete argumentation sequences (with respect to Leitao's argument sequence model).
The learners' task was to read the protocol and to find instances of good and poor argumentative moves and to
give reasons for why they were good or poor. In total, participants could reach up to 20 points on this measure.
In average, students reached a value of M = 3.49 (SD = 2.38), the median value was 3. The sample was split into
halves, so that 42 students of the final sample were identified as holding a low structured internal script and 48
students  as holding  a high  structured internal   script (the unequal  distribution was  due  to absenteeism  in the
second session). Since, according to the script concept introduced by Schank and Abelson (1977), scripts guide
both our understanding and our acting in particular situations, we also validated the results of the internal scripts
test by  looking  at the arguments     that were  produced   during    collaboration by  learners  with low and   high
structured  internal scripts in the low  structured   external  script condition.   The results largely confirmed  the
results of the initial internal scripts test. Learners with high structured internal scripts based on the initial test
produced   more  formally complete     arguments    and more    counterarguments    and in tendency  more  integrative
arguments than learners who had scored low in the initial test (see Kollar et al., 2007).
         Dependent variables. With respect to dependent variables, we focused on the frequencies of arguments
with different levels of structural quality. Two kinds of externalizations of the dyads were taken into account.
First, we  analyzed  arguments   produced    in overall discourse,   without  differentiating between   arguments  that
were produced in a written or oral format. For economic reasons, we abstained from a full transcription of oral
discussions, and instead transcribed ten intervals of five minutes length each of the discussions in each dyad
("time sampling"; Bakeman & Gottman, 1997). Second, to get a more detailed impression on the effects of
internal and external scripts when the external script with its written instructions was salient, we looked more
closely at those arguments that were typed into the text boxes in the two conditions.
         To perform these analyses, we first needed to separate argumentative talk from non-argumentative talk.
Argumentative talk was defined by the speaker at least implicitly or explicitly uttering a claim that was relevant
to the deformed frogs problem. The units of analysis were turns. Interrater reliability was sufficient (       = .78).
For further analyses, only these discourse elements were used that had been rated as instances of argumentative
talk. However, since prior research (e.g., Resnick, Salmon, Zeitz, Wathen, & Holowchak, 1993) has shown that
arguments can develop over multiple turns and speakers, we first needed to adopt a new segmentation procedure
to identify arguments. As a constituent for an argument, we used the implicit or explicit presence of a claim. We
then looked in the surrounding discourse corpus for further argument components that obviously were related to
this claim. Once a new claim was uttered, a new segment was coded. For segmentation, we used principles
introduced by Strijbos, Martens, Prins and Jochems (2006) which lead to two agreement indicators of 79 % and
81   % (for  a more  detailed description   of  the method,  see   Strijbos et al., 2006). After  segmentation, every
identified argument was assessed with respect to argument structure quality. Three levels of argument structure
quality were distinguished: (a) arguments consisting only of a claim (low quality), (b) arguments consisting of a
claim and data or a reason (medium quality), and (c) arguments consisting of a claim, data, and a reason (high
quality). Interrater reliability with respect to argument structure quality was sufficient ( = .68).
         Control variables. As control measures, we used motivation, interest, prior collaboration experience,
prior experience in learning with the computer and prior domain-specific knowledge. All of these constructs
were measured by a paper-pencil-questionnaire that was to be completed in the first session. In none of these
variables, we found a systematic difference between the four experimental groups except for the biology grade
in the preceding year. It appeared that students with high structured internal scripts outperformed students with
low  structured internal scripts (F(1,87)   =   7.38; p <  .01; Eta² =  .08).  Thus, there is obviously  a connection
between high argumentation skills and getting good grades in biology. We consider this result as a confirmation
of the validity of the internal script test, since empirical research (Means & Voss, 1996) has shown that learners
exhibit higher quality of argumentation when they have more domain-specific knowledge.
         Statistical analyses. With respect to each discourse category, we computed ANOVA's to see whether it
was affected by the different internal and external scripts. For all analyses, the alpha level was set to 5 %.

Results
Effects of internal and external scripts on argument structure quality in overall
discourse
         We first looked at the effects of internal and external scripts on the structural quality of all arguments,
no matter if they were produced in oral or in written discourse. The mean frequencies and standard deviations of
arguments with low, medium, and high structural quality are presented in table 2.

                                                                                                                          1-
                    Separate ANOVA's     revealed that   the structuredness   of  the learners'  internal scripts had   significant
         effects on  the  production  of arguments    with high  (F(1,40)   = 10.48;   p <  .01; Eta² =   .21) and   with medium
         structural quality  (F(1,40)  = 7.32; p  <   .01; Eta² = .16), but   not  on  the  production   of  arguments  with   low
         argument structure quality (F(1,40) < 1; n.s.). I.e., learners with high structured internal scripts produced more
         arguments with higher levels of argument structure quality than learners with low structured internal scripts,
         while there were no differences with respect to the production of arguments with low structural quality.

         Table   2: Mean   frequencies   and  standard deviations  of  arguments    on   different levels of   argument   structure
         quality (in overall discourse).

                                           Low structured internal scripts                  High structured internal scripts
           Overall argumentstructure qualityLow structured      High structuredexternal scriptexternal scriptMSDMSDLow structuredexternal scriptMSDHigh structuredexternal scriptMSD
             Low                       10.09        4.11        7.50        5.89       11.55        6.92          9.33      5.19
             Medium                    14.36        6.04        15.00       10.46      28.27        12.51         15.92     5.87
             High                        5.64       3.50        8.30        5.77       13.09        6.35          10.92     4.68

                    For the structuredness of the external script, however, only one significant, but small main effect was
         found,  namely   for  the production  of argument    with   a medium     structural quality  (with  the  high  structured
         external script reducing the number of such arguments, F(1,40) = 4.57; p < .05; Eta² = .10). However, we also
         found a small, but significant interaction effect on the same measure (F(1,40) = 5.62; p < .05; Eta² = .12),
         indicating  that the positive effect of  the  low  structured external   script on  the production    of arguments  with
         medium structural quality was especially due to the high number of such arguments produced by learners with
         high structured internal scripts. A similar interaction effect for arguments with high structural quality failed to
         reach statistical significance (F(1,40) < 2.40; n.s.). No further effects were significant (F(1,40) < 2.00; n.s.). To
         sum up, in overall discourse, mainly the learners' internal scripts were influential. The external script had at best
         a rather weak impact on the production of arguments with medium structural quality.

        Effects of internal and external scripts on argument structure quality in written
        discourse
                    To answer  the  second   research  question  (whether    differently well-structured    internal and  external
         scripts have differential effects on the structural quality of arguments that were either produced in an oral or a
         written mode), we conducted analogous analyses with respect to the arguments that were produced in a written
         mode (for the descriptive results, see table 3).
                    Separate ANOVA's on the single argument structure quality categories revealed a large and significant
         main effect of the external script on the production of arguments with a high structural quality (F(1,41) = 23.86;
         p < .01;   Eta²  =  .37). A marginally   significant main    effect  for the  external  script was  also  found   for the
         production of arguments with medium structural quality (F(1,41) = 3.14; p = .08; Eta² = .07). For arguments
         with low structural quality, no main effect was found for the external script (F(1,41) = 1.68; n.s.). Interestingly,
         the learners' internal scripts did not have effects on any of the three categories (F(1,41) < 1; n.s.).Thus, when
         looking only at those arguments that were produced when the external script was salient, only the external script
         was influential, while effects of the learners' internal scripts disappeared.

         Table   3: Mean   frequencies   and  standard deviations  of  arguments    on   different levels of   argument   structure
         quality (in written discourse).

                                                  Low structured internal scripts             High structured internal scripts
           Written argument structurequality   Low structured        High structured        Low structured        High structuredexternal scriptexternal scriptexternal scriptexternal scriptMSDMSDMSDMSD
             Low                               3.00        2.49        2.40       2.50       3.92       2.11       2.50     3.17
             Medium                            3.00        1.48        3.70       1.83       2.92       2.02       4.33     2.46
             High                              0.36        0.50        3.30       3.68       0.67       0.89       3.83     2.04

       Discussion
                    In this paper, we presented in-depth process analyses on a data set described in Kollar et al. (2007). We
         investigated the interplay and differential effects of differently structured internal and external scripts on the
         structural quality of arguments produced by dyads in web-based inquiry learning. The first research question

1-
was: "What are the effects of two differently well-structured external scripts that give written instruction for
collaborative   argumentation    on the    structural quality of  arguments     produced    in dyads  with  differently well-
structured   internal   scripts on  collaborative     argumentation?"   Connected      to   this question   there  were    two
competing hypotheses, an additive and an interactive effects hypothesis. With respect to this question, none of
the two   hypotheses    received   full support.   While   interaction effects   were    solitary and   not  homogeneously
distributed over the three levels of argument structure quality, we did find that holding a high as compared to a
low structured    internal script  led  to the production   of arguments     with   a higher   structural quality, when    the
overall discourse material was examined. This result has at least two implications. First, it can be seen as a
validation of the results of the initial internal scripts test that asked students to analyze a fictitious discourse
protocol. Referring back to Schank and Abelson's (1977) notion of scripts as internal knowledge structures that
permit both understanding and acting in related situations, there indeed is a correspondence between these two
functional components. Second, the result fits nicely with the notion of internal scripts as knowledge structures
that have developed through participation in numerous related situations over one's life course and thus are
relatively stable (Kolodner, 2007; Schank & Abelson, 1977). In our study, students indeed used their internal
scripts that they probably have developed not only in school settings, but also in other instances, to regulate their
collaborative   argumentation.    The   high   structured external   script, in  contrast,  did  not  have  clear  effects on
argument structure quality when looking at the overall discourse. Obviously, the high structured external script
was not powerful enough to deeply change or even replace the learners' internal scripts by a more ­ from a
scientific perspective ­ sophisticated one.
          This, however, does not mean that the high structured external script was ineffective, because when
looking at those phases of collaboration, in which the written external script instructions were highly salient
(namely   in written   discourse),  we  found   large  effects compared      to the low   structured   external script  in the
direction of an improvement of argumentative processes. This result fits with prior research for example by
Stegmann     et al. (2004)  which   demonstrated      the power   of collaboration    scripts    for successfully  modifying
collaborative argumentation processes in a highly specific manner. Thus, the second research question ("To
what extent do differently well-structured internal and external scripts have differential effects on written and
oral argumentation?") can clearly be answered as "Yes, there are differential effects". While the internal scripts
obviously  were     influential for oral   discussions    (which  took a large    part   in overall   discourse),  they were
ineffective in written argumentation ­ and the reverse was true for the external script. Thus, for both internal and
external  scripts,  it can be   argued  that  scripts for talking  are not   simultaneously     scripts for writing. Instead,
internal scripts as measured by an argumentation analysis task rather seem to be a script for talking (but not for
writing), while the external script with its written instructions seemed to be a script for writing (but not for
talking). From a pedagogical perspective, this result points to the need of finding ways to transfer the positive
effects of providing learners with a high structured external scripts to situations in which such a script is not
available. Probably,    more    long-term  effects can  only   be reached    through  a  more    long-term  intervention.  To
confirm this, future studies are needed.
          Coming back to the two competing hypotheses concerning the first question, it can thus be argued that
there was no additive effect of high structured internal and external scripts in the sense of simultaneous effects
of the two. Instead, an additive effect has occurred in a chronological way ­ both high structured internal scripts
and high   structured   external  scripts  improved    the structural  quality   of   collaborative   argumentation,   but  in
different  phases   of  collaboration.  As   a consequence,    designers of     web-based   collaborative   inquiry  learning
environments should present high structured external scripts in a written mode to improve written argumentation
processes. However, future research should also try to find ways how to transfer the positive effects to oral
discussions ­ or find external scripts that have the potential to improve oral discussions in a way similar to the
written script in this study improved written discussions.

References
Atkinson,  R.   K.  &   Renkl,   A. (2007).    Interactive example-based        learning environments:     Using  interactive
          elements to encourage effective processing of worked examples. Educational Psychology Review, 19,
          375-386.
Bakeman, R. & Gottman, J. M. (1997). Observing interactions. New York: Cambridge University Press.
de  Jong,  T.   &   van  Joolingen, W.     R.  (1998).  Scientific discovery     learning   with  computer   simulations    of
          conceptual domains. Review of Educational Research, 68(2), 179-201.
Dillenbourg, P. & Jermann, P. (2007). Designing integrative scripts. In F. Fischer, I. Kollar, H. Mandl & J. M.
          Haake    (Eds.), Scripting   computer-supported      collaborative    learning:   Cognitive,  computational,     and
          educational perspectives (pp. 275-301). New York: Springer.
Driver, R., Newton, P. & Osborne, J. (2000). Establishing the norms of scientificargumentation in classrooms.
          Science Education, 84, 287­312.
Fischer, F., Kollar, I., Mandl H., & Haake, J. M. (Eds.) (2007). Scripting Computer-Supported Collaborative
          Learning ­ cognitive, computational and educational perspectives. New York, NY: Springer.

                                                                                                                                 1-
        Ginns, P. (2005). Meta-analysis of the modality effect. Learning & Instruction, 15(4), 313-331.
        Kollar, I., Fischer, F., &  Hesse, F.   W.  (2006).  Collaboration  scripts  ­ a  conceptual analysis.  Educational
                 Psychology Review, 18(2), 159-185.
        Kollar, I., Fischer, F., & Slotta, J. D. (in press). Internal and external scripts in computer-supported collaborative
                 inquiry learning. Learning & Instruction.
        Kolodner, J. L. (2007). The roles of scripts in promoting collaborative discourse in learning by design. In F.
                 Fischer, I. Kollar, H.  Mandl    &  J. M.  Haake (Eds.),   Scripting  Computer-Supported     Collaborative
                 Learning  ­  cognitive, computational,   and  educational    perspectives (pp. 237-262).  New    York, NY:
                 Springer.
        Leitão, S. (2000). The potential of argument in knowledge building. Human Development, 43, 332-360.
        McNeill, K. L., Lizotte, D. J, Krajcik, J., & Marx, R. W. (2006). Supporting students' construction of scientific
                 explanations  by  fading scaffolds  in  instructional materials.  The Journal   of the Learning   Sciences,
                 15(2), 153-191.
        Means, M. L. & Voss, J. F. (1996). Who reasons well? Two studies of informal reasoning among children of
                 different grade, ability, and knowledge levels. Cognition and Instruction, 14(2), 139-178.
        O'Donnell, A. M., & Dansereau, D. F. (1992). Scripted Cooperation in student dyads: A method for analyzing
                 and  enhancing   academic   learning   and performance.   In  R.  Hertz-Lazarowitz,   &   N. Miller  (Eds.).
                 Interaction  in cooperative   groups:  The theoretical   anatomy  of  group  learning  (pp. 120-141).  New
                 York: Cambridge University Press.
        Pea, R. (2004).   The social and  technological   dimensions   of scaffolding  and related  theoretical concepts for
                 learning, education, and human activity. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 13(3), 423-451.
        Quintana, C., Reiser, B. J., Davis, E. A., Krajcik, J., Fretz, E., Duncan, R. G., Kyza, E., Edelson, D. & Soloway,
                 E. (2004). A scaffolding design framework for software to support science inquiry. The Journal of the
                 Learning Sciences, 13(3), 337-386.
        Resnick, L. B., Salmon, M., Zeitz, C. M., Wathen, S. H. & Holowchak, M. (1993). Reasoning in conversation.
                 Cognition and Instruction, 11(3&4), 347-364.
        Reznitskaya,  A., Anderson,  R.  C.,   McNurlen,  B., Nguyen-Jahiel,   K.,  Archodidou,  A.  &  Kim,    S.-Y. (2001).
                 Influence of oral discussion on written argument. Discourse Processes, 32(2&3), 155-175.
        Sandoval,   W. A.  &  Millwood,   K.   A. (2005). The  quality of  students'  use  of evidence  in written scientific
                 explanations. Cognition and Instruction, 23(1), 23-55.
        Schank, R. C. (1999). Dynamic memory revisited. Cambridge, NY: Cambridge University Press.
        Schank, R. C. & Abelson, R. P. (1977). Scripts, plans, goals and understanding. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
        Shear, L., Bell, P. & Linn, M. C. (2004). Partnership models: The case of the deformed frogs. In M. C. Linn, E.
                 A. Davis & P. Bell (Eds.), Internet environments for science education (pp. 289-311). Mahwah, NJ:
                 Erlbaum.
        Slotta, J. D. (2004). Web-Based Inquiry Science Environment. In M. C. Linn, E. A. Davis & P. Bell (Eds.).
                 Internet Environments for Science Education (pp. 203-231). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
        Stegmann, K., Weinberger, A., Fischer, F. & Mandl, H. (2004). Scripting argumentation in computer-supported
                 learning environments. In P. Gerjets, P. A. Kirschner, J. Elen, & R. Joiner (Eds.), Instructional design
                 for effective and enjoyable computer-supported learning. Proceedings of the first joint meeting of the
                 EARLI    SIGs   Instructional Design   and   Learning    and Instruction  with  Computers    (S.  320-330).
                 Tübingen: Knowledge Media Research Center.
        Stein, N. L. & Albro, E. R. (2001). The origins and nature of arguments: Studies in conflict understanding,
                 emotion, and negotiation. Discourse Processes, 32(2), p. 113-133.
        Strijbos, J.-W., Martens, R. L., Prins, F. J. & Jochems, W. M. G. (2006). Content analysis: What are they talking
                 about? Computers & Education, 46, 29-48.
        Toulmin, S. (1958). The uses of argument. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
        Van Eemeren, F. H., Grootendorst, R. & Henkemans, F. S. (1996). Fundamentals of argumentation theory ­ a
                 handbook of historical backgrounds and contemporary developments. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.

1-0
