                         The Role of Literacy Work Circles in Developing
                                               Professional Community

                                                     Peter S. Wardrip, Ken Rose,
                                 Northwestern University, School of Education and Social Policy
                                               2120 Campus Drive, Evanston, IL 60208
                                  Email: p-wardrip@northwestern.edu, rose@northwestern.edu

                  Abstract: To address teacher isolation in schools, more reform leaders are finding hope in
                  establishing professional communities as a way to promote continuous school improvement.
                  At the same time, adolescent literacy has been identified as a crucial area to address in the
                  middle  and   upper  grades   as   part   of the reform    agenda.  Using   the    characteristics of
                  professional community created by Kruse, Louis & Bryk (1995), we describe the development
                  of professional   community   of    sixth grade  middle    school teachers  implementing    literacy
                  strategies across their content areas through a work circle. This particular work suggests that
                  the introduction of a long-term instructional topic, in this case literacy, may contribute to the
                  development of professional community.

       Introduction
                  The work of teaching has long been characterized as taking place in isolation (Lortie, 1975). Too often
         in the history  of  schools, teachers  have    worked   alone  as adults   with  discrete student groups    in separate
         classrooms with little time to engage in dialogue with colleagues about teaching practice. However, the work of
         teachers does   not solely occur  in  classrooms,   so  opportunities  for sharing  practice  are indeed    available in
         schools.
                  Today,  to address  this isolation,   more   reform  leaders are  finding hope   in establishing   professional
         communities as a way to promote continuous school improvement. A professional community describes the
         interpersonal relations and activities among teachers to improve teaching and learning (Stevens, Kahne &
                  Cooper, 2006). In the service of school improvement, professional communities provide opportunities
         for innovation and improvement of practice (McLaughlin & Talbert, 1994). Teachers in strong professional
         communities feel a sense of empowerment and a feeling of affiliation with their schools (Kruse, Louis & Bryk,
         1995). They have chances to collaborate, which can increase teachers' sense of mutual support and feeling of
         personal responsibility for  effective instruction    (Louis, 1992).  Creating   successful  professional communities
         requires a deliberate effort and much nurturing, yet the potential to decrease teachers' isolation and improve
         instructional practice in schools is clear.
                  Similarly, adolescent literacy has been identified as a crucial area to address in the middle and upper
         grades as part of the reform agenda. (Snow & Biancarosa, 2003; Berman & Biancarosa, 2005; Biancarosa &
         Snow,  2006).   Adolescent   students begin    to come  across  academic   discourses  and   content area   concepts  in
         school that necessitate different  reading   strategies than  more   traditional literary forms.  Adolescent   Literacy
         advocates not only point out the need to improve students' reading, but also the role literacy plays in students'
         high school success, closing the achievement gap and preparing students for a changing workplace after high
         school. However, literacy is not just confined to Language Arts and English classrooms. Adolescent readers
         often  struggle to  make   sense  of  text  in the  content   areas  (Language   Arts, Science,   Social    Studies and
         Mathematics). Yet, content area teachers do not necessarily have training in supporting reading in their classes.
                  In our work described here, the teachers formed a work circle (Shrader et al., 1999; D'Amico, 2005)
         around the concept of integrating literacy across the curriculum in the sixth grade. Work circles are teams of
         researchers and practitioners that meet on a regular basis to address an issue, design or revise curriculum, or
         implement   new  strategies  for instruction   or  assessment.  Work   circles  come   from  the  participatory design
         (Schuler & Namioka, 1993) tradition. When putting learning theory into action by designing and implementing
         strategies that instantiate these theories, we can study their impact on the school context.

       Framework
                  The purpose of this paper is to examine the relationship between a literacy work circle carried out by a
         small group of teachers and the development of professional community. Is there evidence that engaging in
         literacy work circles plays a useful role in fostering professional community? As a theoretical framework, the
         five core characteristics of professional communities outlined by Kruse, Louis & Bryk (1995) are beneficial.
         This core set of characteristics provides us with a lens through which to view and code rich, qualitative data and
         artifacts produced by the work circle.

2-
         Kruse,    et. al.  identified the  following    key  elements:  (a) shared    norms     and values,   (b)  reflective
dialogue, (c) deprivatization of practice, (d) focus on student learning, and (e) collaboration. Shared norms and
values are the teachers' beliefs about institutional purposes, practices and desired behaviors. However, this is
not intended to entail complete agreement of all beliefs, but rather a core set of similar values on which the
teachers' community may develop. Reflective dialogue refers to conversations that critique practice, pedagogy
and student learning. These conversations require teachers to practice their craft in the open and place sustained
attention on how pedagogy is linked to student learning.

Methods
         The work being reported in this paper is part of a larger effort of addressing literacy in the content
areas at middle schools and high schools. The essence of the larger work is to build effective reading­to-learn
environments for middle school students and to use these environments to help us understand the reciprocal
relationship between content area achievement and reading achievement.              We focus on building reading-to-learn
environments     that  rely  on the   three strategic  approaches   to  reading   support:   summarizing,      T-Charts   and
annotating text (Scherer et al., in press). Summarizing allows students to capture the gist of a chosen text in
writing as well as the major concepts and details supporting those concepts. T-charts, also known as double-
entry journals are two or three column charts (like the shape of a T) that provide a structure for students to
monitor and document their understanding of texts (Atwell, 1990). Annotation is the process of marking up a
text in order to perform content analysis as well as reveal the meaning behind various textual features. (Liu,
1996) Teachers couple these reading tools to the text so that students may gain deeper understanding of the
content area within which they are learning.
         At   our  site, grade  level  teachers  already  have  common     planning    time, which     is meant   to promote
professional community. However, the school does not prescribe how teachers' time together is spent. There is
no guarantee that a professional community will develop amongst grade level teachers merely because they
teach in the same grade. This is why we are studying more closely whether engaging in literacy work circles can
foster the core characteristics of a professional community.
         Over the past year, the three teachers in this work circle have been meeting once a week during the
school year for one hour every Friday and about six hours a week during the summer. Once familiar with the
literacy tools, the teachers examined the role of text in their respective content areas and designed lessons to
embed    the tools with    the texts.  Finally,  once  they began   enacting the    literacy tools  in the  classroom,    they
reflected on the tool use in order to refine their place in future lessons.
         As   participant   observers,  we   gathered   observation  notes,  meeting    agendas,     and  teacher   generated
artifacts as well as interview data. These data provide thick qualitative descriptions of the literacy work circles
for  one year.   Using   the framework,     the  data  were  coded, often  fitting  into more    than  one    of the element
categories. The coded data also provided us with counterexamples.
         In using the Kruse, Louis & Bryk framework, it is worth noting that reflective dialogue and shared
norms   and  beliefs   couple  themselves   to   other characteristics  of the framework.     It is  difficult to   talk about
student learning without reflective dialogue. Two researchers discussed the data in order to increase reliability
of the coding, multiple coding and counterexamples. In the next section, we shall try to explain some of the
results of the literacy work circles with respect to the professional community framework.

Results: Using the Framework to Describe the Development of
Professional Community
         The literacy work circle began in a collaborative space. The school teachers are already placed in grade
level teams. These grade level teams share common planning times. The grade level teachers are mandated by
the principal to participate in two team meetings per week. Yet it is the idea of literacy and integrating strategies
that gives   the  teachers   a  reason  to  collaborate.  Specifically,    literacy gives   the  teachers  opportunities    to
collaborate  around    instruction. Because     the teachers  chose the  meeting    times   and  dates,   the time   has  been
protected. Other meetings took place outside of the Friday meetings, but these rarely involved instruction. Too
often, the demands outside of the classroom take up the teachers collaborative work time: parent issues, school
paper work    related  to  standardized   tests, grades, etc. Instead,  Friday is   a  time  for the teachers    to co-design
lessons  that  use literacy    strategies  that  provide  support   for students    to learn  the   intended   content.   The
introduction of a long-term instructional topic, in this case literacy, as well as the involvement of an outside
participant-observer prompted the teachers to protect that time.
         During these meetings, teachers had opportunities to share the content of their classes, their classroom
pacing and successful instructional strategies. This deprivatizing of practice allowed the science teacher, for
example, to share how she helps students identify in-text definitions. The language arts teacher offered how he
teaches topic sentences as a vehicle for writing summaries. The math teachers noted how she encourages the
students to identify the textual features of their workbook as a way to understand a new concept.

                                                                                                                                  2-
                   The work naturally went beyond literacy to bigger picture instructional matters. By identifying and
        sharing  the  trajectory  of their  class   content  to  the work  circle, the    teachers saw overlaps    in  their content.
        Initially, this task's  purpose   was    to identify  places  to embed    the literacy strategies   to aid  in teaching  and
        learning content. The teachers rearranged the sequence of their content to provide more continuity of what they
        were teaching. In October, they linked their work for an interdisciplinary family history project, a project, they
        stated, would not have taken place without the literacy work circle.
                   The  examples   of    sharing led  the teachers   to  talk about   students as   well.  In  general, the  literacy
        strategies were used as tools to address student difficulties in content area reading. As the teachers became more
        familiar with the strategies, they were able to discuss how they used or adapted the strategies in their planning
        and lessons. There were numerous examples of the teachers sharing their lesson plans by prefacing what their
        learning   goals were   and  what   challenges    they  anticipated   the students  having  in reaching    those goals.  For
        example,   the  science  teacher  shared    how   she  used  annotation   as  a way  for   students to engage   in   textbook
        readings with difficult vocabulary.         The math    teacher  observed    that annotation,  with   its multiple  layers of
        complex tasks, provided students of different levels to connect with the text. The talk of appropriateness of a
        strategy usually led to consideration of how we know the students have understood the reading. These ideas
        related to differentiation and assessment were examples of the work circle's focus on student learning.
                   By focusing on the students' learning and their own practices, the meetings afforded the teachers rich
        opportunities for reflective dialogue. Reflection, as one characteristic of professional communities, allowed the
        other four characteristics to take place. The work circle began in the summer by mapping out the content of the
        school  year.   While   providing   an opportunity    to share   content  with  the teachers,  the  teachers   also used this
        activity as an opportunity to assess what "worked".       In order for the teachers to learn the literacy strategies, they
        reflected on their own use of these tools in the early work circles. They remarked on what worked for them in
        relation to the tools as well as reflecting on their role as a reader. Once the school year began, the teachers
        reflected on the implementation of the strategies. Reflection has been key to the teachers' ability to refine the
        literacy strategies as they apply to their specific content areas. And reflection has been a catalyst for illuminating
        the teachers' expectations of students in their classes.
                   Reflecting on the teachers' expectations of the students is one way the teachers' beliefs emerged in
        their discussions. Agreeing on the expectations of the students was a key component in implementing these
        strategies. First and foremost, these teachers believed that understanding text was key to making meaning of
        their content areas. These shared norms and beliefs were also evident in the teachers' commitment to using the
        three literacy strategies as a way to address students' reading obstacles. The math teacher mentioned early on
        that her perspective of the role of reading in her content area was changing and coming more in line with the
        other two teachers. She realized that her textbook was filled with new, discipline specific vocabulary and the
        textbook writers expected students to write summaries and explanations about their problem solving strategy
        use.
                   As these examples of results demonstrate, the literacy work circle can contribute to all five of the
        categories of in our framework. In some cases, a component of the work circle activity may contribute to more
        than one characteristic at the same time. And some activities contribute to some categories more than others.
        However, at least in this case, this literacy work circle did contribute in a positive way to the creation of the
        professional community.
                   It's important to note that the literacy work circle created a tension in the teacher community because
        of the time commitment. Because the work has demanded the teachers to reexamine the role of text in their
        classrooms and how they support the students reading of that text, it has required more planning and reflection
        time. This time requirement allows for some of the teachers to interact with the strategies more than others.
        However, this degree of strategy participation has not impeded work circle participation. With a year of weekly
        meetings, none of the teachers have missed more than three meetings.
                   It's also important to note that teacher beliefs and curriculum have influenced the amount of strategy
        use amongst the teachers. For example, all three of the teachers have stated how much more challenging it is to
        use the strategies in math class as opposed to science. In addition, certain strategies lend themselves to certain
        types of content. For example, the group has found it difficult to apply annotation to short fiction. This has
        allowed the science/social studies teacher to more easily apply literacy strategies to her content than the other
        two teachers.
                   This framework is helpful to capture characteristics of a professional community. However, our data
        show  us   that  it is difficult to disentangle   reflective  dialogue    and shared   norms  and   beliefs  from   the other
        characteristics. For example, how does a professional community focus on student learning without reflective
        dialogue? And how does a professional community focus on student learning without coming to the shared
        belief that this focus is important?

2-
Discussion
         Improving schools involves more than simply restructuring them. For example, having teachers divided
into grade level teams with common planning time is a start. However, once the structures of this kind are put in
place for teachers to come together, policy makers and administrators need to consider what work the teachers
will carry out. What are the human and social dimensions for community beyond the structures (Kruse, Louis &
Bryk, 1996)?
         This paper leads us to believe that literacy work circles could play an important role in developing
professional  community    beyond  the  structures. The   literacy work circle allowed   teachers  to reflect  on   their
practice and student learning, uncover their beliefs, and collaborate in a meaningful way.     It is the importance of
keeping  both  structures  and  instruction in mind.  When    these  teachers planned   and discussed    about literacy
strategies, they were able to talk about a vast array of their professional experiences. Perhaps this is one area for
further investigation. One   of the implications    that this work   suggests  is a set of  design principles  for  the
formation of a work circle. Having the structure of common planning time, regularity of meeting time, a long-
term instructional  goal,  deep  analysis   of cross-curricular  content   and an   outside  participant-observer   are
components of our work circle's formation.
         Work circles are just one example of how teachers can come together. Other examples could be groups
that exist within the school's organizational structure such as: curriculum planning teams, department teams,
common course teams, school improvement committees, etc. There could be groups that exist in schools outside
of the organization structure such as board certification or alternative certification cohorts. We can imagine
teachers coming together around other long-term instructional topics besides literacy. In our case, the teachers
have said that literacy is broad enough that it applies to all of the teachers' content areas and is important to their
instructional goals. Students need strategies to read text in all of their classes. However, we can imagine other
broad topics as well, such as project-based learning (Wardrip, 2008), cooperative learning or technology.
         Indeed, literacy is a reason for teachers to come together and share practice, but in actuality what might
be happening   is  the literacy work   circle  is building  increased interpersonal   trust between   and  among    the
members in the professional community. Looking more closely into the development of relational trust (Bryk &
Schneider, 2002) among the teachers may be where we discover that the literacy work circle has the greatest
amount of traction.

References
Atwell, N. (1990). Coming to know: Writing to learn in the intermediate grades. Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann.
Berman,   I., &   Biancarosa,   G. (2005).    Reading    to achieve:  A governor's    guide  to  adolescent    literacy.
         Washington, DC: National Governor's Association Center for Best Practices.
Biancarosa,   G., & Snow,   C.E.   (2006).  Reading  next--A   vision for  action and   research in  middle  and    high
         school literacy: A report to Carnegie Corporation of New York (2nd ed.). Washington, DC: Alliance for
         Excellent Education.
Bryk, A.S., & Schneider, B. (2002). Trust in Schools: A core resource for improvement. New York: Russell
         Sage Foundation.
D'Amico,   L.M.   (2005).  The  Center  for  Learning    Technologies  in  Urban   Schools:  A  case  of design-based
         research      in   education.      Unpublished      Meta     Study    Case     Report     (Available     from
         www.lrdc.pitt.edu/metastudy/PDF/LeTUS_Final2006.pdf).
Heller, R., & Greenleaf, C. (2007). Literacy instruction in the content areas: Gettting to the core of middle and
         high school improvement. Washington, DC: Alliance for Excellent Education.
Kruse, S.D., Louis, K.S., & Bryk, A.S. (1995). An emerging framework for analyzing school-based professional
         community.    In  K.S.  Louis,  S.D.     Kruse, &   Associates   (Eds.), Professionalism    and  community:
         Perspectives on reforming urban schools (pp. 23-44). Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin Press, Inc.
Lortie, D.C. (1975). Schoolteacher: A sociological study. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Louis, K.S. (1992). Restructuring and the problem of teachers' work. In A. Lieberman (Ed.), The changing
         contexts  of  teaching  (91st Yearbook,    pp.  138-156).   Chicago:  National    Society  for  the Study   of
         Education.
Liu, K. (1996). Annotation as an index to critical writing. Urban Education, 41:192-207.
McLaughlin, M.W., & Talbert, J.E. (2001). Professional communities and the work of high school teaching.
         Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Schuler, D.,  &   Namioka,   A. (Eds.). (1993).    Participatory   design: Principles   and practices.   Hillsdale, NJ:
         Erlbaum.
Sherer, J., Gomez, K., Herman, P., Gomez, L., White, J., & Williams, A. (in press). Literacy infusion in a high
         school environmental science curriculum. In K. Bruna & K. Gomez (Eds.), Talking science, writing
         science: The work of language in multicultural classrooms. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.

                                                                                                                             2-
         Shrader, G. W., Whitcomb, J., Finn, L. E., Williams, K. P., Walker, L. J., & Gomez, L. M. (1999). Work in the
                  work circle: A description of collaborative design to improve teaching practice. A paper presented at
                  the Spencer Foundation Conference on Collaborative Research for Practice, New Orleans, LA.
         Snow, C.E., & Biancarosa, G. (Eds.). (2003) Adolescent literacy and the achievement gap: What do we know
                  and where   do we  go   from here? Carnegie  Corporation of New York   Adolescent Literacy Funders
                  Meeting Report. New York: Carnegie Corporation of New York.
         Stevens, W.D.,  Kahne,  J., &  Cooper,  L.  (2006). Professional  communities and instructional improvement
                  practices: A study   of small  high schools  in Chicago. Chicago:  Consortium  on  Chicago  School
                  Research.
         Wardrip,  P. (2008).  More  than  heavy  lifting: The role of project-based learning in the development  of
                  professional community. A paper to be presented at the annual conference of the American Educational
                  Research Association, New York, NY.

       Acknowledgments
         We thank Northwestern University for their support for the work reported here. We wish to thank a number of
         individuals who contributed to this work. We are particularly thankful to Louis and Kim Gomez for their help
         and guidance at all levels of  this project. In addition, we are grateful to Laura Perelman, Mike Barber, Ben
         Shapiro, Adam Williams, Kristen Perkins and Margie Pligge for their contributions to this work. Finally, we
         wish to thank the teachers involved in the work: Jennifer Tobey, Ame Nusser and Gary Cipinko.

2-
