            Cutting through Layers of the BBC "ONION Street":
     Children's Use of Homework Message Boards Out-of-school

             Yang Yang1, Charles Crook2, Claire O'Malley3, Learning Sciences Research Institute
           University of Nottingham, Jubilee Campus, Wollaton Road, Nottingham, NG8 1BB, UK.
  Email: lpxyy@ nottingham.ac.uk1, charles.crook@nottingham.ac.uk2, claire.o'malley@nottingham.ac.uk3

        Abstract:    We  explored   children's spontaneous    use of the Onion   Street Maths     and  English
        message boards out-of-school. These are open-access, study support forums that are widely
        accessed and well-regarded by teachers and students in the UK. 416 messages were collected
        on  the   Maths  board    and  893  messages  were    collected  on the  English    board. Sustained
        engagement was rare. Around 90% of user identities contributed only once. Nearly two thirds
        of threads on both boards did not get any reply. Sequential observation and content analysis
        were  used   to  identify  themes   emerging  in  the  discussion.  Results  revealed that    although
        children came to the boards mainly for seeking help and asking questions, discussions around
        different   curriculum subjects   (Maths  and  English)   were  structured   differently. Because   of
        children's   limited skills   in asking  questions,   the boards   had  limited value     for learning
        conversations. However, sharing emotional reactions to study and examination may still have
        made the resource a useful one.

BBC ONION Street
        The  message     board is  a  handy  and  low cost  online   asynchronous    communication     medium     that is
popularly  used  for people  asking    questions and  sharing  information  and  proficiencies    online   (e.g., Yahoo
message   boards, Google    message   boards,  BBC   message   boards,  etc.). Meanwhile,    with  the  greater   use  of
Internet (Livingstone, 2005), teenagers make up a considerable number of active users on message boards. In
this study, we explored children's spontaneous use of the BBC message boards which are targeted at 11 to 14
years old. The bbc.co.uk website is the UK's most-visited digital destination used widely by both adult users
and child users. Its school section provides many kinds of information and activities for children and young
people from  4   to  16+ years  old,   including multimedia    learning  activities, study  and   revision tips,  online
assessments, message boards and so on. These online learning resources are usually used and recommended by
school teachers when they help their students to revise, especially before exams. Because these resources can be
freely accessed through the Internet, they support children's learning both at school and at home. `Onion Street',
in the school section, is an online asynchronous communication system which is linked closely to other BBC
online and informal learning resources. It is a popular place where UK children can get advice on schoolwork
and support on    personal  issues through  the  Internet out-of-school.   They  can   also share  ideas   and    develop
friendships with other people of the same age. Therefore, Onion Street potentially supports children's authentic
networked learning -- out-of-school and in their everyday life.
        In  this  study, in  order  to   understand how   the  asynchronous    communication      medium   worked     for
students in an out-of-school learning context and to explore its prospects, the first research question was how
discussion patterns  and   content   varied in  two  different discipline-based  boards:    Maths     and English,  and
especially how the discussions helped users to construct their knowledge both individually and socially in these
different subjects. The second research question was to find out to what extent the message boards supported
genuinely evolving discussions. Also, because the message boards provided the students with a space to talk
with other students with shared or similar school experiences, the content in the board could reflect the students'
real concerns and interests from their daily school and out-of-school learning experiences. Therefore, in order to
capture and understand children's emerging learning cultures, the third research question addressed what the
exchanges on the board revealed regarding the prevailing concerns of students in this age group when they were
confronting private study out-of-school. In more detail, this study looked at how different varieties of postings
were made by the students. Before exploring these three research questions, current understanding of children's
relationships with digital media and, particularly, children's out-of-school learning experiences with networked
media need to be reviewed.

Children's engagement with digital media out-of-school
        With the significant increase in children's access to the Internet (ONS, 2003) and the UK government's
strong belief that technology will play a major role in transforming UK children's learning experiences (DfES,
2002), many children are living in media-rich homes and their relationships with media are changing rapidly.
Studies of the media-saturated family have identified an important change: namely that in public spaces, such as
the living room, TV has given way to what Livingstone et al. (1999, 2002) call "bedroom culture": that is, one

                                                                                                                           2-
          that provides  media-rich,   personalised                                                      opportunities            for     safe      and  entertaining           identity      expression  and   peer-
          focused   relationship exploration                                                      (Livingstone,            2002).      Such  increasing             "privatisation"           of media  results in  a
          transformation of the private home into permit a media saturated, individualised leisure culture. Moreover, the
          uses  of  networked    and  communication-orientated                                                                    media      (e.g.      Mobile        phones,             email,  MSN     messenger,
          discussion forums   and    chat rooms)                                                       occupy       more        children's          leisure      time  at       home.        Regarding the learning
          potential  of using    the networked                                                        and      communication-mediated                     media,       researchers            and  designers    (e.g.,
          Scardamalia & Bereiter, 1994, Scardamalia 2003) have considered how to design networked media, construct
          and evaluate the learning community, and propose design guidelines. Furthermore, these experiences which are
          characterised as self-initiated, inventive, and spontaneous (Hsi, 2007) led the children to be more competent and
          confident users of those media. Somekh et al (2002) propose that networked media, like the virtual classroom,
          have enabled students to work at their own pace, from school as well as home, thereby `empowering' these
          students. Social  connection    and                                                     communication               have     always       been  of        fundamental           importance   to teenagers.
          Accordingly, these experiences have also enlarged the scope and scale of the children's social worlds (Lyman,
          2004; Wasko, Philip, & Meehan, 2001).
                    Academics,   educators,   and                                                     politicians          emphasise       the      importance         of       home      in  relation to children's
          academic achievement, because the home cultural background can be different from school practice. Therefore,
          many  researchers  stress  that  a  good                                                     relationship            between      home        and      school      is  important;       although  roughly
          imposing a school model of learning onto children's home learning will lead to the loss of an important part of
          learning (Lave & Wenger, 1991; David, 1998; Maddock, 2006). According to Forgatch and Ramsey (1994),
          homework is an important component in children's academic achievement. Communication and involvement
          among teachers, children and parents are supportive to the home school link (Caddell, 1996; McNamara et al,
          2000). The effective home school link is likely to empower young people by involving them in a process of
          consultation  and initiative development                                                            to  increase        feelings          of ownership       and       responsibility      (Smith,  2000;
          Caddell, 1996). Given those considerations, we might argue that effective use of networked media connecting
          students with teachers and peers to collaboratively work on school work could contribute to a good home to
          school link. Furthermore, Somekh et al. (2002) declare that the uses of virtual classrooms reveal the potential of
          learning  without walls    and, through                                                      home       access       to the     learning      resources,           make  learning        more   flexible. If
          online resources are available together with guidance and support from teachers, whether face to face in the
          classroom, or via electronic media, opportunities for independent learning are maximised and students have
          more choice and flexibility about how and when to work according to their individual preferences (Somekh et
          al., 2002). Referring to the success of using networked technology to support home/school links in Somekh et
          al.'s research (2002), we could further find out how networked open discussion could support children's social
          and learning activities out-of-school.
                    Against this background, the users of Onion Street were presumed to be self-initiated users living in a
          media rich home environment suited to organise their personalised learning. Additionally, they are expected by
          designers, parents,    teachers  and                                                     academics        to        learn    effectively       through       this      open        and  public  text-based
          communication media: Onion Street.

         Data collection

                                                                                                  350

                                                                                                                                      English Board     Maths Board
                                                                                                  300         292

                                                                                                  250

                                                                                                  200         193          205

                                                                                                  150

                                                                                                  10050                    49          9440         8450         7259        9759         5862

                                                                                                    0
                                                                                                            1            2           3            4            5           6            7
                                                                                                                                              Page No.

                                  Figure 1. The number of messages/25 discussion threads (discussion page).

                    All the users of the message boards must have registered user identities by providing their birth dates to
          prove they are at the boards' targeting ages. All the message boards are topic centred in two sections: General
          topics (e.g., Talk It Over, KS3 Bitesize 11-13) and Subject topics (e.g., English, Maths, Music, etc). In every
          message board, there are 25 discussion threads on each page (`thread', instead of meaning a thread of messages,
          was defined by a new starting message no matter whether it gained replies or not). The number of pages in each

2-
                                                                           The number of messages
board depends on how many threads the students have posted in all. The threads are listed sequentially from the
most recently replied or posted to the least recently replied or posted. To protect the users' privacy and safety
and to make sure that the discussion focuses on the topic, there is a pre-moderation period before a newly-
submitted message appears in the board. During the pre-moderation period, a new message will be displayed as
a "queued message" only, with a posting date.
        In this study, messages on the Maths message board and the English message board were collected
before UK children's national SATs exams in the first week of May, 2006. There were 416 messages from 175
discussion threads on the Maths    board and 893  messages    from  175 threads  on the English    board.  Figure 1
illustrates how the number of messages varied every 25 discussion threads, which are separately displayed in
each page. From the diagram, we see that even though there are more messages created on the English board
than the Maths board, a similar trend tells us that the first discussion pages in both boards (which are likely to be
browsed by the user when they first get to the boards) are the most popular pages. Moreover, we can see that the
number of messages in the page 3 to 7 remain relatively stable in both boards. Hence, the data from page 3 to 7
can be representative to the rest of the discussion pages which are not included in the whole data set.

Data analysis
        The data were analysed at two levels. First, we quantitatively measured the `traffic' of boards: that is,
the density of the message board content and the density of users' participation. Second, content analysis was
used to classify the characteristics of the discussion found on the boards.

`Traffic' on the boards
Table1: Density of Content.

                                                Maths message board           English message board
        Average length of thread                3.0 messages                  5.4 messages
                                                SD=5.71   t=7.04              SD=16.59 t=4.12
        Average length of message               44.52 words                   66.00 words
                                                SD=44.25 t=20.98              SD=81.26 t =22.58
        Percentage of threads with replies      32.0%                         44.8%

        Average Number of days to have a        2.23 days/message             3.47 days /message
        new message added to the board

        From table 1, we can see that there are generally more replies in an English board thread than a Maths
board thread, and an English board message is usually longer than a Maths board message. When coming to the
average number of days to have a new message added to the board, we can see that both boards evolved at a
very slow pace. However, if the opening thread message and the first reply message are ignored, the average
number of days to get a message added significantly reduced to 1.03 days/message on Maths board and 1.45
days/message on English board. Pre-moderation period could explain this change. Pre-moderation meant that
the opening thread  message   waited longer  to get its first reply message.   But once it got    replied, the users
participated more frequently.

Table2: Density of Participation.

                                                Maths message board           English message board
        The number of participated              345 user identities           416 user identities
        identities
        The number of user identities who       262 user identities           298 user identities
        only participate once
        The average number of messages          1.44 messages                 1.87 messages
        contributed by the child users

        Table 2 illustrates how the participants are distributed on the message boards within a fixed period of
time. On the maths   board, less  than one fourth of  the total user identities (24.05%)   posted  more    than one
message on the board. Only 29 (8%) user identities came back to the board again where this return means they
entered the board in different days. 54 user identities who posted more than one message on the same day. In
summary, more than 90% of user identities came to the board and did not come back and contribute again. On
the English board, more than a quarter of the total user identities (28.37%) posted more than one message. And

                                                                                                                       2-
          only 54 user identities posted message on different days. Therefore, similar to Maths board, nearly 90% of users
          came and never returned to contribute again.

         Characteristics of the discussion
                  Beyond    quantitative   measurements   of users' participation and the message    board  visiting dynamic,
          how   users generated  learning  and a   social culture through  discussion  on the   message    boards was  further
          explored. Content analysis was conducted in order to categorise the messages on both boards.

         1. Maths board:
                  Based on a content analysis, the maths discussion threads were categorised into five themes: "General
          help", "Topic   help", "Questioning",   "Offer  help  and suggestion",  and "Social   chat". Table  3  explains each
          category in more detail.

          Table3: Maths board threads themes.

                       Theme                                     Definition & Example                          Proportion of
                                                                                                               total corpus
           Learning       General help       State their needs to get help in maths subject without            32.9%
           discussion                        clarifying any specific maths topic
                                                  E.g. I am in year 10 and I am really bad at maths, the
                                             biggest problem is that I have exams in a month. What can I
                                                                          do?
                          Topic help         State their needs to get help on a specific maths topic           24.5%
                                             without any specific information
                                             E.g. i need help with fractions but it ent come up on the
                                             board so im sendin another 1... anways this is what i need
                                             help with... multiplyin and addin together fractions... im
                                             goin a bit write back if you know the answers
                          Questioning        Have a complete maths question written in the message             19.7%
                                             E.g. I have homework I dnt get it1! OK, this is what I have
                                             to do....
                                             Add 1+1=2 2+2=4 and you do that all d way 2 1000. what
                                             is the most simple way to do that?
                          Offering help      intend to offer help, learning strategies, tips and learning      3.5%
                                             resources to others
                                             E.g. hi, everyone I am in year 8 but my math teacher keeps
                                             saying to me that I should be in year 11 because of how
                                             good I am at maths. So if anyone has any problems with
                                             their homework then I sam the one to come to. I come on
                                             here most days so start sending your messages
           Chat-style     Social chat        Looking for social chats instead of any particular replies        17.9%
           Discussion                        about maths
                                             E.g. my head is killing me I have done so much revision

          ¾   General help
                  Among the whole discussion data, nearly one third of posts were in the general help category. Because
          users  did  not articulate the specific maths   topic they needed  help  with and did   not  further  update replies
          afterwards, more than three quarters of discussion threads in this category failed to get any reply. In order to
          understand the failure of sustaining the discussion in this category, the motivation for user to post general help
          threads are further investigated. The following principal themes were identified:
                  a)   Time pressure from exams: Significantly, more than half of general help threads were initiated
                       because of perceived time pressure from exams. In their messages, they often mentioned `exams
                       are coming up', `exams in next week' or even `HELP ive got a maths exam in an hour'.
                  b)   School    and  peer evaluation: A  quarter of threads referred to  their general   school or  classroom
                       experiences, especially the difficulties they encountered at school, such as `my class are all going
                       to fail' or `the new teacher doesn't care about teaching us'.
                  c)   Feelings   about  learning and   achievement:  These  postings  were explicit   reference  to emotions
                       generated by the personal activity of study. For example that they felt depressed with their maths
                       achievement. `I hate the subject and I cant do it.'

2-0
Users who posted general help threads, needed help but they did not really sure what could really help them.

¾   Topic help
         Topic help threads were another kind of frequently posted threads by users. Here they required help
with a specific topic. The common motivations to post threads were:
         a)  Time pressure from exams: This is still frequently mentioned in threads; as in: `can anyone do
             trigonometry coz I av sats 2morrow'.
         b)  Homework and coursework completion is also frequently a reason for posting the threads; e.g., `im
             in yr 10 nd needs help on my coursewrk with the number stairs. Fanxs'.
         Even    though it involved specific topics to discuss, the     reply rate in this category did not increase
significantly. Especially threads asking about algebra such as angles, circumferences and so on: these did not
attract replies. But compared  with  general help threads, the  specific   topic   help pursue could lead to quality
replies such as maths procedural knowledge discussion.

¾   Questioning
         Questioning threads were more likely to get replies than the former two categories of threads. Because
users who post questioning threads were clearer about their needs, they were more likely to update their replies
afterwards. In questioning threads, users were far less likely to express their stress from exam time pressure.
Instead, most questioning threads were initiated because of homework, coursework or scheduled revision work.
The quality of replies was also better; it included both maths procedural knowledge discussion and conceptual
knowledge discussion.
         However, the reply rate (40%) was still not very high. One reason for the low reply rate might be the
age difference among users. Both boards were targeting at age from 11 to 14. All users perhaps come to the
board with their personal interests with limited patience. The relatively older users may not want to spend time
on simple questions posted by young users without any reward. On the other hand, the younger users might not
be capable of solving the older users' questions. Additionally, because the boards did not provide editing tools
to format the maths answers, the users needed to spend extra time on putting their message in a readable format.
This could challenge the child users' patience.

¾   Offer help and suggestion
         Even though there were only 5 threads trying to offer help to other child users. 4 threads got replies.
But, none of them were sustained by the host offering help to others, the "offer help" posts seemed accidental
without giving more information on their proficiencies, saying things like `Need any help with ur maths work? i
am here to help' or `Need Eny Help Tell ME And I'll Help'. However, these accidental posts did not discourage
the replies expressing help users needed. One offer help thread even got 51 replies which was the longest thread
among the Maths board data.

¾   Social chat
         In the social chat category, most threads were still not replied to. The messages were more like `dip-in'
chats which did not expect serious attentions from others and the people who initiated the threads did not pay
attention to it later either. But exam time tension was still the main reason for child users posting on the board.
         To summarise, more than 80% of threads on the Maths board addressed child users' needs for help and
advice on their maths work closely linked to the learning progress they made at school. About one third of
threads clearly expressed the time tension from exams. This time tension urged them to talk with others for help
or simply   seeking  social  chat with peers   who  might  be   in the    same   situation. Because  the  discussion
developments were delayed by the pre-moderation process, the users are not well inspired to contribute to the
discussion. Hence, the users did not perceive this board as a reliable learning environment, but rather a place to
release their stress for the exams and to talk about their school life.

2. English board
         Maths learning is often more about `yes or no' questions, while English is about listening, speaking,
reading and writing with more `yes and no' questions. Therefore, in contrast to the maths board categorisation,
there were more discussions on English board categorised into Chat-style discussion and there were more sub-
themes in this chat-style discussion category.

Table 4: English board threads themes

             Theme                                     Definition & Example                           Proportion of
                                                                                                      each category

                                                                                                                       2-
                                             Asking for help with a specific term or comprehension with a
           Learning       Topic help         specific piece of English paragraph.                                     44.2%
           Discussion                        E.g. yoh
                                             watz vivid vocabulary
                                             i no datz borin but plz tell me?
                          English            Invite people to discuss about English literatures. Instead of
                          literature         purely looking for others' replies and opinions, they gave out           9.2%
                          discussion         their own insights first.
                                             E.g. Heya!!!
                                             Just    a little thought   on   Inspector   Goole  from  An   Inspector
                                             Calls.    It  seems near     the  end  of the   play he  is  distressed
                                             because he "doesn't have much time". Then he leaves and we
                                             discover      he wasn't    a real    Inspector, and    THEN   the  girl
                                             dies...I told you it was far-fetched.
                                             Your opinions please
                                             Thank you
                                             IntoTheSpotlight
           Chat-style     Exam-initiated     Look      for people    to   talk about   exams,   exam   results  and   23.9%
           Discussion     chat               revision tips.
                                             E.g. hi is anybody doing richard the III for their english exam
                                             i just wanted to check i kno everything about it. please reply
                                             thanks x
                          English            Set rules for the whole thread in order to establish regulated           2.4%
                          interactive        interactions in the thread.
                          game               E.g.    lets  do  like a  chain   story.  i could  start it,  and then
                                             someone could say the next bit, and then someone else does
                                             the next bit after that, so on and so forth.
                          School and peer    Talking about their school lives and their worries from school           8.6%
                          evaluation chat    E.g. hi im in year 10 and i have too much english coursework
                                             whether its henry vii or seamus heaney and behing on all of it
                                             and now the teachers are pushing me for course work. wot
                                             shud i do
                          Social chat        Talking      about  personal     attitude and   experience,   want  to   11.7%
                                             involve in social interactions with other people in the board
                                             E.g. I really love english- especially english lit! my friends all
                                             take the mick but i really love it!! lol!! they dont take the mick
                                             though when they need me to annotate their anthology with
                                             them!!    lol!!  anyone    else  love english   or am  i just the only
                                             geek!!!

          ¾   Learning Discussion
                  Nearly half of threads were in search of help with specific topics. Because English school lessons and
          homework are normally centred on a topic, users can easily identify which topic they need help with. But in
          order to get useful help on the topic, they need valuable discussions around the topics from both sides: help
          seeker and help provider. Disappointingly, 62.5% of threads in specific help category did not get any reply.
                  Even    though  there  are only    15   discussion  threads   discussing   about  English  literature ranged  from
          Romeo and Juliet to Harry Potter, 14 out of 15 threads (93.3%) attracted a replied. This category was the most
          replied. But the discussion in this category is more about comprehension of the literature and Harry Potter is a
          more favourable   topic:   it attracted more    than 100   replies   in  one thread   than  Shakespeare's  classics which
          normally received no more than 10 replies.

          ¾   Chat-style Discussion
                  Chat-style   discussions   on   students'   school  learning    experience    and exam   relevant  experience and
          strategies also occupied    one  third  of discussions    in  the    board.  Exam  time   tension was  not    as frequently
          mentioned on the English board as on the Maths board. And in the social chat, users expressed more affection
          towards English. They even played chain story games on the board. It seemed that even in terms of the online
          discussions, English is a more suitable subject than Maths for stimulating discussions (amongst a constituency
          of students who were taking both subjects in national exams at that time).

         General Discussion

2-2
Shared phenomena emerged across different subject boards
         Referring the quantitative analysis of the `traffic' on the Maths board and the English board, we found
that the threads on the English board were generally longer than the Maths board and the total amount of users'
participation on the English board was significantly more than the Maths board. Nonetheless, the quality of the
conversations was not improved by the denser participations and discussions.
         Firstly, the ratio of active users to the totality of users on each board is not significantly different. This
indicated that the rise in participation did not make an impact on the return of users. Secondly, because the
discussions in the chat style category on the English board are nearly three times that of chat style discussions
on the Maths board, this led to more participation on the English board during the fixed period of time. Based on
these two observations, we might argue that although there was more discussion and participation on the English
board  than the Maths  board, the  shared phenomena    emerged across the  two boards  are that   the  amount of
learning discussions were  limited and  social emotional exchanges  were prevailing, no matter    how  dense  the
discussion and participation could be.

Different subject discussions animate the boards differently
         BBC ONION Street message boards are topic-centred. According to data analysis of the Maths board
and the English board separately, different thread structures were identified. Maths discussion threads normally
emphasised procedure and accuracy in replies. Users on the Maths board were likely to post a question from
their homework. They needed instant, agreed and reliable replies. Also, maths discussions, especially on algebra,
required text format editing and better visual representations. These functions were not included in Onion Street.
But, English discussion threads required clear references to each contribution, because the child users normally
talk about their personal experiences or opinions on a topic. Therefore, although the children can transplant their
communication   skills from spoken     English to online text-messaging, different characteristics  of academic
subjects still should be considered when communication media is designed for children's learning.

Self-initiative users compromise with the regulation of the board
         BBC ONION Street message boards provided a free, high profile, accessible and public space for all
the UK children. Children's authentic experience with text-based asynchronous communication media occurred
during their out-of-school leisure  time. They  joined discussions on their  own   initiatives. Their aims when
joining the boards were revealed through their messages. But more than 90% of user identities never came back
in three months. Therefore work needs to be done if this is to be turned into a truly engaging resource for young
learners to return to. More than half of discussion threads fall into general help (Maths), topic help (Maths) and
chat-style (English) categories and more than one third of threads mentioned the exam time tension. This reveals
that child users are not really skilful at proposing their needs and asking questions. They are not clear about
what they can expect from the people they are talking to. Moreover, the pre-moderation process delayed the
development of the whole board discussion. As competent users of mobile phones and commercial text chat
system which are supporting instant replies, the Onion Street users may easily lose their patience in trying to
follow the discussions by waiting one or two days. With those constraints, the users finally compromised with
the regulation of the board. They posted more social messages to release their stress and personal concerns, but
fewer learning messages which required more effort to gain valuable feedback. They rarely posted new threads
and finally became inactive users.

Conclusion
         In this paper, we have investigated children's authentic uses of message boards in an out-of-school
learning context. We identified that the quantity of discussion and participation did not have a direct impact on
the learning quality of discussions, although a message board needs to survive by sustaining its considerable
amount of participation. As self-initiative users nested in a technology rich home, children's perception of a
message board constrained its learning value. However, sharing emotional reactions to study and examination
may still have made the resource a useful one. Therefore, in order to improve the learning value of message
board to children, we need to subtly consider different subjects individually. In the Maths discussions, agreed
and reliable replies should be highlighted. However, in the English discussions, clear references to the authors,
bookmarks and classification of individual's scattered contribution should be provided. Furthermore, to sustain
children's long-term participation, we need to provide emotional support to children's learning and encourage
them to create emotional bonds on the message boards.

References
Caddell, D (1996). Roles, responsibilities and relationships: Engendering parental involvement. Paper presented
         at SERA conference. Dundee 1996.

                                                                                                                         2-
          David, M. (1998) Home-school relationship or families, parents and education. British Journal of Sociology of
                  Education, 19 (2): 255-261
          DfES   (2002). Statistics  of education:   survey of   Information and  Communications      Technology    in schools,
                  England 2002.
          Forgatch, M.S., & Ramsey, E. (1994). Boosting homework: A video tape link between families and schools.
                  School Psychology Review, 23, 472­ 484.
          Hsi, Sherry (2007). Conceptualizing learning from the everyday activities of digital kids. International Journal
                  of Science Education, 29:12, 1509-1529.
          Lave, J. & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge : Cambridge
                  University Press.
          Livingstone, S., & Bovill, M. (1999). Young people, new media. London: London School of Economics and
                  Political science.
          Livingstone, S. (2002) Young people and new media. London: Sage.
          Livingstone, S.  (2005)    UK  Children    Go  Online   -  Final report   on key  project   findings Available  from
                  http://www.york.ac.uk/res/e-society/projects/1/UKCGOExecSummary.pdf Last accessed 17/11/2007
          Lyman, P., with Billings, A., Ellinger, S., Finn, M., & Perkel, D. (2005). Literature review of kids'informal
                  learning  and   digital-mediated   experiences.    White paper  for  the  MacArthur    Foundation.Retrieved
                  November 5,
          Maddock, M. (2006) Children's personal learning agendas at home. Cambridge Journal of Education. 36 (2):
                  153-169.
          McNamara,    O., Hustler,  D.,   Stronach, I., Rodrigo,   M.,  Beresford, E.  and  Botcherby,  S.  (2000) `Room   to
                  manoeuvre: mobilizing the "active partner" in home­school relations'. British Journal of Educational
                  Research 26(4): 473­89.
          Office of   National  Statistics (2003,    Dec).  Internet access:   individuals  and households.    Available  from
                  http://www.statistics.gov.uk/pdfdir/intc1203.pdf.     Last accessed 17/5/2007.
          Scardamalia, M & Bereiter, C. (1994).      Computer Support for Knowledge-Building Communities. Journal of
                  the Learning Sciences. 3 (3):265­283
          Scardamalia,  M. (2003).   Knowledge    Forum    (Advances    beyond CSILE).     Journal of Distance  Education, 17
                  (Suppl. 3, Learning Technology Innovation in Canada), 23-28.
          Smith, R (2000). Whose childhood? The politics of homework. Children and Society 14: 316­325.
          Somekh,  B.,  Lewin,   C., Mavers,  D.,  Fisher,  T.,  Harrison, C., Haw,    K., Lunzer,  E., McFarlane,  A.E.,  and
                  Scrimshaw, P. (2002). Impact 2 ­ Pupils' and teachers' perceptions of ICT in the home, school and
                  community. Becta/DfES London
          Wasko,  J., Phillips, M.,  &  Meehan,   E.R.   (Eds.). (2001). Dazzled  by   Disney?  The   global Disney audiences
                  project. London: Leicester University Press.

2-
