    The potential for developing algebraic thinking from purposeful
                                      guessing and checking
                    Mariana Levin, Graduate Group in Science and Mathematics Education
           University of California, Berkeley, 4533 Tolman Hall, Berkeley, California, 94609 USA
                                            Email: levin@berkeley.edu

         Abstract: Two contrasting problem solving episodes are presented in which a pre-algebra
         student uses  systematic  guessing  and    checking   to solve algebra   word   problems     with  the
         underlying structure: "For a given y, m, and b, find x such that y=mx+b." The first episode
         illustrates how the student initially engages in systematic guessing and checking organized in
         a table (a "Guess and Check chart") to converge to the solution to a given word problem.          The
         second episode describes the student's activity in a later problem solving session where he
         discovers a deterministic and essentially algebraic algorithm (linear interpolation) for solving
         word problems of this same form. The evolution of the student's thinking from purposeful
         guessing  and  checking   to an  algebraic  algorithm  illustrates that this   activity structure can
         potentially offer a context in which the meaningful development of the fundamental concepts
         of variable, function, and rate of change can be engaged.

Introduction
         Many   research studies  have   documented   that  students, even     those who  have    extensive  training in
formal algebraic problem solving approaches, employ informal strategies such as guessing and checking when
faced with making sense of algebraic contexts (Bednarz & Janvier, 1996; Hall, Kibler, Wenger, & Truxaw,
1989; Johanning, 2004, 2007; Kieran, Boileau, & Garançon, 1996; Nathan & Koedinger, 2000; Rojano, 1996).
However,   the value  of the activity  of guessing    and checking   is contested    in different   contexts within   the
mathematics education literature.  Some previous research has ascribed a potentially negative role to guessing
and  checking, for  example,   citing it as an  obstruction  to   learning  to formulate  and    solve equations  using
algebraic methods (Stacey & MacGregor, 2000).         Another problematic aspect researchers have associated with
guessing and checking is that it can be a "local tactic" that undermines the purpose of the activity of generating
expressions that capture the general form of geometric or numeric patterns (Healy & Hoyles, 1999; Lannin,
2005; Mason, 1996; Radford, 2006).       The arguments against guessing and checking in these contexts concern
students' attempts to find a rule that fits a particular instance of the pattern instead of understanding the general
relation between the members of a given pattern.      On the other hand, other research describes the potential for
developing an understanding of the rules that could correspond to given data from linear functions expressed in
a completed tabular form through engaging young students in the "Guess My Rule" game (Carraher & Earnest,
2003; Schliemann, Carraher, & Brizuela, 2001).        Other research (Bills, Wilson, & Ainley, 2006; Haspekian,
2003; Johanning, 2004, 2007; Rojano, 1996; Sutherland & Rojano, 1993) has reported that students' guessing
and checking approaches (in many instances in the context of using computer spreadsheets) for solving word
problems can be foundational to the construction of algebraic knowledge.          Such work is generally concerned
with the development of meaning for algebraic symbolism through work with specific numerical instantiations
of relationships described   in problem   contexts   before algebraic   notation  is  introduced.    This instructional
approach directly responds to the literature that highlights the complexity of the concept of variable and the
difficulty that students have in developing meaning for symbolic algebraic notation       (Heck, 2001; MacGregor &
Stacey,  1997; Philipp,  1992;  Schoenfeld   &  Arcavi,   1988).   However,    beyond   the potential   for  developing
meaning for algebraic symbolism, it appears that the activity of solving algebra word problems using "guessing
and  checking"  has largely  been  unexplored   as  a potential   resource  to build  upon  in   constructing algebraic
knowledge around how variables co-vary in functional relationships and the rate of change of functions.
         In this paper, I discuss two contrasting episodes of a pre-algebra student, Liam, using purposeful and
systematic guessing  and   checking   recorded  in a  chart (a  "Guess  and    Check  chart")    to solve algebra word
problems with the underlying structure: "For a given y, m, and b, find x such that y=mx+b." The first episode
provides a baseline view of the student engaged in purposeful guessing and checking. In this initial episode, the
student deliberately uses the results from previous guesses to inform subsequent guesses. Over the course of the
sessions from  which   the  focal  episodes  are extracted,  Liam's   purposeful     guessing    and checking   strategy
unfolded into the discovery of a deterministic and essentially algebraic algorithm for finding the solution to any
of the word problems from the sessions. The second episode examines how Liam uses his algorithm to solve a
particular word problem. In the second episode, inputs and corresponding outputs from trial values are treated as
data about the  underlying  linear function  in  the  problem  context.    Using the data generated from two trial
input/output pairs, Liam is able to predict the correct next "guess." Liam's algorithm hinges upon determining

                                                                                                                            1-
         the rate of change between the two trial input/output pairs. Knowing the rate of change allows him to establish
         how much the output would increase or decrease when the input was changed by one. Hence, starting from
         either of the trial input/output pairs, Liam can figure out how to alter the input value so that it achieves the target
         output.

       Data Collection & Methodology
                   Liam (a pseudonym) was a pre-algebra student (age 13), who had just completed a year-long traditional
         pre-algebra  course.  Liam   enjoyed  mathematics     and approached    solving the  problems    in the sessions  in
         remarkably intuitive and reflective ways. He was unusually articulate in discussions of his work.     He frequently
         took the opportunity to check his work, reflect on his solution process, and was very interested in efficiency.
         Liam participated in a total of six "tutorial-style" sessions, each approximately one hour in length.       In these
         sessions, he  solved  multiple word   problems    of similar underlying  structure.  The first session  was  a pre-
         assessment and the last session was a post-assessment.    The contrasting episodes examined in this paper come
         from session   two and session  five. "Episode    One"  examines    how Liam    uses a Guess   and  Check   chart to
         organize a trial and error solution strategy for solving a particular word problem. "Episode Two" is taken from a
         later problem solving session, during which Liam articulates an algorithm for determining the solution to any of
         the word problems he has been given.    For each of the six sessions, both video and audio records were collected
         and student work artifacts were saved for analysis.  Audio from all six sessions was transcribed and the resulting
         transcript was annotated with the relevant gestures and actions upon chart forms using the corresponding video
         records and student work artifacts. Nine episodes over the course of the six sessions were identified as relevant
         to Liam's refinement of the "guessing and checking" approach to solving problems.
                   The instructional content of the sessions was designed to parallel instruction described in the CPM
         (College  Preparatory Mathematics)    curriculum   (Kysh,  Sallee,  & Hoey,  2003).  CPM   is  a "reform-oriented"
         curriculum that was designed to align with the Principles and Standards for School Mathematics published by
         the National Council of Teachers of Mathematics (NCTM, 2000) in the United States. Solving word problems
         by organizing guessing and checking in charts is initially encouraged in the CPM curriculum.          Guessing and
         checking in chart forms is positioned as a way to develop meaning for algebraic symbolism before students are
         introduced  to equation-based  approaches   for   solving word    problems. The  overarching   goal  of the tutorial
         sessions  was  to explore on a  small scale with   individual students  over  a medium   length  of  time, how    the
         transition from guess and check chart-based problem solving strategies to equation-modeling strategies could be
         supported when following the materials and guidelines in the CPM curriculum. I was influenced in the design
         and implementation of the instructional sessions by my experience the previous academic year as a participant-
         observer in a classroom where Guess and Check charts were used.          The data that is presented in this paper
         (Liam's discovery of a deterministic and essentially algebraic algorithm for solving the word problems in the
         sessions) was not a planned part of the instructional activities.

       EPISODE ONE: Liam engages in purposeful "guessing and checking"
                   At the beginning of the sessions, Liam was using informal methods, including guessing and checking,
         to solve word problems.   From the very beginning, Liam was making purposeful decisions about how to choose
         his next guesses as he solved problems. During the second instructional session, I asked Liam to start recording
         his sequences of trial solutions in a chart form. I introduced some basic conventions that I wanted him to follow
         when constructing such charts. The conventions included naming a column for each of the quantities that the
         problem statement gives relational information about (in this case, the height and the base of the rectangle),
         including a column for the given constraint on these quantities (in this case, the perimeter of the rectangle), and
         including a column to denote whether a given trial value was too low or too high.        We decided that an "up
         arrow" would mean that the trial value was too high and a "down arrow" would mean that the trial value was too
         low. The following data excerpt comes from session two and is the first time Liam solved a word problem using
         a guess and check chart. The problem he was working on was:

         The base of a rectangle is 3 more than twice the height. If the perimeter of the rectangle is 60 inches, find the
         height and the base of the rectangle.

1-0
                                                                      Height    base          Perimeter             60
                                                                                                                    check
                                                                      18        2(18)+3=39    36+(39+39)=114        n
                                                                      10        2(10)+3=23    20+46=66              n
                                                                      8         2(8)+3=19     8+8+19+19=54          p
                                                                      9         2(9)+3=21     9+9+21+21=60          =

         Figure 1. Liam's (original) Guess and Check chart for episode one and a typed version of his work

         In terms of the underlying linear function, this problem would be: "Find x so that 6x+6=60." In working on
this problem, Liam chooses an initial guess of 18 inches.     He considers changing it to 20, noting that he knows it's a
bit too high, but then decides to go with his initial guess of 18.  In the middle of the calculations for the perimeter of
a rectangle with a height of 18 inches he notes "Oh. So it's actually a lot lower.            I just realized that."   As he
continues to write out the calculation for 18, he conjectures that the height is 6 inches, noting "So basically, you try
to double this [the height] then double that [the base] then add them [the doubled height and doubled base] to try to
get 60." "This is way too much" he says as he is finishing the calculation for 18.         The interviewer asks him about
how much too high it was. He says, "Uh, it's almost twice as much.        So I'll try it with 10."  After working through
the calculation for 10, he concludes that it is a little too high and says that he wants to try it with 8. He writes out the
calculations for a height of 8 in the chart, concluding [since 8 is too low] "It's probably nine." When the interviewer
asks him how he knew this, Liam says "Well, it was actually definitely 9 if this [the result for a guess of 8] was too
low and this [the result for a guess of 10] was too high.  Unless it was a decimal number."
         The above episode is illustrative of some important ways in which Liam's initial activity with Guess and
Check  charts  differs from the   activity of  a student engaged   in   "un-purposeful"    guessing and    checking.   If we
consider just the first guess of 18 that Liam specified for the height of the rectangle, there are several possible
rationales for choosing a next guess.    For example,

   1.    He could   notice  that he gets   114 inches  for the perimeter   and  then  decide  to simply    choose any  other
         number  that  is not  18   as a next  guess.  (This  would be   an   example  of  "un-purposeful"     guessing   and
         checking).
   2.    He could notice that 114 is greater than 60 and from this decide to choose a next guess that is less than 18.
   3.    He could notice that 114 is a lot greater than 60 and from this decide to choose a next guess that is a lot
         smaller than 18.
   4.    He could notice that 114 is about twice as much as 60 and decide that he should reduce his guess of 18 by
         roughly a factor of 2.
   5.    He could notice that 114 is a little less than twice as much as 60 and decide that he should reduce his guess
         of 18 by a little less than a factor of 2.

         Note that criterion 5 includes a scalar judgment (a little more than) in addition to noticing a proportional
relationship (twice as much) and is also consistent with choosing 10 as a next guess rather than 8.            In the above
episode, Liam may have used a criterion similar to either the fourth or fifth criterion listed above when choosing his
next guess of 10. Now observe the last three rows in the chart that Liam constructed above.          Liam explained that
after he had found that a guess of 10 yielded a value for the perimeter that was too high and that a guess of 8 gave a
perimeter that  was too   low,   he knew   that  the  correct value for   the height   would  be   "probably   nine."   This
"sandwiching" idea is yet another example of how a student might use information from previous guesses to inform
the choice of a next guess. For each trial value, he considers both how far off and in which direction from the target
value he was each time.    Additionally, considerations about how far off he was from the target value may be given
in both scalar and proportional terms. This discussion is meant to demonstrate that a student might be making a
number of mathematically consequential observations in the course of choosing a next guess.

EPISODE TWO: Liam discovers a deterministic, algebraic algorithm
         The second focal episode is taken from the fifth instructional session.        Between session two and session
five, Liam  had more   experience   solving   algebra  word   problem   using guessing    and checking     and recording  his

                                                                                                                              1-1
        sequence of guesses in the charts. In the intervening sessions, we had also been considering how to encapsulate the
        meaning  of the relationships captured   in the chart using   symbolic  unknowns and  formulating equations.  This
        usually involved first solving the problems using guessing and checking recorded in the charts and then thinking
        about how to use this to formulate an appropriate equation to solve. The emergence of the algorithm that we explore
        in this section was not a planned part of the instructional intervention.   In this episode, Liam is working on the
        following problem:

        The sum of three consecutive integers is 414.   Find the three integers.

                The problem, in terms of the underlying linear function, would be: "Find x so that 3x+3=414." In this
        episode, Liam's artifacts have been modified so that the reader can see what his work looked like as he was solving
        the problem and describing his thinking.

        1. Liam                 I'm gonna guess one hundred-thirty-five.
        2. Interviewer          Okay.

                                (There     is a pause   in talking as Liam   is engaged in making the chart template  with
                                columns labeled "1", "2", "3", "Sum", "Ch" and labeling his "target" of 414 above
                                the "Sum" label.)

                                       Figure 2.  Liam's modified Guess and Check chart, 1

        3. Interviewer          Okay.
        4. Liam                 408. So, that's a bit too low.
        5. Interviewer          Okay.
        6. Liam                 I guess 140. And the number that I'm aiming for is... Wait, you could do that when you
                                have two... [rows], okay 140.

                                       Figure 3. Liam's modified Guess and Check chart, 2

        7. Interviewer          So, what were you thinking of doing right there?

        8. Liam                 Well, compare the ­ like how much off this number was [indicates 408, the result of his
                                first calculation], and compare it to a different guess [indicates 140 and then the whole
                                second row (currently blank except for 140 in the "1" column) possibly referring to the
                                process of working through the calculation with 140] and look at that [points to currently
                                blank entry in the sum column in the second row], see how much off it was, then you
                                could get this [pointing to the sum of 414 in the problem statement].

        9. Interviewer          Okay, and what did you say=

1-
10. Liam                    Like the difference between this result [pointing to 408 in sum column] and this result
                            [indicating the second row of sum column, which is currently blank] and see how far
                            apart these [pointing to the "inputs" 135 and 140] were, so you could tell how many of
                            these [pointing to the entries in the "1" column] equaled how many of these [pointing to
                            the entries in the "Sum" column].

          In the above exchanges, Liam restates his approach, now in terms of the particular numbers that he has
chosen. Liam is focusing attention on relationships between input/output pairs from the column labeled "1" (the
input) and the column labeled "Sum" (the output). His gestures also indicate that he is concerned with the number
that occupies this position rather than focused on the particular value that happens to be currently occupying that
position.  This is an important point--he is describing a general algorithm that involves comparing input/output
pairs, not specific numerical calculations.
          In lines 11-18 (not displayed), the interviewer asks again for clarification about what Liam wants to do.
Liam says "I remember how to do it with two of them." The interviewer (who is still trying to understand Liam's
proposed approach) interprets this as a reference to a previous problem that Liam has solved with a sum of two
consecutive odd integers, not to a further elaboration of the idea of using the inputs and outputs recorded in two
rows to   predict the value of the first integer   that will achieve the sum of 414.  [Upon later examination of the
transcript, it is clear that Liam is describing how to use the rate of change to predict the value of the first integer that
will achieve the sum of 414]. The interviewer suggests that for the moment they just continue with the calculation
for 140.  In turn 19, Liam has completed the calculation for 140 as the first number.

                                Figure 4. Liam's modified Guess and Check chart, 3

19. Liam                    Yeah. (having verified the calculations for a guess of 140 with the calculator). That's a
                            little bit too high.

20. Interviewer             Okay.

21. Liam                    I said that was 408 [results from input of 135] and this 423 [results from input of 140].
                            The difference of this is [gesturing between 408 and 423 in the "Sum" column]--it's 15,
                            [now moves hand over to column labeled "1"].
                            So for every one of these [points to entries in the "1" column], it's 3 there [points to
                            "Sum" column].
                            Okay, so I'm trying to get 414.
                            So... (pauses to think).
                            Ah. The difference between these two [indicates 423, the result of the calculation for 140,
                            and 414, the target value] is 9,
                            so this should be less [points to 140 in the "1" column].

          In turn 21, Liam is now explaining how he is trying to figure out how to predict the answer while he is the
process of working with specific numbers.    He is mapping from his "general" idea of how this process should work,
to how it works in the case with these particular values.

                                                                                                                             1-
                                                                                                                      414          Ch
                                                                              1         2             3               Sum
                                                                            135     135+1=136    135+2=137      137+135+135=408    p
                                                                            140     140+1=141    140+2=142      140+141+142=423    n
                                                                            137     137+1=138    137+2=139      137+138+139=414    =

                          Figure 5. Liam's final (original) Guess and Check chart with a typed version of his work

         There is a pause in talking as Liam completes the next row of the chart using his predicted guess of 137 (since he
         had decided in turn 21 that he needed to adjust his guess by lowering it from 140 to 137). In turns 22-25, there is a
         brief exchange about whether his calculations for 137 achieved 414.

         26. Interviewer             Good. So can you recap your reasoning?          How did you decide that 137 was the best
                                     guess?

         27. Liam                    Well, it isn't really a guess once you get to the third one! [gesturing between the entries
                                     in the "sum" column]
                                     I took 408 and 423. [pointing to 408 and 423 in the sum column, as he is explaining]
                                     I have the difference between those [between 423 and 408], which is 15.
                                     The difference between these two [pointing to 135 and 140 in the "1" column] is 5,
                                     and 15 divided by 5 is 3.
                                     So, that means that for every one that this [pointing to 140 in the "1" column] changes,
                                     [moves hand over to the "sum" column] the answer changes 3.
                                     So, then I took 423 and I subtracted that [moves hand up to problem statement to indicate
                                     the target value of the sum: 414]; the difference was 9.
                                     3 times 3 is nine, [moves hand over to 140 in the "1" column] so I knew it would have to
                                     be 3 less than this [pointing again to 140 in the "1" column], and yeah.

                   In contrast to the purposeful activity described in episode one, Liam has developed a more sophisticated,
         interpolation approach to solving the problem in the second episode.       He first computes the outputs that correspond
         to two test values.  He then uses this data to determine the rate of change between the input-output pairs.            At this
         point, he chooses to determine the absolute difference between a particular output (here, he chose the second output)
         and the target output. By dividing the absolute difference by the rate of change, he can determine how many units he
         must adjust the input by in order to achieve the target output.
                   Liam's comment "It isn't really a guess once you get to the third one!" at the beginning of turn 27 is very
         telling. It gives evidence that already at this point, Liam understands that his approach gives a way to determine
         solutions to a certain class of word problems, not just find the answer to this particular word problem. It is worth
         noting   that after the  episode   described here,   Liam  spontaneously    deploys   his   new,   general algorithm   as  he
         determines that it is appropriate when he is solving future problems using a Guess and Check chart. The awareness
         of the generality of applicability of the approach is an extremely important distinction between Liam's activity in
         episode  one   and  his  activity in episode two.    Liam's activity   in  episode  one   is dependent   on  the  continuing
         refinement    of previously specified  guesses   as he converges  to   the solution  to the  word   problem. In  contrast,  in
         episode two Liam has found a general method for finding the solution to any of the word problems in the sessions.
         Though Liam is still performing computations on particular test values, the choice of the particular values is not
         important.    Liam has discovered that what is important is that he can figure out the rate of change between the two
         test values he chooses.

       Discussion and Conclusions
                   The aim of this paper has been to highlight opportunities for the development of algebraic thinking around
         the concepts of variable, function, and rate of change from purposeful guessing and checking activities. The focal
         episodes  described   in this  paper  show   that  Liam's activity evolved    from   "guessing     and checking"  to   "linear
         interpolation."   At the beginning of the sessions, the guessing and checking activity was focused around determining
         whether   or  not a particular guess   or  trial value satisfied the constraints  given   in   the problem  and  then  using
         information   about  the results  of that guess  to inform the   choice of  the  next trial  value. This approach   led to  a

1-
sequence of guesses that would eventually converge to the solution to the problem.      At the end of the sessions, the
guessing and checking activity had evolved into using particular test values to collect data about the rate of change
of the underlying linear function given in the problem contexts.      Liam then used this data (in an optimal way) to
accurately determine solutions to algebra word problems.     Furthermore, Liam was aware of the power of his method
and confident in its applicability and use in other similar contexts.
         A fundamental aspect that underlies the work presented here is the role of the chart structure in mediating
Liam's guessing and checking activity and the construction of his algorithm. Organizing a record of previous trials
using the structure and organization of Guess and Check charts evidently supported both Liam's initial activity of
refining a sequence of guesses and also Liam's later activity involving using information about how the inputs and
outputs co-vary to determine solutions to the word problems.        The meaning that can be constructed for variable,
function, and rate of change through the examination of the patterns between particular numerical instantiations
could  easily be   suppressed   or overlooked  in an   activity involving guessing  and checking   that did not include
organizing this information in a chart form.     At a basic level, the use of the "check" column to record whether a
guess was too high or too low distinguishes the activity with the charts from un-purposeful guessing and checking
activity where one might only note whether a particular guess was right or wrong. Further research is needed to
understand the nature of the support that Guess and Check charts can provide in word problem solving activities. In
addition to the affordances of the structural organization of the chart, it seems likely that the activity itself of solving
a problem by iterative guessing and checking supported Liam's coordination between the inputs and outputs that he
was recording in the table as he solved the problem.
         The research in this paper indicates that the context of a Guess and Check chart for organizing purposeful
guessing and checking word problem solving strategies has potential for supporting the development of algebraic
thinking around the concepts of variable, function, and rate of change. Upon reviewing Liam's activity presented in
this paper, one might well wonder what the prospects for other students would be if they were to engage in similar
activities. It would be premature and unwarranted to expect that other students would necessarily have the same
experience as Liam.     Future work examining the experiences of other students as they work with Guess and Check
charts to solve algebra word problems is needed.    However, especially because Liam's discovery of this algorithm is
an impressive achievement, it would be of significant interest to study in more detail how he came to construct this
algorithm in order to inform future instructional design.

References
Bednarz, N. & Janvier, B. (1996). Emergence and development of algebra as a problem solving tool: Continuities
         and  discontinuities   with arithmetic. In N.  Bednarz,  C.Kieran,  &  L. Lee  (Eds.), Approaches  to  algebra.
         Perspectives for research and leaching (pp. 115-136). Boston, MA: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Bills, L.,  Ainley, J., &   Wilson,  K. (2006).  Modes   of algebraic  communication--Moving      from  Spreadsheets to
         Standard Notation.     For the Learning of Mathematics. 26(1), 41-47.
Carraher, D. & Earnest, D. (2003). Guess My Rule: Revisited. In N. Pateman, B. Dougherty, & J. Zilliox (Eds.).
         Proceedings of the 2003 Joint Meeting of PME and PME-NA. College of Education, University of Hawai'i:
         Honolulu, HI, Vol 2., pp. 173-180.
Hall, R., Kibler, D., Wegner. E. & Truxaw, C. (1989). Exploring the episodic structure of story problem solving.
         Cognition and Instruction, 6, 223-283.
Haspekian, M. (2003). Between arithmetic and algebra: a space for the spreadsheet? Contribution to an instrumental
         approach.   Proceedings of the Third Conference of the European Society for Research in Mathematics
Education,   Pisa,  Italy, Università di Pisa,   Thematic Working     Group  9.  Retrieved   November   15, 2007  from
         http://www.dm.unipi.it/~didattica/CERME3/proceedings.
Healy,  L.  &  Hoyles,  C.  (1999).   Visual and  Symbolic   Reasoning    in Mathematics:    Making Connections with
         Computers? Mathematical Thinking and Learning 1(1), 59-84.
Heck, A. (2001). Variables in Computer Algebra, Mathematics, and Science. The International Journal of Computer
         Algebra in Mathematics Education, 8(3), 195 - 221.
Johanning,   D. I.  (2004).  Supporting  the development    of  algebraic thinking in middle school: A   closer look at
         students' informal strategies. Journal of Mathematical Behavior, 23, 371-388.
Johanning,   D. I.  (2007).  Is There   Something   to be Gained   from   Guessing?   Middle School  Students'  Use  of
         Systematic Guess and Check. School Science and Mathematics, 107(4), 123-33.
Kieran, C., Boileau, A. & Garançon, M. (1996). In N. Bednarz, C. Kieran, & L. Lee (Eds.), Approaches to algebra:
         Perspectives for research and teaching (pp. 239-293). Boston. MA: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Kysh, J., Sallee, T. & Hoey, B. (2003). College Preparatory Mathematics 1 (Algebra 1). CPM Educational Program.
         Sacramento, CA.

                                                                                                                             1-
         MacGregor, M. & Stacey, K. (1997). Students' understanding of algebraic notation: 11-15. Educational Studies in
                  Mathematics, 33, 1-19.
         Mason, J. (1996). Expressing generality and roots of algebra. In N. Bednarz, C. Kieran. & L. Lee (Eds.), Approaches
                  to algebra:  Perspectives for research   and  teaching   (pp. 65-86). Dordrecht,    The Netherlands:  Kluwer
                  Academic.
         Nathan, M. J. & Koedinger, K. R. (2000).      Teachers' and researchers' beliefs about the development of algebraic
                  reasoning. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 31(2), 168-190.
         National Council of Teachers of Mathematics. (2000). Principles and standards for school mathematics. Reston,
                  VA: Author.
         Philipp, R.A. (1992). The many uses of algebraic variables. The Mathematics Teacher, 85(7), 557-561.
         Radford, L. (2006). Algebraic Thinking and the Generalization of Patterns: A Semiotic Perspective. In S. Alatorre, J.
         L. Cortina, M. Sáiz,  A. Méndez    (Eds.), Proceedings   of  the 28th Conference   of the International  Group for the
                  Psychology   of Mathematics   Education,    North   American   Chapter,   Mérida:    Universidad  Pedagógica
                  Nacional, November 9 - 12, Vol. 1, pp. 2-21.
         Rojano,  T. (1996). Problem  solving in    a spreadsheet environment.   In N.  Bednarz,   C. Kieran, &  L. Lee (Eds.),
                  Approaches   to algebra:  Perspectives  for research    and  teaching (pp.   137-145).  Boston. MA:   Kluwer
                  Academic Publishers.
         Schoenfeld, A. & Arcavi, A.  (1988). On the meaning of variable. The Mathematics Teacher, 81(6). 420-427.
         Schliemann, A.D., Carraher, D.W. & Brizuela, B.M. (2001). When tables become function tables. Proceedings of
                  the XXV Conference of the International Group for the Psychology of Mathematics Education, Utrecht, The
                  Netherlands, Vol. 4, pp. 145-152.
         Stacey,  K.  & MacGregor,    M.   (2000).     Learning   the Algebraic  Method     of Solving   Problems,  Journal  of
                  Mathematical Behavior. 18(2), 149-167.
         Sutherland, R. & Rojano, T. (1993).  A spreadsheet approach to solving algebra problems.      Journal of Mathematical
                  Behavior.12(4),                                                                                       353-8.

       Acknowledgments
         I would like to thank Alan Schoenfeld, Andy diSessa, Randi Engle and the members of the functions research group
         at UC Berkeley for their support and feedback. The research in this paper is based in part on work supported by the
         National Science  Foundation  Grant    No.   ESI-0119732     to the Diversity  in Mathematics    Education Center  for
         Learning and Teaching.

1-
