Effects of Representational Guidance during Computer-Supported
                                         Collaborative Learning

Jeroen Janssen, Gijsbert Erkens, Paul A. Kirschner, Gellof Kanselaar, Research Centre Learning in Interaction,
                      Utrecht University, P.O. Box 80140, 3508 TC, Utrecht, The Netherlands
             Email: j.j.h.m.janssen@uu.nl, g.erkens@uu.nl, p.a.kirschner@uu.nl, g.kanselaar@uu.nl

         Abstract:    This   research    investigated  the role   of   representational   guidance   during   the
         construction   of  argumentative    diagrams.    We used    a design that   compared     two  tools  that
         differed with respect to the representational guidance they offered: The Graphical Debate-tool
         offered more guidance than the Textual Debate-tool. The results show that groups that worked
         with  the  Graphical   Debate-tool    constructed  representations   of  higher  quality,  wrote  better
         essays, and performed better on a knowledge post-test.

Introduction
         External representations (ERs) are graphical or diagrammatic representations that represent information
about a  topic. The   active  construction   of ERs,   is thought  to   stimulate deeper    and   more mindful    cognitive
processing, resulting in larger learning gains (Cox, 1999). These ERs can be constructed individually, or by
groups of students. Collaborative construction of ERs may link the benefits of collaborative learning, such as
fostering positive social interaction, peer support, and critical discussion, to the benefits of constructing ERs.
Unfortunately, this has not always been shown to be the case. Several researchers have reported mixed or even
negative results when students collaboratively construct ERs (e.g., Suthers & Hundhausen, 2003).
         Representational    guidance    refers to the fact  that different ERs   are   capable   of expressing    different
information  (e.g.,   cause and   effect relationships versus   temporal   relationships),   make   different information
salient, or stimulate   different cognitive  processes    than other   ERs  (Suthers    & Hundhausen,     2003)    and may
account for the mixed findings on the benefits of co-constructing ERs. Argumentative diagrams constitute a
specific  type  of  ERs. They     are usually   embedded    in  computer-supported      collaborative    learning  (CSCL)
environments and are used to stimulate students to explicate their claims and arguments. There is evidence that
representational guidance influences the effects that argumentative diagrams have on students' reasoning, use
and quality of argumentation, and learning (e.g., Schwarz, Neuman, Gil, & Ilya, 2003; Suthers & Hundhausen,
2003). Because most research focused on the argumentative processes students engage in while co-constructing
these diagrams,     and the  quality   of  the  co-constructed    diagrams,   little is known     about  the  effects  that
representational guidance may have on individual learning outcomes. The aim of this research is therefore to
investigate the role of representational guidance by comparing the effects of two argumentative diagrams that
differ with respect to the guidance they offer on the quality of the representations constructed, the quality of the
group products (an essay), and students' performance on a knowledge post-test.

Co-constructing a Historical Debate Using the Debate-tool
         In this study, students studied the way Christians were treated or maltreated in the Roman Empire.
However,    there  is some   debate   concerning   the magnitude     of these persecutions.     On   the one  hand,    some
historians and the Catholic Church maintain that the persecutions were severe and a great number of Christians
became martyrs because they were killed for religious reasons (Martyrs position). On the other hand, there is
evidence  this number    was  greatly  and deliberately   exaggerated   by  the  church   and Christians   as propaganda
meant to inspire Christians and to increase the number of converts (Propaganda position). In this study, the
participating students were given a number of historical and contemporary information sources and were asked
to analyze  and   reconstruct this  debate   by co-constructing   a  representation   of  it with  a Debate-tool   and  by
collectively writing an argumentative essay based on their findings. In the Debate-tool and the essay students
were required to mention and discuss the arguments put forth by proponents of both positions. This required
students to process and synthesize the information given in the sources.
         Figure   1 shows   screenshots   of both  versions  of the  Debate-tool.    In the  left screenshot  showing   the
Graphical Debate-tool, the boxes labeled Martyrs and Propaganda on the edge of the inner circle represent both
positions of the debate. While working with the Graphical Debate-tool, students can add arguments (the boxes
on the edge of the second circle) to either of the positions. Students can also add information that supports or
refutes the added arguments. This is represented by the boxes on the edge of the outer circle. Elements that
represent supporting information have a white background, while elements that represent refuting information
have a grey background. In the Textual Debate-tool students also add arguments to the corresponding positions.
No distinction is made however, between arguments, supports, and refutations. Instead, information is added to
the Textual Debate-tool in two lists. The biggest difference between the Graphical and the Textual Debate-tool
concerns the representational guidance they offer. The Graphical Debate-tool uses more visualization techniques

                                                                                                                               3-
       to make information salient and to help students complete the representation more effectively and efficiently.
       The Graphical Debate-tool  for example,   discerns between arguments, supports,  and refutations. This  feature
       may  guide students more   to search for  supporting and refuting information,   and to  formulate   arguments.
       Furthermore, the Graphical    Debate-tool visualizes how   well positions are    supported  by arguments    and
       supporting information. When a position is located closer to the flag, it is better supported by arguments. This
       may help students to draw a conclusion and thus may contribute to computational offloading (Ainsworth, 1999).

                  Figure 1. Screenshot of the Graphical Debate-tool (left) and Textual Debate-tool (right).

               The Graphical Debate-tool also visualizes students' progress through the problem better. Although both
       versions give an idea about the balance between both positions (e.g., Has one position been given more attention
       than the other?) the Graphical Debate-tool makes it clearer whether students tended to focus on certain elements
       (i.e., arguments, supports, or refutations). Students can infer this from the number and type of boxes that have
       been added to the representation. In the Graphical Debate-tool students have the option to rate the quality of
       arguments, supports, and refutations. The rating functionality of the Graphical Debate-tool serves two purposes.
       It stimulates students to think about and discuss the importance of arguments and may help them to see which
       arguments are more important than others. Concluding, the Graphical Debate-tool offers more representational
       guidance than the Textual Debate-tool does. The aim of this study was to examine whether this would lead to
       better group and individual performance.

      Results
               We used a single-factor between subjects design (Graphical versus Textual Debate-tool). We randomly
       assigned three history classes to the Graphical Debate condition (79 students in 24 groups), and two classes to
       the Textual Debate condition (45 students in 15 groups). We rated all of the items (arguments, supports, and
       refutations) placed in the tool by the students on a 5-point scale and found that groups in the Graphical Debate
       condition made representations of significantly higher quality than groups in the Textual Debate condition. We
       also analyzed the quality of the essays written by the groups. No significant differences were found between the
       two conditions with respect to number of topics covered in the essays and average conceptual quality of the
       essays, but average grounds quality was significantly higher in the Graphical Debate condition. Finally, we
       found that students in the Graphical  Debate  condition performed  better on   a knowledge   posttest  than did
       students in the Textual Debate condition. The results of this study therefore show the advantage of the Graphical
       over the Textual Debate-tool and highlight the importance of representational guidance.

      References
       Ainsworth, S. (1999). The functions of multiple representations. Computers & Education, 33, 131-152.
       Cox, R. (1999). Representation construction, externalised cognition and individual differences. Learning and
               Instruction, 9, 343-363.
       Schwarz, B. B., Neuman, Y., Gil, J., & Ilya, M. (2003). Construction of collective and individual knowledge in
               argumentative activity. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 12, 219-256.
       Suthers, D. D., & Hundhausen, C. D. (2003). An experimental study of the effects of representational guidance
               on collaborative learning processes. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 12, 183-218.

      Acknowledgments
       This project was funded by NWO, the Netherlands Organisation for Scientific Research (project 411-02-121).

3-
