    The effect of disciplinary identity on interdisciplinary learning
                               during scientific group meetings

                          Anat Yarden and Nir Esterman, Department of Science Teaching,
                               Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot 76100, Israel
                          E-mail: anat.yarden@weizmann.ac.il, nir.esterman@gmail.com

          Abstract:    Learning   to  become  an    interdisciplinary   scientist will be  needed   in  order  to
          participate in the scientific research of the future. It is therefore of great importance to learn
          about  the   challenges graduate   students,   with   various disciplinary   backgrounds,   face when
          carrying out interdisciplinary scientific research. We used the weekly group meetings of an
          interdisciplinary research group, in the field of systems biology, as a platform to probe the
          challenges to learning interdisciplinary science. Group meetings were observed and interviews
          were carried out with the group members. A visible, if sometimes subtle, difference between
          the  challenges   facing   biologists  and   those    facing  physicists  was   identified.  Physicists
          encountered difficulties in grasping the biological knowledge organization; while biologists
          found the models suggested by physicists over simplistic. The views of the group members on
          the nature   of the disciplines  of physics    and  biology   complement    our understanding    of the
          possible causes of some of the identified challenges.

Introduction
          Contemporary      scientific  research    is  becoming    increasingly    more   interdisciplinary   in   nature.
Innovations are moving beyond disciplinary borders while funding agencies are also promoting interdisciplinary
studies (Kafatos & Eisner 2004; Sung et al. 2003). Thus, new interdisciplinary fields of study emerged in the
recent years.    For example,   bioinformatics,  which     combines     elements  from  biology  and   computer     science
(Luscombe     et al. 2001), and   systems  biology     which  combines   approaches    from  biology,  computer    science,
engineering and physics (Aderem 2005; Allen & Cowley 2004), and which has its paradigmatic roots in systems
thinking (Gutierrez et al. 2005). Thus, learning to become an interdisciplinary scientist will be needed in order
to fully participate in the scientific research of the future (Bialek & Botstein 2004). However, most scientists in
training today are not involved in an undergraduate curricula that prepare them to think like interdisciplinary
researchers (Bialek & Botstein 2004; Gross 2004). Most postsecondary studies are disciplinary in nature, and
students who wish to carry out interdisciplinary research face significant cultural barriers such as differences in
the scientific   language  used,  the  approaches   to  scientific research, epistemologies,    learning styles,   teaching
styles and disciplinary discourses (Ares 2004; Bradbeer 1999; Sung et al. 2003).
          There are two possible ways for developing an interdisciplinary scientist: either the scientist can become
proficient in one discipline and then cross a disciplinary border to another field, as is often the case today, or he can
study an interdisciplinary curriculum in an earlier stage of his scientific career (National Research Council [NRC]
2003). Until interdisciplinary curricula will become widespread in undergraduate education, most graduate students
who  wish   to   become    interdisciplinary  scientists   face several   challenges,  including  mastering   disciplinary
knowledge and language to a level that will permit them to contribute to different disciplines as well as reconciling
conflicting methodologies,    epistemologies    and  paradigms     (Golde &  Gallagher    1999). It is therefore   of great
importance  to   learn about  the challenges  graduate   students,  with  various  disciplinary  backgrounds,  face   when
carrying out interdisciplinary scientific research in the course of their studies.
          Learning science at the graduate level is not limited to formal course work. An important part of such
learning occurs during the daily scientific work. This learning is mainly a result of talking, reading and engaging
in the different aspects of the process of scientific research. Not only is such learning inseparable from doing the
actual research, but also individual learning is inseparable from the collective learning that takes place in a
typical research group. Such learning usually occurs by undergoing enculturation into a practicing community of
scientists. Communities of practice provide the setting for the social interactions needed to engage in a dialogue
with others and to see diverse perspectives on any issue (Brown 1994; Lave & Wegner 1991). In a scientific
research community of practice, many of the interactions between members have an intrinsic learning aspect.
Some of the learning that occurs within this community is therefore cooperative or collaborative in nature.
          Group meetings of scientific research groups were previously reported to be central for the generation
of  ideas and    conceptual   change   of group  members      (Dunbar   1997).    The  group meetings    are  not  only an
environment    for   advancing scientific  research    but also an  important  learning   environment.   In   this learning
environment    every   group   member,    in  turn, teaches   the  other  group   members    about  his  research   and is
challenged by them when they disagree with or misunderstand him. Each participant teaches what he knows best
- his own research. Moreover, participation in group meetings was shown to be effective in assuring immersion

                                                                                                                              2-
         into the culture, language, technology and literature of the scientific disciplines involved in interdisciplinary
         research (Sung et al. 2003).
                  Explaining to someone else is considered a highly effective form of elaboration (Webb 1989). Students
         who engage     in elaborated   explanations   to  others,  were  found  to  gain  the  most   from  cooperative   learning
         activities (Webb   1989).   This  may   be  explained   in  part by the   process   which the  person   who   delivers   an
         elaborated    explanation undergoes.   This   process   involves  clarification and   reorganization   of the  material  to
         oneself  which    allows  for the discovery   of  gaps  and  discrepancies   in ones   knowledge.   It may   also  include
         formulating   the explanations    in more   than  one way,   generating   new   examples, linking   the   examples  to  the
         students'  prior  knowledge,    and  using  several  visual  representations.   All of  these are  likely to  expand    and
         solidify the  understanding    of the material   for the  one giving the   explanation   (Webb    1989).  Although     most
         studies  on   cooperative learning   were   conducted   on  the  primary  and   secondary educational     levels, graduate
         students also found cooperative learning useful in increasing both conceptual understanding and interpersonal
         and communication skills (Towns & Grant 1997).
                  So far, most of the studies that examined learning in research laboratories focused on scientists and
         scientific groups with a well defined disciplinary identity. Some studies concentrated on developmental biology
         laboratories or laboratories working with pathogens (Dunbar 1995), others on molecular biology laboratories
         (Amann & Knorr-Cetina 1989; Latour & Woolgar 1986), and yet others on high energy physics laboratories
         (Traweek 1988). In this study we examined the weekly group meetings of an interdisciplinary scientific research
         group as a platform to probe the challenges to science learning of the group members. We focused on events
         that occurred during group meetings since, as mentioned above, group meetings were found to be central to the
         intellectual life of scientific groups (Dunbar 1997). In addition, participation in group meetings was proven to be
         effective in assuring immersion in the culture, language, technology and literature of the scientific disciplines
         involved   in interdisciplinary   research  (Sung  et al.  2003). The   group   members'   views   on  the nature   of  the
         disciplines of physics and biology and how they influence their learning of new disciplines were also examined.

       Objectives of this study
             i)   To   characterize  the   challenges  to science  learning  during  interdisciplinary scientific  research     group
                  meetings
             ii)  To characterize the views of the research group members on the nature of physics and biology, and
                  how those views influence learning of a new discipline.

       Methodology
        Subjects
                  The subjects of the research were members of an interdisciplinary scientific research group which is a
         leader in the field of systems biology, in an academic research institute. Systems biology, as practiced by this
         research   group,  focuses  on  investigating    biological systems from    a physical   perspective,  thus  this  group's
         research   is aimed  at  finding  basic   systemic   principles  underlying  biology.   The   group includes    biologists,
         physicists, and bioinformaticians. This research group was selected on the basis of           the quality of the group's
         publications,  the significance   of  their  already  achieved   discoveries  and   the type  of  research  they  conduct
         (following Dunbar 1995). The group consisted of 20 members during the course of this research.

        Methodological approach
                  The research method used here is a qualitative-constructivist approach based on a thematic analysis
         (Shkedi 2005). Interviews were used as the primary sources of information and direct observations of group
         meetings as secondary sources of information (Shkedi 2005). Two research instruments were used during the
         interviews: a list of 53 questions and a collection of written episodes transcribed from the audio-records of the
         observed group meetings. Episodes were taken from both group meetings where the interviewee was the speaker
         and from other group meetings. The episodes were used during the interviews as a tool for promoting reflection.
                  Group    meetings    were   held  weekly.   In each  weekly    group   meeting,  one  or  two    group   members
         presented   their research    and asked   for feedback    and   suggestions.  The   research  presentation   included   the
         theoretical   and practical background     of the research   presented, the  model   and/or   the experiments     that were
         carried out, the results and when possible the conclusions. The group members could intervene at any time to
         ask questions or to comment. Often discussions deviated from the intended plan of the lecture. The group leader
         was active in both initiating and participating in the group discussions, often moving to the front of the room to
         draw on the blackboard. The meetings were audio-recorded.
                  Fourteen   interviews    were  audio-recorded    and   analyzed. Each   interviewee   (75  to  90 minutes)     was
         interviewed once. The interviews with the group members took place one week to one month following the
         presentation of their research in a group meeting. The interviews were semi-structured and in-depth (Shkedi,
         2005).   Conversations    were  prompted    by   leading  questions and   presentations   of  episodes    from  the    group
         meetings, and were open in nature.

2-
Method of analysis
        The recordings of the interviews were transcribed. The transcripts were segmented and analyzed using
the NarralizerTM software (Shkedi   &   Shkedi   2005).  The  analysis included    four   stages, as recommended      by
Shkedi (2005): `The initial stage of analysis` `The mapping stage of analysis', `The focusing stage of analysis'
and `The theoretical stage of analysis'. In each step a categorical tree was built and subsequently expanded or
refined. A meaningful extent of validity was reached by triangulation between observations in group meetings,
interviews and the   published literature. The  group   members   were  allowed    to view    and  comment    on all  the
quotes used in this study. A meaningful extent of reliability was reached by inter-rater reliability checks for the
first two stages of the analysis. The episodes were inserted into the mapping tree by another researcher using a
written description. The researchers met several times in order to refine the description and agree on the coding.
The level of match was compared for the first 35 episodes out of total 62 episodes. These 35 episodes were
inserted into 47 categories by the fellow researcher. Forty four of these insertions were matched by the primary
researcher leading to a percent match of 93.6%.

Results
Interdisciplinary challenges to learning during group meetings
        Two interdisciplinary challenges were encountered while the group members presented in their group
meetings.  The first challenge  is that the   presenter should not  assume    that all   the  listeners share   the same
background knowledge. The second challenge is that a presentation that can be understood by everybody may
not elicit an effective input to the presenter. Thus, a presenter is often torn between two conflicting forces: on
the one hand, the desire that all group members understand his presentation and on the other hand, the need to
receive meaningful feedback and criticism from the group members. Even veteran members are not sure where
such a balance can be found, as described by one of the veteran physicists:

        Take   for example  the   meeting   I gave last  week, I  started building    it  in  a way  that  [the
        biologists] could understand, but we ran into the problem of too much diversity. If I will start
        with a first lesson about dynamical systems, then the physicists in the group will go to sleep.
        Ultimately, the people from whom I expect feedback and smart insights on dynamical systems
        are the people who already dealt with dynamical systems in the past. People that see stuff for
        the first time, often have good ideas but also often not. It is hard, this heterogeneity, it is
        problematic. The result is that things are often either above your head or not interesting.

        The group leader is aware of the challenges related to presenting to such a highly diverse audience and
he requires the presenters in group meetings to be very clear, often intervening in the presentations in order to
clarify certain points. A group member described this:

        Often when someone got a little lost in building the presentation or communicating it, [the
        group  leader]  focuses   things,  shows the  correct  logical order, what's      the main   question,
        what's the basic approach and what are the significant results. Then everything fits in a much
        more   logical format.  I  feel the   contribution not only  in the   specific    content, whether    I
        understood something or not but also the presentation method. It really helps to understand
        how and on what to put emphasis and what is the best logical order to do that.

        When presented with the idea that the reason for the group leader emphasis on clear and well delivered
presentations is the result of the field of systems biology being interdisciplinary, most members agreed that
presenting to an audience composed of both biologists and physicists requires extra clarity and that this may be
the reason for the emphasis given by the group leader on the quality of the presentation. As one member said:

        I think that because [the group leader] lives in several different worlds, it is very clear to him
        that you must know how to direct the presentation or how to create a presentation which has
        some universal base that is relevant to all the groups or to as many groups as possible from
        the groups   composing    the audience.  This   is why it is so   much in     the foreground    of his
        awareness. It is very probable that if we were dealing with lets say, quantum optics and gave
        lectures to the same community ­ quantum optics people, then the whole thing wouldn't have
        been so important.

        In  addition to the aforementioned     challenges,  there was   a visible, if    sometimes   subtle,  difference
between the challenges facing biologists and those facing physicists, as described below.

                                                                                                                            2-
        Challenges facing physicists in the group
                   The  knowledge   structures  of  different disciplines often  vary (Becher  1989).  This may  explain  why
         physicists in the group reported that it is difficult for them to construct their biological knowledge in a way that
         reflects the knowledge organization of the discipline. The physicists said that they often see biology as full of
         details and that it is hard for them to locate the central details and to find a guiding logic. Possibly this challenge
         is related to the structure of knowledge in biology in general. A relatively new physicist in the group felt that he
         could not really see beyond the details of biology. Biology is presented to him, especially in text books, as a
         mass of data without organization. He was deeply frustrated by this saying:

                   I will never be as good as the biologists with quantities of data [..]. I think that I'll have a
                   problem that I will insist on understanding everything to the depth before I go to cover the
                   breadth. I really have a problem reading [biology textbooks]. I really get upset I read things
                   and I don't understand what is it they want to say.

                   Another physicist had similar opinions about biology being full of details. He added that dealing with
         many details is an expertise of biologists, not physicists saying:

                   There are many things that biologists can do better than physicists, all this thinking in terms of
                   pathways. That A activates B that inhibits C that facilitates...
                   Q. What do you find difficult here as a physicist?
                   First of all you need a good memory, all this dealing with details doesn't come naturally to
                   physicists really. But what can you do, there are lots of details in biology and what can you
                   do, there are systems in which all these details are important.

                   The first member quoted above felt that it was something in his understanding that was lacking while
         the second member believed that it is possible that all the biological details are important. The latter feeling may
         hint at a difficulty with organizing the knowledge in a meaningful way which will allow separation between
         what is important from what is less important. The group leader, a physicist with a lot of experience in biology,
         reflected on learning biology saying:

                   It is difficult to enter biology[..] There is a period when nothing is understood. Even when I
                   sit in a biological lecture it is difficult to listen to the lecture if there is no clear idea that
                   unifies all the facts.

                   It seems that even when a form of knowledge organization is presented, physicists in the group often
         find this form   of organization     somewhat  confusing. A  group   member   described  this as a different   way of
         thinking that biologists have. He dubbed it 'epistatic thinking' saying:

                   My association for biological thinking is 'epistatic thinking'. I go to a biological lecture and
                   the lecturer starts to make a chain where gene X affects something and represses gene Y and
                   then gene Z does something and something more and the chain becomes longer. But I already
                   lost the  chain of  thoughts   after two stages because    I don't have 'epistatic thinking'. The
                   biologists next to me understand this very easily.

                   Biological systems     are not only  complex  but also  unique   (Mayr  1988). The  physicists noted   their
         reluctance in learning about biological data that is a result of its high specificity to particular systems, making it
         nontransferable to other systems. One physicist referred to the issue of specificity saying:

                   The problem with all this information is that it is information on a specific gene. Now, if you
                   move to another system, then all these pieces of information on what gene interacts with what
                   gene becomes irrelevant. In Physics [..] knowledge is more modular, you can transfer it from
                   one system to the other.

                   Biological knowledge is extensive, complex and interconnected at many different levels (Fisher et al.
         2000). In  biology,  however,    the level of  interconnectivity might   make a  lack of conceptual  knowledge    and
         familiarity an interference with further learning for the physicists. Due to the high degree of connectivity in the
         structure of knowledge in biology, it is difficult to learn new things in biology without having enough prior
         knowledge   to  link to   the new    knowledge.  The  difficulty  is not only  with  understanding  the  structure of
         biological knowledge, but also with a lack of specific knowledge in biology. A physicist described how his lack
         of familiarity with the details of a system decreased his gains from biological lectures. He said that:

2-
        In systems I am more familiar with, I already know the names of 10 or 15 genes so that when
        I hear the name of a gene, I already have some association related to it. From a physical point
        of view, you are trying to make generalizations, not to give too much emphasis to a specific
        gene or gene name but to think on more general effects and what happens system-wise. [..]
        Someone who knows all the details and knows what everything is supposed to do, when he
        hears   a gene's   name  he  has   all the  associations from  all  the  interactions  he knows    these
        protein to have. I lack that, so it is difficult for me to follow.

        It is interesting to note that he attributed the problem originally to a certain degree of unwillingness of
physicists to learn specific biological details.
        Becoming      familiar with  disciplinary   language  is   one of   the   obstacles facing  an   interdisciplinary
scientist (Golde & Gallagher 1999). Some physicists felt that biology is laden with specific terminology which
takes time to grasp. This is illustrated in the following quotation from an interview with a veteran physicist from
the group:

        At  first the  terminology   was   hard  to understand.  It took  a little  time.  Once you   grasp   the
        terminology, [biology] starts to become relatively understood.

Challenges facing biologists in the group
        A lack of strong quantitative training in the education of biologists has been reported recently (Bialek
& Botstein 2004; National Research Council [NRC] 2003). One of the biologists in the group described the lack
of depth in physics and some of its consequences saying:

        I  feel that  as the   meeting   progresses  I  understand   [the  physicists]  better  but   I can   not
        participate or suggest ideas. I never learned physics to such a degree. The most I can say is
        that I understand what they are talking about.

        Another biologist, relatively new to the group but with extensive background in biology, described how
she felt in one of the presentations which were overloaded with Mathematics:

        Once [the presenter] started to go over the equations and develop them, I didn't understand a
        thing   [..] The theory  is  very  complicated   and to    develop  it... I understood    the theory  in
        general. I comprehended the intuition behind it but not beyond that [..] It's not that I don't
        want or can't do it. It's just that, first, it doesn't really interest me how he reached a certain
        equation.    There  is nothing   I can  do, right now    I don't  have    the tools to deal   with such
        questions.

        The effects of the challenge of the lack of mathematical or physical knowledge, among the biologists in
the group, are  evident  in  some   of the   group  meetings which   were   very    physically  oriented.  In such  group
meetings more than 90% of the interactions were between physicists. The opposite did not happen in more
biologically oriented group meetings, even tough the degree of participation was roughly equal to the percentage
of physicists and biologists in the group.
        Physicists    learn how   to   build   and  use mathematical   representations     of  physical  processes  (Van
Heuvelen 1991). However, biological processes are more complex than physical ones (Mayr 1985; Rosenberg
1985). Biologists in the group often complained that they felt that some of the assumptions, or models presented
by the physicists, are over simplistic or non-biological. This feeling was strongest among the biologists at the
time of joining the group but it did not disappear over time. A biologist elaborated on the problems she had with
the assumptions used by physicists saying:

        [The physicists] use assumptions which are incorrect in biology. I understand this however,
        they  simplify   things, give  a   general  model and then   they   will  go  into  something   in more
        detail. I mean, they don't assume that the model is true biologically-wise.
        Q. And does it work ?
        No... many of the theories, they are theories based on mathematical models and they never
        tried them on organisms. [..] With many of the things which are more detailed it is OK. But
        many of the things are like evolutionary genomics and there, all their assumptions are simply
        beyond my ken. I completely do not understand these things. The first time I heard about
        them was in a group meeting given by [a computer scientist] on evolutionary genomics and I

                                                                                                                             2-
                  was   like, 'how   do you    do evolution in  the    computer?   I  totally didn't understand        your
                  presentation' [laughs]

        Group members' views on the disciplines of physics and biology
                  Tapping into the views of the group members on the nature of the disciplines of physics and biology
         may help to clarify the causes for some of the challenges discussed above. The views that follow were received
         from group members when they were asked to characterize biology and physics with an emphasis on comparing
         between them.

        Group members' views about physics
                  In accordance with the literature (Becher 1990; Donald 1993; Donald 2002; Leonard et al. 1996), the
         physicists in the group described physicists as interested in finding general major basic principles. The group
         leader said:

                  The  interesting   questions in physics  are questions    that deal with principles,  questions      that
                  unify many systems and look at things in an abstract manner.

                  The tendency towards abstraction is thought to be ingrained into physicists as a part of their education
         as physicists. As previously suggested (Donald 1993), physics is indeed considered to be hierarchical by all of
         the group members. Thus, physical knowledge should be acquired in a specific sequential order. Mathematical
         insight is appreciated in physics (Donald 1993) and indeed, the hierarchical or layered nature of physics was
         attributed mostly to the mathematical aspects of physics. Most group members described the use of a small set
         of problems which are studied in great depth and act as a sort of a canon, as a central way of learning physics.
         Mapping new problems to canonical problems often adds important insights. It seems that mapping a problem to
         a familiar problem is a common and useful heuristic in physics, according to the group members' views.

        Group members' views about biology
                  Not only was biological knowledge described as extensive, highly complex, incomplete and often ill-
         structured (Fisher   et al. 2000),  but  also textbooks in    biology   were  reported   to supply     unclear  and  loose
         definitions for theory (Gibbs & Lawson 1992). This combination may explain the views of group members that
         molecular biology is mostly a science of details about facts and methods, at least when compared to physics.
         Most   group  members    share  the   view  that classical    molecular  biologists  are  interested    mostly  in  simple
         interactions.
                  The group members believe that the theoretical parts of biology are easy to learn when compared to
         physics  and  that learning  them  can   be done  through     the use of text books.   In accordance       with the  group
         members views that molecular biology is all about facts as described above, and with the tendency reported that
         textbooks center on facts and labels (Fisher et al. 2000; Gibbs & Lawson 1992), the group members believe that
         biology is relatively easy to learn when compared with physics. This stems from their belief that for learning
         biology reading and absorbing the facts from textbooks should be enough. This feeling, that learning biology is
         easier than learning physics was shared by all the group members, biologists and physicists alike.
                  The group members acknowledge that learning from books is good for learning the details of biological
         knowledge, but is not enough for developing proficiency or deep understanding in biology. Without learning the
         underlying organizing principles of biology and developing a well organized knowledge structure, physicists
         still experience the  challenges  reported  above  with  the   amounts   of  information    they have      to assimilate in
         lectures and group meetings. It seems that there is a clear distinction between theoretical knowledge and the
         more practical knowledge needed to conduct experimental research in biology. Physicists in the group believe
         that wetting their hands in a laboratory work is essential for their understanding. Although physicists in the
         group learn biology and most of them engage in laboratory work, there is still a reluctance to reach the full depth
         of knowledge in biology.

       Discussion
                  In this study, the learning that occurs within an interdisciplinary scientific research group was studied.
         The group meetings of this group were observed and in-depth interviews were carried out with members of the
         group. Weekly group meetings were reported by the group members to be very beneficial to the scientific progress
         of this research group, especially due to the interdisciplinary nature of the group. The initial disciplinary identity
         that one acquires during his or her academic education was found here to strongly influence the way one acquires
         knowledge in and about other disciplines. The group members' views about the disciplines of biology and physics
         reveal  some  dichotomies   between   the  two   disciplines, which   may   explain  the difference     in challenges  that
         biologists and physicists face when they begin to learn the disciplines they are unfamiliar with. The results of this
         study may facilitate interdisciplinary transitions of scientists, teachers and students at all levels.

2-0
         The   group   members'    views   about  the  disciplines   of  biology and  physics   reveal  some  dichotomies
between the two disciplines, which may explain the difference in challenges that biologist and physicists face
when they begin to learn the disciplines they are unfamiliar with. The challenge of separating the wheat from the
chaff, which physicists often described when dealing with biological knowledge, seem to be closely related to
their view of biology as detailed and specific. Specific details are the opposite of principles and abstraction
which are basic to the physicists. When everything is perceived as details, the conclusion that there is no wheat,
only chaff is a natural one. What makes it even more difficult is that there are no easy mathematical values that
can be attached to these details to help the process of simplification which physicists are using when faced with
large amounts   of  data.  The   specificity of biological   knowledge    and  its seeming   lack  of depth   might further
aggravate the challenge of a lack in biological conceptual knowledge. This lack can only be covered by learning
but the motivation to learn often weakens when one feels that much of what there is to learn is very specific and
not profound by itself.
         On    the other   hand,  the biologists   in this study  often  expressed    frustration regarding   their lack  of
mathematical or physical training which they seldom encounter in their undergraduate studies. If we combine
this with the deep hierarchy of mathematics that requires a relatively strict order of learning, some frustration
seems inevitable. Physicists in the group often came up with models of biological systems that were based on
various  assumptions    and   neglections.   The  biologists   in this  study did  not  always    agree with  the   logic of
physicists on what may and should be neglected or assumed with regard to the analysis of biological systems,
and some times regarded certain assumptions as "non-biological".
         Systems    biology   can be  viewed    as having   paradigmatic    roots  in systems   thinking  (Gutierrez  et  al.
2005). Most approaches to systems thinking agree that much of the art of system thinking involves the ability to
represent and assess dynamic complexity (Linda & Sterman 2001). This requires mathematical skills as well as
various systems thinking skills. Examples are the ability to understand how behavior of a system arises from the
interaction of its agents over time, the ability to discover and represent feedback processes, the ability to identify
nonlinearities  and  delays   and to  understand   their   impact  (Linda   &  Sterman   2001).   Biologists  in this study
reported some   lack    in mathematical    skills  and  a  difficulty  with   some of   the general   approaches    used  by
physicists  in the  group.  Physicists    have  prior experience   with   systems   thinking   and  with  the mathematics
associated with it. Perhaps, a better understanding of the systems thinking skills related to systems biology, such
as  identifying components     and    the relationships   between    them,  can  facilitate the  learning  of the   relevant
mathematics.   This    should help biologists   narrow   the  effect  of this challenge  without   having  to learn  all  the
mathematics and mathematical tools that physicists acquired during their training in physics.
         Recent calls suggested that undergraduate biology curriculum should undergo a transformation towards
a  more  interdisciplinary  curriculum    which    includes  a  more    comprehensive   quantitative   training  (Bialek  &
Botstein 2004; National Research Council [NRC] 2003). In agreement with these calls, We suggest that more
emphasis will be put not only quantitative skills but also on systems thinking, since mathematical skills alone
are insufficient for the application of systems thinking (Linda & Sterman 2001).
         The interdisciplinary field of systems biology involves knowledge that stems from both the discipline
of  biology and    the discipline of  physics.  Students   of  systems   biology   need to  construct an  interdisciplinary
knowledge structure, based on the knowledge structures of their original discipline. The knowledge structure of
those students   can   be  described   as  progressing     from   synthetic  interdisciplinary  towards   transdisciplinary
(following Lattuca 2001). A synthetic interdisciplinary knowledge structure in systems biology may draw from
the knowledge    structures   of biology   and  physics,   thus containing    elements  from   both knowledge    structures
without integrating them. However, a transdisciplinary knowledge structure in systems biology may share some
similarity with the knowledge structures of physics and biology but it is mostly a new knowledge structure that
is a result of merging the two original knowledge structures. It is evident that the group meetings facilitate this
process but further research will be required in order to fully characterize the interdisciplinary identity of those
involved in learning systems biology.

References
Aderem, A. (2005). Systems biology: It's practice and challenges. Cell, 124, 511-513.
Allen, W., & Cowley, J. (2004). The elusive field of systems biology. Physiological Genomics, 16, 285-286.
Amann, K., & Knorr-Cetina, K. (1989). Thinking through talk: An ethnographic study of a molecular biology
         laboratory. Knowledge and Society, 8, 3-26.
Ares, M. J. (2004). Interdisciplinary research and the undergraduate biology curriculum. Nature Structural &
         Molecular Biology, 11(12), 1170-1172.
Becher,  T.  (1989).    Academic   tribes  and    territories:  Intellectual  enquiry   and  the  cultures of   disciplines.
         SRHE/Open University Press.
Becher, T. (1990). Physicists on physics. Studies in Higher Education, 15(1), 3-20.
Bialek, W., & Botstein, D. (2004). Introductory science and mathematics education for 21st-century biologists.
         Science, 303(5659), 788-790.

                                                                                                                                 2-
         Bradbeer,  J. (1999).  Barriers to interdisciplinarity:   Disciplinary  discourses  and   student learning.  Journal   of
                  Geography in Higher Education, 23(3), 381-396.
         Brown, A. L. (1994). The advancement of learning. Educational Researcher, 23(8), 4-12.
         Donald, G. J. (1993). Professors' and students' conceptualizations of the learning task in introductory physics
                  courses. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 30(8), 905-918.
         Donald, G. J. (2002). Learning to think: Disciplinary perspectives (1st ed.). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
         Dunbar,    K. (1995).  How     scientists really  reason:  Scientific reasoning    in the  real-world    laboratories. In
                  Davidson, J. (Ed.), The nature of insight (pp. 365­395). Cambridge MA: MIT Press.
         Dunbar, K. (1997). How scientists think: Online creativity and conceptual change in science. In Vaid, S. (Ed.),
                  Conceptual structures and processes: Emergence, discovery and change. Washington DC: American
                  Psychological Association.
         Fisher, M.    K., Wandersee,   H.  J., &   Moody,     E.  D. (2000).  Mapping    biology   knowledge.    Dordrecht, The
                  Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Publishing.
         Gibbs, A., & Lawson, E. A. (1992). The nature of scientific thinking as reflected by the work of biologists & by
                  biology textbooks. The American Biology Teacher, 54(3), 137-152.
         Golde, M. C., & Gallagher, A. H. (1999). The challenges of conducting interdisciplinary research in traditional
                  doctoral programs. Ecosystems, 2, 281-285.
         Gross,  J. L.  (2004). Interdisciplinarity  and   the undergraduate    biology   curriculum:  Finding    a balance. Cell
                  Biology Education, 3(Summer), 85-87.
         Gutierrez,  A. R.,  Shasha,  E.  D.,   &  Coruzzi, M.     G. (2005).  Systems    biology  for the  virtual  plant. Plant
                  Physiology, 138, 550-554.
         Kafatos, C. F., & Eisner, T. (2004). Unification in the century of biology. Science, 303(27), 1257.
         Latour, B., & Woolgar, S. (1986). Laboratory life: The construction of scientific facts (Vol. 1). Princeton, New
                  Jersey: Princeton University Press.
         Lattuca, R. L. (2001). Creating interdisciplinarity: Interdisciplinary research and teaching among college and
                  university faculty. Nashville: TN: Vanderblit University press.
         Lave, J., & Wegner, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. New York: Cambridge
                  University Press.
         Leonard, J. W., Dufrense, J. R., & Mestre, P. J. (1996). Using qualitative problem-solving strategies to highlight
                  the role of conceptual knowledge in solving problems. American Journal of Physics, 64(12), 1495-1503.
         Linda, B. S., & Sterman, J. (2001). Bathtub dynamics: Initial results of a systems thinking inventory. System
                  Dynamics Review, 16(4), 249-286.
         Luscombe, N. M., Greenbaum, D., & Gerstein, M. (2001). What is bioinformatics? A proposed definition and
                  overview of the field. Method of Information Medicine, 40, 346­358.
         Mayr,   E. (1985).  How    biology differs  from  the    physical  sciences. In  Weber,  B.   H.  (Ed.), Evolution  at  a
                  crossroads:   The   new   biology    and     the new    philosophy   of   science  (pp.  43-63).   Cambridge,
                  Massachusetts: MIT Press.
         Mayr, E. (1988). Toward a new philosophy of biology. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press.
         National   Research   Council   [NRC].    (2003). BIO2010:      Transforming    Undergraduate     Education  for   Future
                  Research Biologists. Washington (DC): National Academies Press.
         Rosenberg, A. (1985). The structure of biological science. Cambridge: Cambridge university press.
         Shkedi,  A.   (2005).  Multiple case   narrative:  A   qualitative  approach    to the study  of  multiple   population.
                  Amsterdam: John Benjamins Publishing Company.
         Shkedi, A., & Shkedi, Y. (2005). Narralizer: A software for qualitative research analysis (Version 1.01.001).
                  Yakum: Yazamut Yakum.
         Sung, S. N., Gordon, I. J., Rose, D. G., Getzoff, D. E., Kron, J. S., Mumford, D., Onuchic, N. J., Scherer, F. N.,
                  Sumners, L. D., & Nancy, K. J. (2003). Educating future scientists. Science, 301(5639), 1485.
         Towns, H. M., & Grant, R. E. (1997). I believe I can go out of this class actually knowing something: cooperative
                  learning activities in physical chemistry. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 34(8), 819-835.
         Traweek,   S.  (1988). Beamtimes     and   lifetimes: The    world of high   energy   physicists. Cambridge:   Harvard
                  University Press.
         Van Heuvelen, A. (1991). Learning to think like a physicist: A review of research based instructional strategies.
                  American Journal of Physics, 59(10), 891-897.
         Webb,   M.  N.    (1989). Peer interaction  and   learning   in small groups.   International Journal    of Educational
                  Research, 13(1), 21-39.

       Acknowledgments
         We are thankful to the group leader and the group members for letting us tap into their professional thoughts and
         views. AY is the incumbent of the Helena Rubinstein Career Development Chair.

2-2
