         Collaborative Scientific Conceptual Change in Simulation-
                                Supported Learning Environment
                    Lei Liu, Cindy E. Hmelo-Silver, Rutgers the State University of New Jersey,
                   Graduate School of Education, 10 Seminary Place, New Brunswick, NJ 08901
                        Email: leiliu@eden.rutgers.edu, cindy.hmelo-silver@gse.rutgers.edu

          Abstract: The purpose of our study is to: 1) propose a new model of conceptual change called
          collaborative scientific conceptual change model; 2) examine student collaborative scientific
          conceptual    change  process    while  using    computer    simulations    to understand     aquarium
          ecosystem through three perspectives (i.e., cognitive, social, and epistemic) included in the
          new   conceptual  change   model.   We  propose    that collaborative   scientific  conceptual  change
          occurs when learners co-construct new knowledge and make a shift from their previous ways
          of thinking towards the scientific ways of thinking that scientists use to explain phenomena.
          We    report  preliminary   results of  a    classroom  study    exploring   how    students  used    the
          simulations   to develop  collaborative   discourse    and   applied epistemic   practices   to achieve
          conceptual change. The results imply that this new theoretical framework is effective to study
          conceptual    change  and    the  simulation   environment     may   mediate    the  development      of
          successful    collaborative  interactions    (including   collaborative   discourse      and  epistemic
          practices) that lead to conceptual change.

Introduction
          One   problem    in science  education    is that  students  often   do  not possess     an  in-depth conceptual
understanding   of    science and   demonstrate   an   inability to analyze    and apply   scientific  thinking  processes
(National  Research     Center, 1996).  The   field  of  research   in conceptual   change    has  proliferated  studies   to
investigate the    nature  and  process of   conceptual   change    and  to search   for theoretical   underpinnings    and
pedagogical strategies to foster student conceptual change and improve higher-level thinking and conceptual
understanding. One of the common instructional strategies is to confront students with discrepant events to help
students realize the cognitive conflicts, which is widely accepted to be essential to radical conceptual change
(Posner,   Strike, Hewson,    & Gertzog,   1982).  However    other  researchers   propose    that conceptual   change  is a
gradual  process   and  argue  that adults, children   and   even trained  scientists  failed to   make a  change   in their
theories when they face conflicting evidence (Chinn & Brewer, 2002; Mason, 2003). Other facilitating factors
may be required to develop deep conceptual understanding, such as peer interactions and sophisticated scientific
epistemic practices. The purpose of the reported study is to: 1) propose a new model of conceptual change called
collaborative scientific conceptual change model; 2) examine student collaborative scientific conceptual change
process while using computer simulations to understand aquarium ecosystem through three perspectives (i.e.,
cognitive, social, and epistemic) included in the new conceptual change model.

Theoretical Framework
          In our study, we employ a new theoretical framework to interpret the conceptual change process ­ the
collaborative conceptual change model. Instead of focusing on the cognitive conflict, we use a new theoretical
framework, the collaborative scientific conceptual change model, to explain conceptual change processes. This
model stresses cognitive factors as well as the effect of social interactions and role of epistemic practices of
science.  We  propose    that collaborative   scientific conceptual    change  occurs  when   learners    co-construct new
knowledge and make a shift from their previous ways of thinking towards the scientific ways of thinking that
scientists  use    to explain   phenomena.    Collaborative      discourse  may    help  students     discover  knowledge
discrepancies and insufficiency through knowledge sharing thus stimulating convergent conceptual change. In
addition, the sociocultural views suggest that collaborative discourse may allow students to engage in scientific
practices  that encourage     deep  processing   while   engaging   in observation,    collaborative   argumentation,   and
experimentation.
          This framework echoes with Sinatra's urges to use multiple theoretical spotlights to understand student
conceptual change process. Sinatra (2002) suggested the pursuit of both internal (cognitive and motivational)
and  external   (social and   contextual)  aspects  of   conceptual    change. Using   the   framework    of collaborative
scientific conceptual change, we integrate three major perspectives (i.e., cognitive, social, epistemic) to explore
the conceptual change process with a particular stress on social and epistemic aspects. Conceptual change is not
easy to   achieve   because   students  tend  to use   their intuition  to  explain   science  concepts,   which    leads  to
superficial understanding that may be resistant to change despite instruction (Chi, 2005). The distributed nature
of cognition suggests that conceptual change requires communication among people (Pea, 1993). Peer discourse
may create an awareness of the need for knowledge revision and encourage deep processing, thus is a powerful

                                                                                                                                1-
         tool for conceptual change (Roschelle, 1992). In addition, the intersubjective meaning making in peer discourse
         helps create joint interpretations through phases of negotiation focused on shared information (Suthers, 2006).
         However, collaborative learning is not always productive as few students see science as a process of formulating
         researchable   questions,  conducting   experiments    to test ideas,   and formulating     evidence-based   argumentation
         (Carey   &   Smith, 1993;   Dillenbourg,   1999;   Sandoval   &   Reiser,  2004). Students   need   more  opportunities  to
         develop   sophisticated   epistemic  practices   such  as testing  and  modifying     ideas through   experimentation   and
         evidence-based     argumentation.   Both   diSessa  (2006)   and   Linn   (2006)  question  the  coherence   of the criteria
         students  use  for  their epistemic  practices   and  advocate  epistemic   practices   entailing  systematic   observation,
         argumentation,    and experimentation.     In  our framework,    we   argue  that on  one   hand,  collaborative  discourse
         makes    students'  epistemic  practices  visible  and   available for  comparison.   On    the other  hand,  the epistemic
         practices  of  science    require that students   use evidence     to support   their claims  thus  producing    productive
         discourse.   Such  reciprocal  relations  between    collaborative    discourse  and  epistemic  practices seem   likely to
         foster collaborative scientific conceptual change.
                   We report here on a classroom study using the collaborative scientific conceptual change framework to
         investigate trajectories of conceptual change in a simulation-supported collaborative learning context. In our
         study,   we  use  computer    simulations  as  a   media  to provide    opportunities   for students   to conduct   science
         observation, collaborative argumentation, and experimentation. The computer simulations can mediate students'
         collaborative discourse and their epistemic practices. First of all, computer tools shape the way students interact
         with each other, such as how they propose an argumentation or solve a problem. Second, running computer
         simulations immediately reflect the results of students' epistemic practices of problem solving and such visual
         feedback     help learners  develop  and   adopt   sophisticated   epistemic   practices  such  as designing    experiment,
         collecting data, coordinating theory and evidence, and testing and modifying hypothesis.

       Methods
                   We   designed    two  computer    simulations   and  conducted     a  classroom   study  address   the  following
         research  questions:  1)   What   patterns of  collaborative   discourse   occur  during    students' collaborative use  of
         computer simulations? How do these patterns relate to students conceptual change process? 2) What patterns of
         epistemic practices occur during students' collaborative use of the computer simulations? How do these patterns
         relate to students conceptual change process? 3) What are the relationships between the patterns of students'
         collaborative discourse and epistemic practices?

        Participants
                   The  participants   in  this study   were   145  middle     school   students  from   two   public  schools  who
         volunteered    to participate in  this study.  Seventy   were  seventh    graders taught  by  Ms.  W.   Seventy   five were
         eighth graders taught by Mr. K. Both teachers were experienced middle school science teachers and taught five
         classes.  The  study  was   conducted   in both  classrooms    as  part of  students'  science  instruction.  Twenty   focal
         groups' collaborative activities were video and audio taped. In this paper, we report the preliminary results of
         four case studies. Group 1 and 2 were from Ms. W's classes and group 3 and 4 from Mr. K's classes.

        The Domain of Study
                   The aquarium ecosystem, an example of a complex system, was the science domain for this study. It
         includes  both    macro   and micro  levels   components.    The   macro  level  components     include fish, food,  plants,
         filters, air pump,  light;  micro   level components     include   bacteria and   other  micro-organisms,    the  chemicals
         involved in the nitrification process (ammonia, nitrite, nitrate), oxygen, and carbon dioxide. It is difficult for
         students to develop a systematic understanding of such a complex system because the macro and micro level
         components are interrelated with each other to maintain a balance in the system. For instance, the fish produce
         waste composed of toxic chemical, ammonia. The gravel provides a place for the colonies of beneficial bacteria
         to survive   and  reproduce,  ensuring    that the aquarium    remains    healthy by  converting   the  ammonia   into  less
         harmful chemicals, such as nitrite and nitrate. As a closed system, some designed components are needed to
         maintain the equilibrium in aquarium, such as the filter, heater, and light.           Part of the filter is the biological
         filter,  which is  composed   of  bacteria  that convert  ammonia      to less  toxic chemicals.   The  primary   source of
         ammonia is from the fish waste. Bacteria in the water first convert the ammonia into less toxic nitrite and finally
         non-toxic nitrate, which can be used by plants as fertilizers.

        Computer Simulations
                   To   facilitate students' understanding     of the system,    we  programmed      two  simulation   models   using
         NetLogo    (Wilensky    &  Reisman,    2006).  Students   could   run  and  observe   the simulations,  generate   and  test
         hypotheses, and modify ideas based on observed results. The two simulations (the fish spawn model and the
         nitrification process model) present the system knowledge at different scales. The fish spawn model is a macro

1-
level  simulation,    simulating   how   fish spawn  in   a natural  environment.    We   used  pink   and blue   fish-shaped
representations    to embody     the fish gender    and  yellow  dots   to represent  the  fish food.  The  purpose    of this
simulation    model   is to  help   students  learn about   the relationships   among   different  aspects  of   an aquarium
ecosystem,    such  as   the amount   of  food, initial  gender  ratio,  filtration, water quality,  reproduction,   and  fish
population. The nitrification process model presents a micro level simulation of how chemicals reach a balance
to maintain a healthy aquarium. We used red, white, and yellow dots to represent the chemicals (ammonia,
nitrite, nitrate respectively)   in  the water  and  blue   and purple   patches  as  two  different types of  bacteria.  The
symbolic     representations  in   both  simulation  models   initiated  students'   collaborative discussion  by   providing
shared references that was initially puzzling. Both simulations allow students to adjust the values of variables
and observe the results. The manipulable representations guided students to useful learning interactions as they
designed experiments to test ideas.

Procedures
          The goal of the designed study was to support middle school science curriculum instruction and to
promote deep scientific understanding of the aquarium ecosystem through the use of computer simulations. We
collaborated   with   two   public  middle    school science    teachers  to develop   specific curriculum    units. Prior to
enacting instruction, the teachers participated in a two-week professional development on the content and tools.
          In both classroom settings, teachers instructed to facilitate students to use the computer simulations to
learn  about   the aquarium    ecosystem.     Before the  classroom   study,   both  classrooms    had a  physical  aquarium
model installed and maintained for about two months. All learning activities were completed in small groups,
the size of which varied from 2 to 6 students.
          The two teachers used different teaching approaches due to existing differences in curriculum focus of
the school    districts  and their   previous  teaching   experiences.   Ms.   W   designed  worksheets    with  open-ended
questions for groups while they explored the computer tools, and expected homogeneous progress for the whole
class thus provided direct instructions to frame group activities. Mr. K was more inquiry-oriented and tended to
scaffold groups' progress with explanatory questions and prompted students to explain their observations. In
addition, Mr. K encouraged heterogeneous progress among the groups and facilitated student learning by using
open-ended     questioning.   Both   teachers  used  the  unit  for approximately    two  school   weeks   and succeeded   in
getting  students   engaged     in  most  of  the  learning   events. In   both  classrooms,   before  using   the  computer
simulations, both teachers started with a class discussion on the aquarium ecosystem to activate students' prior
knowledge and make connections to the physical fish tank in the classrooms. Then the teachers introduced a
hypermedia we designed to introduce some basic understanding of the aquarium ecosystem with a focus on the
functions of the components in the system. The students explored the hypermedia software in groups followed
by other activities such as class discussions and construction of concept maps that connected parts of the system
to their function. Then the teachers conducted a demo class to introduce students to how to use the NetLogo
simulations by demonstrating one sample model unrelated to the aquarium system. Then the students went to
groups to collaboratively explored the fish spawn simulation and the nitrification process simulation. Students
took an individual pre and posttest. Twenty focal groups' collaborative activities were video and audio taped.
This paper reports the results of a case study of four focal groups' exploration of the computer simulations (a
four-day intervention of pure group exploration and discussion).

Data Coding and Analysis
          The    video   and audiotapes   of   the  groups'   discourse   throughout   their exploration   of  the  computer
simulations    were   transcribed   verbatim.  The   discourse   was    segmented    by turns.  Three  sets   of codes  were
developed     and  applied   to  investigate   students'    collaborative  learning   through   different  lenses.  Both   the
collaborative discourse coding and the epistemic practice coding were conducted at the level of conversational
turns. A conceptual change code was given when a new level of understanding occurred. Both the transcripts
and the codes were imported into the Multiple Episode Protocol Analysis (MEPA) software (Erkens, 2005), for
frequency calculation, pattern identifications by inductive possibility calculation, and sequential data analysis.
Besides, qualitative analyses will be applied to investigate how students scaffold each other and how computer
tools are used as part of discourse.
          The    collaborative   discourse    coding scheme     was  designed   to   uncover cognitive    and  metacognitive
processes underlying the groups' discourse as well as the facilitators' roles (see definitions in Table 1). The
second coding scheme was developed to capture the characteristics of epistemic practices (i.e., the practices
embodying     ways    of scientific  thinking, see   in  Duschl &   Osborne,    2002)  to build understanding     (defined in
Table    2). The third   coding  scheme   identified  hierarchical   levels  of conceptual   understanding.    At  the lowest
level,   the  recognizing    level, students   engage    in a  low  level   of  cognitive  processing,   such  as   proposing
ungrounded     hypotheses    of  what   symbols   (e.g., the  dots  and  patches)  represent in  the   simulation   models or
identifying the patterns of observed phenomena. At the explanatory level, students either build upon their initial
hypotheses with elaborated explanations or propose a grounded hypothesis that includes causal relationships

                                                                                                                                  1-
         between  representations. At  the    critiquing level, students criticize    the stated understanding  by   checking
         knowledge  validity  and  identifying  the gap   between   the  evidence     and  previous hypotheses.  Finally, the
         examined level represents the greatest depth of conceptual understanding. At this level, students have checked
         the validity of their understanding, which they believe is supported by the collected evidence.

         Table 1. Definitions for collaborative coding categories.

                  Categories                                                  Definitions
         Cognitive Process
         Fact Question                 Questions asked with a purpose to obtain factual information
         Explanation Question          Questions asked with a purpose to obtain cause-effect information
         Confirm Question              Questions asked to make sure one gets the shared information
         Directing Statement           Demanding statement for an ongoing activities
         Agree                         Explicit express of acceptance of other's ideas
         Disagree                      Expressing express of     rejection of other's ideas
         Share Knowledge               Share information with other members in the group
         Describe Observation          Descriptions on what is observed in the simulations
         Retrieve Prior Knowledge      Making connections to one's previously perceived knowledge or experiences
         Generate Theory               Statement of a hypothetical proposal
         Paraphrase                    Rewording other's statements
         Warranting Claim              Statements to provide ground for an idea
         Identify Cognitive Conflict   Realizing the discrepancies in one's or the group's reasoning
         Off-topic Talking             Statement unrelated to the learning target
         Metacognitive Process
         Plan                          Defining the learning goals
         Monitor                       Reflecting on the learning process to keep track of the conceptual understanding
         Review                        Looking back on the strategies (e.g., designing experiments, running
                                       simulations) that lead to knowledge construction
         Evaluate                      Judging the effectiveness of learning strategies
         Facilitators' Roles
         Educational Statement         Statements related to the learning content and strategies
         Performance Statement         Statements related to class management and students' performance
         Open Question                 Questions seeking an elaborated answer or explanation
         Closed Questions              Questions seeking a short and factual answer

         Table 2. Definitions for epistemic practice coding categories.

                  Categories                                                  Definitions
         Basic Knowledge               Superficial meaning making practice without reasoning or supporting evidences
         Construction
         Observe                       Practices of observing phenomena on the computer screen
         Predict                       Practices aiming to propose predicting result of a simulation
         Design Experiment             Designing a simulating experiment to test hypotheses
         Check Knowledge Validity      Examine the consistency or accountability of constructed knowledge
         Coordinate Theory-            Practices entailing using theories to explain data and using data to evaluate
         Evidence                      theories
         Modify Knowledge              Making a change in previously constructed knowledge
         Exchange Knowledge            Explicit articulation of one's knowledge
         Scaffold                      Applying purposeful strategies to support other's understanding
         Give Feedback                 Providing evaluative responses to other's statements or actions

       Quantitative Results
                  Our previous  analysis   of pre and posttests  data showed     that students from  both  classroom   settings
         gained  similar learning  outcomes    and  indicated   successful    conceptual   change   by shifting a   superficial
         understanding   of the structural knowledge     about  components    to a deeper   understanding   of  the  functional
         knowledge of the system (see details in Author, 2007). This paper reports the analyses of results of four focal
         groups'  video  data focusing on  investigating  the   trajectories of students'  collaborative scientific conceptual
         change from the cognitive, social, and epistemic aspects. In this section, we first report the quantitative findings
         derived from the calculated descriptive frequencies of the categories in the three types of coding (see Table 3).

1-0
Second, we report the patterns of collaborative discourses, epistemic practices, and trajectories of conceptual
understanding  (produced   by  MEPA    software  through  calculation  of inductive   possibilities) as well  as  the
relations among the patterns with the support of qualitative evidence.

Table 3. Percentages of total statements in coding categories and total turns.

                                                                             Ms. W                    Mr. K
                                                                       Group 1      Group 2    Group 3      Group 4
1. Collaborative Discourse %          - Describe Observation            23.34       19.18        5.12        17.08
                                      - Warrant Claims                  7.07         5.82       10.24         5.17
                                      - Generate Theory                 5.35         5.39        6.20         6.07
                                      - Identify Cognitive Conflict     1.50         0.86        1.89         0.67
                                      - Other Categories                40.25       43.53       30.73        32.58
                                 Total Cognitive Process %              77.51       74.78       54.18        61.57
                                      - Plan                            5.57         5.60        2.96         5.84
                                      - Monitor                         1.93         3.88        5.66         2.47
                                      - Review                          4.07         4.09        7.55         5.62
                                      - Evaluate                        0.21         0.65        0.81         0.90
                                 Total Metacognitive Process %         11.78        14.22       16.98        14.83
                                      - Open Questions                  2.36         1.94       12.67         3.82
                                      - Closed Questions                5.14         3.02        3.23         6.74
                                      - Educational Statement           2.14         3.02       10.51        10.79
                                      - Performance Statement           1.07         3.02        2.43         2.25
                                 Total Teacher Facilitation %           10.71       11.00       28.84        23.60
2. Epistemic Practice %          Design Experiment                      19.70        9.05        2.16         9.21
                                 Observe                                28.91       24.78        5.39        22.25
                                 Predict                                5.35         1.72        6.20         2.02
                                 Coordinate Theory and Evidence         4.93         6.47       10.24         6.29
                                 Check Validity                         1.07         1.51        4.85         1.57
                                 Scaffold                               9.42         8.19       19.14        19.33
                                 Modify Knowledge                       0.43         1.08        7.01         0.67
                                 Other Categories                       30.19       47.20       45.01        38.66
3. Conceptual Understanding      Level 1: Recognizing Level               25         12           23          24
                                 Level 2: Explanatory Level               28         25           33          15
                                 Level 3: Critiquing Level                8             3         10           2
                                 Level 4: Examined Level                  4             4          8           5
                                 Total Turns with Conceptual              65         44           74          46
                                 Understanding Codes
Total Turns                                                             463          462         370          443

        Results showed that most of students' discourse stayed at the first two levels of understanding focused
on identifying representations in the simulation models and developing explanations of the representations. To
some extent, the groups' discourse did show that sometimes students questioned their previous understanding
(Level 3) and reached the level of evidence-based understanding (Level 4). Interestingly, there was obvious
percentage difference at critiquing level across groups. Particularly, group 1 and 3 did more critiquing in their
understanding process than group 2 and 4.
        The   distribution of collaborative  discourse  percentages  showed    that all the four  groups  were  very
engaged in    the cognitive  process, based   on  indicators such   as  different   types of   questions,   describing
observations, retrieving prior knowledge,    generating theories, proposing  warrant    claims, sharing   knowledge,
paraphrasing, and identifying cognitive conflict. However the results exhibited divergence across groups. Both
groups from Ms. W's classes spent a good amount of time describing their observations (23.34% for group 1
and 19.18%    for group  2). However,  group  3  from  Mr. K's  classes did  not  show    this tendency (5.12%).   In
addition, group 3 also provided the highest percentage of warranting claims (10.24%) among all the four groups
even though all the four groups provided similar percentages of discourse to propose hypotheses. It is interesting
to notice that the there a very low percentage of the discourse was used to identify cognitive conflict, which has
been regarded as the most important factor in radical conceptual change theories. The data also showed that all
groups focused their metacognitive process on planning learning strategies and reviewing what activities they
conducted and that they rarely evaluated their learning strategies.
        Furthermore,    we   found there  were   differences in   teachers'  approaches     to facilitating students'
simulation-based learning activities. Mr. K provided more facilitation for groups' collaborative activities than

                                                                                                                         1-1
         Ms.  W   did.  Mr.   K   tended  to ask  more    open  questions   than   Ms. W   to  scaffold  students'  knowledge   co-
         construction. The data also demonstrated that Mr. K adopted different strategies to different groups. For group
         3, he asked more open questions than closed questions but vice versa when he facilitated group 4. In contrast,
         Ms.  W   seemed   to use  the same   strategy   in questioning   and   tended to  ask more   closed  questions  than  open
         questions.
                  The frequency distribution of the epistemic practice coding showed that all groups were engaged in
         designing  experiments    and   observing   the  simulations   but they   did not often   modify   previously  constructed
         knowledge     except  for group   3. Instead,   group  3's  discourse   demonstrated    fairly large percentages   of  talk
         devoted  to   sophisticated   epistemic    practices  such   as predictions,  coordinating     evidence and   theory,  and
         modifying knowledge, In addition, the transcripts showed different amount of scaffolding practices across the
         two classroom settings. This might be caused by the different amount of facilitation across the teachers.

        Qualitative Results
                  Although the quantitative results provide a description at a gross level of collaboration, they say little
         about the patterns of collaboration and the relationships among collaborative discourse, epistemic practices, and
         conceptual    change.    We  found   several  interesting   patterns   in students'  collaborative   discourse,  epistemic
         practices, and conceptual understanding process resulting from the sequential analysis using MEPA software.
         Two major findings were derived from a synthesis of the sequential patterns and the qualitative evidences: first,
         the process   of students'   conceptual    understanding    is nonlinear;   second, the  sequential  patterns in students'
         collaborative discourse and their epistemic practices were associated with their conceptual understanding.
                  In general, when students explored the computer simulations, their understanding often started at the
         recognizing level, and then moved to the explanatory level (shown in Figure 1). Sometimes, the students went
         through the critiquing phase and went back to the explanatory phase and finally reached the examined level.
         However    it is interesting  to  notice that the  students'   conceptual   understanding  frequently   vacillated  among
         different levels. That is their conceptual understanding was not always progressing to higher levels and it very
         often regressed to lower levels. For example, group 1 once was trying to figure out what the blue patches were
         in the nitrification process simulation when they observed that "the red dots disappear once they get into the
         blues". Then they came up with an explanation that "that's the bacteria that influences the ammonia. Cause
         every time the red dots go into the blue squares, the ammonia disappear. And then, the purple squares." Then
         they restarted   the simulation   again  to test their ideas.   Finally they  reached  a  conclusion  that the  blue  patch
         represented bacteria in the model. However, in their later discussion about another topic of "what will happen if
         the number of plants increase", their understanding about the blue patches went back to the recognizing level
         and restarted a reasoning cycle. The dashed link between the critiquing level and the examined level (see in
         Figure 1) indicates that sometimes students' inquiry-based reasoning stopped at critiquing and failed to reach the
         examined level.

                                              Figure 1. Conceptual Understanding Process.

                  Due to the numerous categories for collaborative discourse and epistemic practice it was difficult to
         identify patterns    of  multiple   codes.  Instead, we    ran  two-codes   sequential   analyses,  which  calculated  the
         inductive probabilities of two successive codes in the transcripts. The results identified many patterns associated
         with students'   conceptual     understanding.   For   example,    for  the collaborative  discourse  process,   students'
         observation   descriptions  were    frequently  followed    by  warranting  claims   that were  often   followed   by prior
         knowledge     retrieval; students'  identification of  cognitive   conflict often   followed warranting    claims. For the
         epistemic   practice    process,  students   tended   to   check   knowledge    validity  after  observing;   they    began
         coordinating theory and evidence after either building basic knowledge construction or knowledge exchange;
         they engaged in predictions often followed by experiment design. The types of collaborative discourse functions
         and epistemic practices involved in the above patterns are widely accepted as sophisticated ways that scientists
         tend to use in their scientific reasoning.
                  In-depth    qualitative  analysis  found    that, in  the simulation-supported    learning  context,  there  were
         mutual relations between the patterns of collaborative discourse and epistemic practices, which are important for
         students' conceptual co-construction. Specifically, the simulation provided opportunities for students to engage
         in epistemic practices (e.g., generating hypothesis, designing experiments to collect data during observation,
         coordinating theory and evidence, checking validity, and modifying knowledge). The computer simulations also

1-
provided   opportunities  for  students to engage  collaborative  discourse   that included   high-level cognitive   and
metacognitive processing (e.g., presenting warranting claims, monitoring learning process, identifying cognitive
conflict). The combination of various collaborative discourse functions        (e.g., questioning, sharing knowledge,
retrieving prior knowledge)    stimulated  students to   further engage  in  epistemic  practices to develop   and   test
ideas. The following excerpt showed how the students in Group 2 figured out what the purple and blue patches
represented in the model through patterns of collaborative discourse and epistemic practices:
         Chris:             get more plants. let's do 10 and 10 and see what happens ... okay now is just all
                            ammonia
         Gabby:             see at least is going up, 129
         Chris:             now there is low 50, now there is little nitrite
         ......
         Chris:             ammonia turns into nitrate and nitrate turns into nitrite, and plants eat the nitrite
         Gabby:             but it's all ammonia there is like no nitrate. So if ammonia turns into nitrate, and then
                            nitrate turns  into nitrite. Then would  it  most  of  the ammonia    have   be gone  if the
                            plants eat it?
         Chris:             no cause something else eats the ammonia, and the plants eat
         Gabby:             doesn't the bacteria or something...bacteria creates nitrite or nitrate right?
         Chris:             right. Wait let's see now is going up like crazy, nitrate is too high
         Chris:             what's the blue?
         Gabby:             That's the ...
         ......
         Gabby:             yea, what's the purple and the blue?   What's that supposed to be?
         Chris:             maybe that's..that's nitrite or something ...
         Gabby:             see what happens if it like hum..there is a lot of plants then if the nitrite goes down.
         Chris:             is the number of ammonia going down, now is going up. It goes down like every
                            couple things but mostly it's going up. And the nitrite is going up too
         ......
         Chris:             wait the purple is the bacteria and it's eating all of the stuff.
         Gabby:             and then the blue is the bacteria too, but the blue is the bacteria from the...
         ......
         Chris:             Let's try again.

         The observation of the simulation dynamics stimulated the students' conversation as they described
what they   saw  in the  model.  When    Chris  started  making  meaning    by retrieving  knowledge     achieved   from
previous hypermedia exploration saying that "ammonia turns into nitrate and nitrate turns into nitrite, and plants
eat the nitrite," Gabby identified the conflict that there was no nitrate appearing in the model. This conflict
prompted the group to continue their reasoning and Gabby retrieved that "bacteria creates nitrite or nitrate".
Then the appearance of the blue and purple patches on the screen triggered the question "what's the purple and
the blue?" which led to the experiment design to see what if there are a lot of plants then if the nitrite goes
down. During the following observation, Chris realized that "the purple is the bacteria" because "it's eating all
of the stuff". Inspired by Chris, Gabby figured out that "the blue is the bacteria too". Then they started another
experiment   to  testify their theories. This   example   showed   that  the  collaborative   discourse  and epistemic
practices were mutually supporting each other to a more profound depth.

Discussion
         This study applied a new framework to investigate students' collaborative scientific conceptual change
process in a simulation-supported learning environment through the lenses of cognitive, social and epistemic
practices. We   draw two   major  conclusions   from these   preliminary  results.  First, the descriptive  frequencies
showed   that   students  were  highly   motivated  and   engaged    in their  collaborative   learning  activities  and
successfully   achieved  high-level  conceptual   understanding   in the  simulation-based     learning  context,   even
though differences in learning processes existed due to differences in individuals and facilitation provided. The
results of the sequential analyses demonstrated that students went through a gradual and nonlinear process to
achieve  conceptual  change.   The  groups  went  through   multiple cycles   of testing   and modifying    hypothetical
theories   via  experimentation   and    evidence-based    reasoning to   reach    the highest   level   of  conceptual
understanding ­ the examined level. Consistent with what Chinn (2001) found in their study, we also found that
students sometimes identified but ignored the cognitive conflicts. This might result from the fact that they did
not possess the sophisticated epistemic practices needed to solve the conflicts. Our second major conclusion was
that computer simulations provided opportunities for students to produce productive collaborative discourse that
engaged high-level cognitive and metacognitive process, and they mediated students' epistemic practices. The
sequential analyses identified significant collaborative discourse patterns and epistemic practice patterns that

                                                                                                                             1-
         were  mutually   related and   contributed to  students' conceptual change.  Consistent  with  the findings of other
         research on conceptual change (e.g., Linn, 2006; diSessa, 2006), the results indicate that there are other factors
         (i.e., the convergent knowledge co-construction and sophisticated epistemic practices) besides cognitive conflict
         that are needed   to foster scientific  conceptual change,   a change not  only  in knowledge     content but also in
         scientific ways of thinking and knowledge construction. As mentioned before, this may explain why students
         sometimes failed to solve cognitive conflicts. In summary, the results of the study imply that the collaborative
         scientific conceptual change model is an effective framework to study conceptual change and the simulation
         environment     may  mediate   the development  of successful    collaborative interactions (including collaborative
         discourse and epistemic practices) that lead to collaborative scientific conceptual change.

       References
         Carey, S. & Smith, C. (1993). On understanding the nature of scientific knowledge. Educational Psychologist,
                  28, 235-251.
         Chi, M. T. H. (2005). Commonsense conceptions of emergent processes: Why some misconceptions are robust.
                  Journal of the Learning Sciences, 14, 161-199.
         Chinn, C. A., & Brewer, W. F. (2001). Models of data: A theory of how people evaluate data. Cognition and
                  Instruction, 19, 323-393.
         Dillenbourg, P. (1999). What do you mean by collaborative learning? In P. Dillenbourg (Ed). Collaborative-
                  learning: Cognitive and Computational Approaches (pp. 1-19). Oxford: Elsevier.
         Duschl,  R., &   Osborne,   J. (2002). Supporting  and   promoting  argumentation   discourse  in science  education.
                  Studies in Science Education, 38, 39-72.
         diSessa, A. (2006). A history of conceptual change research: Threads and fault lines. In R. K. Sawyer (Ed), The
                  Cambridge handbook of the learning Science (pp. 265-281), Cambridge, NY.
         Erkens, G. (2005). MEPA, Multiple Episode Protocol Analysis (Version 4.10). [Computer software]. Retrieved
                  October 24, 2005, from http://edugate.fss.uu.nl/mepa/
         Linn, M. (2006). The knowledge integration perspective on learning and instruction. In R. K. Sawyer (Ed), The
                  Cambridge handbook of the learning Science (pp. 243-264), Cambridge, NY.
         Mason, L. (2003). Personal epistemologies and intentional conceptual change. In G. M. Sinatra, & P. R. Pintrich
                  (Eds.), Intentional Conceptual Change. (pp. 199-237) Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
         National  Research   Center.   (1996).  Third  International Mathematics   and  Science  Study.   Lansing, MI:  U.S.
                  National Research Center.
         Pea, R. D. (1993). Learning scientific concepts through material and social activities: Conversational analysis
                  meets conceptual change. Educational Psychology, 28, 265-277.
         Posner, G., Strike, K., Hewson, P., & Gertzog, W. (1982). Accommodation of a scientific conception: Toward a
                  theory of conceptual change. Science Education, 66, 211-227.
         Roschelle,   J. (1992).  Learning   by  collaborating: Convergent   conceptual   change. Journal   of  the  Learning
                  Sciences, 2, 235-276.
         Sandoval,  W.   A.  & Reiser,   B.  J. (2004). Explanation-driven   inquiry: Integrating conceptual   and  epistemic
                  scaffolds for scientific inquiry. Science Education, 88, 345-372.
         Sinatra, G. M. (2002). Motivational, social, and contextual aspects of conceptual change: A commentary. In M.
                  Limon and L. Mason (Eds.), Reconsidering conceptual change: Issues in theory and practice (pp. 187-
                  197). Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer.
         Suthers, D.  D.  (2006).  Technology    affordance  for  intersubjective meaning  making:    A research   agenda   for
                  CSCL. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 1, 317-335.
         Wilensky, U., & Reisement, K. (2006). Thinking like a wolf, a sheep, or a firefly: Learning biology through
                  constructing   and testing  computational  theories   ­ An embodied    modeling    approach. Cognition  and
                  Instruction, 24, 171-209.

1-
