                      Constructive Use of Authoritative Sources
                                       in Science Meaning Making
                                              Jennifer Yeo, Seng Chee Tan,
                 National Institute of Education, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
                              Email: jennifer.yeo@nie.edu.sg, sengchee.tan@nie.edu.sg

         Abstract:    The    role of   authoritative   sources      of information    in a  constructivist   learning
         environment     has  always    been  ambiguous,      especially    in science   learning  where   there   is  a
         bountiful    of knowledge      readily    available  in    various sources.   Taking    a  social   semiotics
         perspective     in this study,   we  take    the view    that  authoritative  sources   are   inscriptions   of
         cultural artifacts and science learning involves meaning making of these cultural artifacts. In
         studying the meaning making process of a group of students doing Problem-based Learning,
         our  findings    show    that authoritative   sources      played  an  important   role  in  deepening    and
         expanding students' scientific knowledge. We also found that constructive use of authoritative
         sources   involves   interpretation   of   meaning      in context.    Therefore,  we   conclude    that  this
         structural coupling of authoritative sources and context for meaningful sense making has to be
         taken into consideration in the design of learning environment.

         The use of authoritative sources of knowledge, like textbooks, experts and teachers, is often associated
with transmission mode of instruction (Scardamalia & Bereiter, 1999).                The "knowledge" encoded in books or
dispensed  by  experts   are  often  considered     as the   ultimate   truth  to be  transmitted   to the   learners, with   due
diligence given to the fidelity of transmission so that learners will acquire the valid content rather than develop
misconceptions.    For this reason, the use of authoritative sources is thought to run contrary to meaning making
in a constructivist learning environment, in which students take on an active role in building knowledge through
collaborative efforts. The consequence could be a total abstinence from authoritative sources in such a learning
environment. This action may, however, deprive the learners of potential resources that could facilitate their
construction  of understanding.        In an  attempt   to   overcome    the   ambiguous    role of   authoritative   sources  in
constructivist classrooms, Scardamalia (2002) proposed "constructive use of authoritative sources" as one of the
12 principles for Knowledge Building (p. 77). This principle defines the use of such sources for informing and
producing iterative cycles of idea improvement (Zhang, Scardamalia, Lamon, Messina & Reeve, 2007). In other
words, it suggests a meaningful deployment of authoritative sources for continual meaning making.
         In the context of science learning where there is bountiful of scientific information recorded over the
course  of history    and   made  readily    available    in various   forms   of  media,   what   does   it mean     to  use the
authoritative sources constructively? In this study, our goal is to find out the process in which authoritative
sources are used constructively in mediating science meaning making. Using a social semiotics perspective of
science  learning, the   study    seeks   to answer    the   research   question   "how   do authoritative    sources    mediate
effective science meaning making?" using a social semiotics perspective of science learning.

Social Semiotics Perspective of Science and Science Learning
         From  a   social   semiotics   perspective,   science   is  a particular    way in which    people   within   a  science
community make sense of the world with different signs and symbols (Lemke, 1990). From this perspective,
science is not so much a set of truth to be discovered. Rather, scientific knowledge is a human construction of a
system of meanings (for example, concepts, theories and principles) with various forms of semiotic resources
such as language, mathematics, diagrams and techniques. This system of meanings is what we come to know as
scientific knowledge (Halliday, 1993).
         The construction of scientific knowledge is a meaning making practice that involves the abstraction of
worldly phenomena and representation of physical actions, objects and events with signs or symbols. These
semiotic  resources   function    as representation    of    the physical   world    and form   the  social  tools  with  which
community members could draw upon for meaning making.                   Members of the science community draw from the
system  of semiotic   resources    to  construct    scientific   knowledge.    When    used  repeatedly   and  regularly,     they
become recognizable within the community and become the institutionalized ways of talking and writing among
the community members.         These stable semiotic structures become the scientific knowledge that is deployed
within the science community. For example, the Newton's Second Law of Motion states that the acceleration of
an object  is dependent     upon  two   variables:    the net    force acting  on  the   object and   the mass   of   the object.
Mathematically,  it   is usually  represented      by F=ma.      The   terms   Force, Mass,  and    Acceleration    are   abstract
representations of physical phenomena that our senses can detect.              These scientific concepts are further used to
construct  scientific laws   that depict     their relationships    which   can   be represented   in  mathematical      symbols.

                                                                                                                                     2-
         Thus, the abstraction of physical phenomena with scientific concepts allows us to build a system of scientific
         meanings. Therefore, a newcomer into the science community has to appropriate the unique system of social
         semiotic tools for making meaning of, for and with them in order to participate meaningfully in the meaning
         making practices of the community.

       Embodiment of Scientific Meaning in Authoritative Sources
                Authoritative     sources are credible  information  repository of  scientific knowledge  constructed by
         members of a scientific community over a period of time. They can come in various media (such as books or
         phonic airwaves) in which scientific meanings are represented with the social semiotic resources, particularly
         linguistic resources, of  the scientific community. Examples    of authoritative sources include books, Internet
         resources, experts and teachers.
                In these authoritative sources, products of meaning making practices in the scientific community are
         made permanent through the inscription of signs and symbols (Stahl, 2006). However, these inscriptions carry
         no meaning in itself although the scientific community has imbued meaning onto them.     Therefore, repeating the
         particular words verbally or writing them in verbatim does not constitute meaning making. Instead, it is the
         ability to deploy these systems of meaning strategically so that community members perceive the actions as
         meaningful that constitute the constructive use of authoritative sources. More specifically, a newcomer into the
         scientific community is not making any meaning of these symbolic inscriptions found in authoritative sources
         until they are brought back to life by human interpretation. Thus, students need to learn to interpret meaning
         embodied in these artifacts. They have to deconstruct the meaning inscribed in these artifacts and reconstruct its
         meaning in a particular context.   It is in this respect that we refer to as constructive use of authoritative sources
         for science meaning making.
                In the following sections, we describe a study which looks at how authoritative sources can be used
         constructively for science meaning making. We report five instances of this meaningful use of authoritative
         sources by a group of five students in a Problem-based Learning (PBL) classroom as they went about solving a
         science problem.

       Method
                This   study   is part of a larger  design research that looks  at the pedagogical design  for supporting
         students' inquiry learning. The focus of this study is to find out the processes in which authoritative sources are
         used constructively for science meaning making.
                In this study, the meaning making process of a group of five grade 7 students in a PBL classroom was
         observed. In the PBL activity, students were tasked to find out the cause of a roller coaster accident before any
         related scientific content knowledge was taught. A scaled-down model of a section of the roller coaster where
         the accident happened was set up for students to carry out investigations. A computer-supported collaborative
         learning system, Knowledge Constructor (KC), was used to support the collaboration among the five students
         during the PBL activity. KC is an online discussion tool that represents discussion threads in a graphical form. A
         screen shot of KC environment of one of the forum discussions is shown in Figure 1.
                The PBL activity was carried out over three 2-hour lessons in a science laboratory. The PBL activity
         started with the teacher delineating the task to the students. They were to investigate (1) how the ride worked
         and (2) what might have caused the accident. More specifically, the students had to construct a theory of how
         the roller coaster cart worked in terms of energy change, and to generate and test their hypothesis of the cause of
         the accident. A forum was set up in each lesson to support the discussion among students.
                The interaction among students was analyzed by threads. Each thread consists of a number of notes that
         build on to each other linearly (see Figure 1). The analysis of the role of authoritative sources made use of the
         framework of systemic functional linguistics (Halliday, 1985). More specifically, the ideational metafunction
         was used to uncover the role of authoritative sources in this science meaning making endeavor. The ideational
         metafunction refers to the use of linguistic resources for constructing activity, kinds of subject matter and logical
         relations (Halliday, 1985).

2-
                                                                                                note

                                                                                                   thread

                                    Figure 1.   Screenshot of KC environment.

Findings
         The findings show students' scientific understanding progressed from a naïve, everyday worldview of
the problem context to a refined conception in terms of the energy changes in the roller coaster system. The
presence of  authoritative sources  in this  activity was    a strong  attribute for   the progressive    advancement    in
students' understanding. The sections below describe five instances in which we consider as constructive use of
authoritative sources in mediating the science meaning making process in the PBL activity.

Defining the Scientific Field
         Findings from the    previous design   research  cycle   showed  that   students'  interpretation  of a problem
context tended to be based on their own systems of meaning, which may not be consistent with those of the
science community. Without any intervention, very little science meaning would be made. Therefore, in this
research cycle, the teacher's voice was used as a source of authority to direct students' attention to the intended
system of meaning. In this case, the teacher's voice was embedded in the instructions in a letter of appointment
to the students, as shown in the following excerpt.

Excerpt 1
         "...This report should include:
         1.  Explanation of how the ride works in terms of energy change.
         2.  A mathematical expression that summarizes the energy change in the motion of the ride
             from the beginning to the end. ..."

         The  excerpt shows    the  teacher  defining    the  system  of meanings      and    semiotic  resources in   this
instruction. For example, the repetition of the noun phrase energy change (shown in italics) emphasized the
intended subject  matter.   It thus drew    the boundary      around  which   meanings     should    be   constructed. The
expanded noun phrases, "explanation of how the ride ..." and "a mathematical expression that summarizes...",
further defined the forms   of  semiotic resources    (linguistics  and  mathematics,      in this case)   to be used   for
meaning making.
         The result of defining the subject matter and the types of semiotic resources was a barrage of notes
posted on KC related to energy change inscribed in both linguistic and mathematical forms. Excerpt 2 shows an
example of a thread of notes that resulted.
         The notes  shown   in excerpt 2 contained    scientific   concepts   (e.g., "mechanical     energy", "amount   of
work done by external forces, "kinetic energy (KE)", "potential energy (PE)", "velocity (v)" and "height (h)")
and scientific relationships (e.g., "PE = mgh", "mechanical energy is the energy possessed ... due to its kinetic
... or potential energy ..."), represented in both linguistic and mathematical symbols. These scientific concepts
and semiotic structures are collocated with the subject matter energy change. They were an indication of the
efficient recognition of the relevant systems of scientific semiotic tools, made possible by the purposeful use of
the teacher's authority embedded in the instructions.

Excerpt 2

Note     Date/Time     Author                                            Content
 14     2006-07-26/         J       A  roller coaster    ride  uses the  work-energy    theorem      that work   done  by
        10:10:06                    external  forces  is able  to  change the    total amount   of   mechanical   energy
                                    from an   initial value    to some  final value.   The    amount  of  work   done  by
                                    external forces upon the object is equal to the amount of change in the total

                                                                                                                              2-
                                              mechanical energy of the object. The theorem is stated in the mathematical
                                              equation below.
                                                                 KEinitial + PEinitial + Wexternal = KEfinal + PEfinal
                                              The left side of the equation includes the total mechanical energy (KEinitial +
                                              PEinitial) for the initial     state of the object   plus  the work   done  by  external
                                              forces (Wexternal)  while       the  right side   of the  equation    includes  the total
                                              mechanical energy (KEfinal + PEfinal) for the final state of the (object).
                                               http://www.glenbrook.k12.il.us/gbssci/phys/mmedia/energy/ce.htmlobject.
          18     2006-07-26/        M         As the roller coaster train begins its descent from the lift hill, its velocity
                 10:12:33                     increases.   This causes the train to gain kinetic energy, which is the energy
                                              of motion.     The faster the train moves, the more kinetic energy the train
                                              gains. This is shown by the equation for kinetic energy:
                                              KE = ½ mv2
          20     2006-07-26/         J        Mechanical energy is the energy possessed by an object due to its kinetic
                 10:17:55                     (energy of motion) or potential energy (stored energy of position). Objects
                                              have mechanical     energy       if  they  are in motion   and/or  if they are  at  some
                                              position relative to a zero potential energy position e.g. a brick held at a
                                              vertical position above the ground or zero height position
          38     2006-07-26/         D        the PE depends on height and the KE depends on velocity
                 10:17:55                     PE= mgh
                                              KE= (1/2) mv2

        Expanding Scientific Field
                   Excerpt 2   showed  notes   containing    scientific      knowledge   that   students had   gathered  from   Internet
         resources. While such reproduction of texts from Internet resources in verbatim was not considered a meaning
         making action, they played an important role in expanding students' field of scientific knowledge.
                  For instance,  the initial  part of    the  problem        solving  process   saw  students'   scientific  knowledge
         confined to a shallow understanding that friction affected motion of an object. They were unable to explain how
         friction was able to stop a moving object. Neither did they have the necessary language competency to talk
         about the phenomenon. In excerpt 2, we saw systems of cultural semiotic tools used by the science community
         for constructing meaning being introduced into the students' sphere of consciousness. For example, the Internet
         introduced a taxonomy of forms of energy (e.g., mechanical energy, potential energy and kinetic energy) and
         their association with our  worldly   phenomenon      (e.g.,     position   and  motion),  represented   in   culturally-agreed
         mathematical symbols (e.g., KE, PE, h, v).          The Internet resources also introduced the specific structures of
         scientific meanings built from these concepts. Examples seen in excerpt 2 included identifying relations (e.g.,
         "KEinitial + PEinitial + Wexternal = KEfinal + PEfinal", "KE = ½ mv2", "Mechanical energy is the energy possessed by
         an object due to  its kinetic ... or  potential   energy       ..." and  "PE=   mgh"),    attributive relations (e.g., "the PE
         depends on height and the KE depends on velocity") and causal relations (e.g., "The faster the train moves, the
         more kinetic energy the train gains." and "Objects have mechanical energy if they are in motion."). Therefore,
         the presence of the Internet had helped students to be acquainted with the particular language (both linguistics
         and mathematics) used for talking about the motion of an object in our physical world. In this way, the Internet
         resources had expanded students' scientific field by creating awareness of the systems of science semiotic tools
         associated with motion.
                  However, lifting information from the Internet was not meaning making. This was evident in a mid-
         activity group report that students submitted to explain the motion of the roller coaster cart. The students merely
         reproduced what   they had  gathered   from     the Internet     resources   without   making   connections     with the roller
         coaster phenomenon. For example, in the concluding statements in the report, the students wrote that

                  "Objects have mechanical energy if they are in motion and/or if they are at some position
                  relative to a zero potential energy position e.g. a brick held at a vertical position above the
                  ground or zero height position.
                  KEinitial + PEinitial + Wexternal = KEfinal + PEfinal
                  The left side of the equation includes the total mechanical energy (KEinitial + PEinitial) for the
                  initial state of the object plus the work done on the object by external forces (Wexternal) while
                  the right side of the equation includes the total mechanical energy (KEfinal + PEfinal) for the
                  final state of the object."

         From this conclusion, it was obvious that they had not made any connection between the roller coaster cart and
         the work energy theorem, "KEinitial + PEinitial + Wexternal = KEfinal + PEfinal".

2-
          Although the work-energy theorem and other science semiotic tools gathered may be meaningful to
members     of the science community,      students had  not made   much    sense of or       with them   thus far. The   next
section continues to show how this increased consciousness of the systems of science semiotic tools had made it
possible for students to deepen their science meaning making endeavor.

Deconstructing Scientific Semiotic Tools
          Thus far, there were few evidences of students making sense of the scientific knowledge introduced in
excerpt 2. However, in the second lesson, we saw the students trying to make sense of the science concepts and
relationships when they were prompted by their teacher to explain the roller coaster cart's motion in the given
problem. Excerpt 3 shows one instance whereby meaning was made of the signs and symbols gathered from the
Internet resources.

Excerpt 3

Note      Date/Time       Author                                            Content
   4     2006-08-02/          J      the cart starts moving down the slope due to its potential energy it has due to
         09:36:23                    its height at the beginning. There is a relationship between the height of this
                                     hill and the speed of the coaster

                                     the higher the height at the beginning, the more potential energy it has, thus
                                     the   roller coaster would  travel   a further  distance      for  a  roller coaster on a
                                     higher slope.

          In excerpt 3, note 4 shows student J deconstructing the term, "potential energy" (found in excerpt 2,
notes 20 and 38). The clause, "the cart starts to move down due to its potential energy it has ..." (excerpt 3, note
4), showed student L identifying "potential energy" as a property that the roller coaster cart "has" which made
the  physical  action  of the cart  ("starts  to moves   down")  possible.  This  implied       that student   J  was making
connection between the abstract concept (potential energy) and the physical context (object and action) of the
roller coaster.
          Deeper meaning of potential energy was evidently made when student J used the adverbial phrase "due
to  its height  at the beginning"   to relate  the  abstract property  (potential energy)       with   the physical   position
(height)  and  time  (at the beginning)    of the roller coaster cart. In this case, a       causal  relationship  was  made
between them. This causal relationship was further elaborated with the clause "the higher the height ..., the
more potential energy it has". In this clause, student J attributed the magnitude of the abstract property ("more
potential energy it has") to how high ("higher the height") the roller coaster was. In so doing, meaning inscribed
in the mathematical representation, "PE = mgh", (excerpt 2, note 38) was made.
          The above example showed how the systems of science meaning and semiotic resources gathered from
the Internet were used to further mediate science meaning making. The deconstruction of the science semiotic
tools   was not possible  without   the   mediation of   the roller coaster context. By        relating the  symbols   to  the
physical objects and space in the problem context, meaning was made of the systems of science semiotic tools.
The result was a recontextualization of scientific knowledge found in the Internet resources.

Reconstructing with Scientific Semiotic Tools
          The deconstruction process, as exemplified by excerpt 3, had helped students to make meaning of the
abstract concepts associated with energy changes. However, to participate meaningfully in scientific practice,
students must also be able to make meaning with the science semiotic tools. Excerpt 4 shows how authoritative
sources further contributed to this aspect of students' meaning making process.

Excerpt 4

Note        Date/Time      Author                                            Content
 14       2006-08-02/           J      KEinitial + PEinitial + Wexternal = KEfinal + PEfinal
          09:49:04
                                       as the cart is coming to a stop, the kinetic energy increases (increase in speed)
                                       as the potential energy decreases (due to decrease in height), the KE added to
                                       the PE added to the external forces (friction), would equal to the final KE
                                       when the cart has stopped, which is 0 and the potential energy, which is also 0,
                                       this is because W has used up the energy needed for movement.
                                        .
                                        .

                                                                                                                                 2-
                                                .

           23      2006-08-04/        D       As the KEinitial + PEinitial is always known. In the case of the roller coaster,
                   16:38:13                              PE= mgh
                                                         KE= (1/2) mv2
                                              PE can be calculated from the measurements and KE would be 0. By means of
                                              working backwards, we can find the force which occurs in the whole process.

                                              0 + mgh + [-force x displacement x cosine (theta)] = 0 + 0
                                              mgh = force x displacement x cosine (theta)

                   Note 14 shows student J applying the newly made scientific meanings to interpret the work-energy
         theorem, "KEinitial + PEinitial + Wexternal = KEfinal + PEfinal" (excerpt 2, note 14) in the context of the roller coaster
         phenomenon.    In note 23, student D further made use of the mathematical symbols (e.g., "m", "g", "h" and "v")
         to represent the interpretation, resulting in the derivation of the equation "mgh = force x displacement x cosine
         (theta)". Hence, this  equation,  a  symbolic      representation of the motion    of the roller  coaster cart,  was   a
         reconstruction of meanings using the semiotic tools that the students had made sense of earlier. In this sense, we
         consider  the authoritative  sources  to   have provided  the  affordances    for the continual   process of meaning
         making.

        Questioning Authoritative Sources
                   The above four instances of constructive use of authoritative sources showed that while students had
         made meaning of and with the science semiotic tools, they had not made new meanings for these semiotic tools.
         Meanings for the semiotic tools were often acquired from the Internet resources without questions. For example,
         students had readily accepted the assumption of negligible air resistance, as given in the Internet resources, for
         the computation of Wexternal. However, we saw them questioning this assumption when a discrepancy between
         their derived theoretical equation and empirical evidences resulted from their investigation of the cause of the
         accident. Excerpt 5 shows notes resulting from the investigation.

        Excerpt 5

         Note      Date/Time       Author                                            Content
           34      2006-08-16/        D       ...given total weight of the four victims is 340kg: ... d =   127.78 = 128 (3sf)
                   10:09:12
           35      2006-08-16/        D       compared to a car carrying four riders of average 70kg:      ...d...  = 128 (3sf)
                   10:10:56                   thus, e difference in displacement is: 128 - 128 = 0 ...
           36      2006-08-16/        D       Mass (g) 1st try 2nd try 3rd try Average
                   10:50:56                   28         42.0   42.5   44.5    43.0
                                              34         51.0   49.0   48.0    49.3
                                                .
                                                .
                                                .
           38      2006-08-16/        D       mass DOES not affect the stopping distance..
                   10:58:05                   what have we neglected in e process of driving e final equation?

                   Students had hypothesized that excessive mass was the cause of the accident. During the investigation,
         they tested their hypothesis using the theoretical expression derived (refer to excerpt 4, note 23) and triangulated
         the results with the model set-up of the roller coaster ride. Notes 34 and 35 showed the results obtained from the
         derived expression when different values of mass were substituted into the equation. It showed no difference in
         stopping  distance. Note  36 showed      the stopping distances   of the cart obtained  with  the model   set-up when
         different masses   were loaded   onto    the cart. However, it    indicated a difference  in stopping   distances. The
         discrepancy between the theoretical and empirical results triggered student D to ask "what have we neglected in
         e process  of deriving  e final equation?".   This  prompted  the   students  to look back   at their meaning   making
         process, which eventually led to a construction of a new meaning for the symbol, Wexternal. Finally, the students
         realized that air resistance had to be taken into account in the amount of external work done by the roller coaster
         cart (Wexternal), despite what most authoritative sources claimed. In this sense, a new meaning was made for the
         semiotic symbol, Wexternal.
                   This instance thus shows another constructive use of authoritative source. The discrepancy between the
         physical phenomenon and theory surfaced by the investigation activity triggered the spontaneous reflection on

2-
the students' meaning making process. This led to a further refinement in the students' understanding of the
scientific knowledge.

Discussion and Conclusion
          Constructive use of authoritative sources will lead to a continual advancement in students' scientific
understanding   (Scardamalia    &    Bereiter,  1999).  In   this study,   we  see  a  refinement   in    students'    scientific
understanding as their knowledge shifts from everyday knowledge (everyday ways of thinking and talking about
motion   of  objects)    to  theoretical   knowledge       (culturally-agreed  knowledge      found    in  the  Internet),    to
deconstructed and reconstructed knowledge (sense making of and with theoretical knowledge) and finally, to
reflexive knowledge      (meanings   made    as a  result  of  reflexive  thinking  of meaning     making    process).     This
advancement of scientific knowledge, as reported in the findings, is mediated by the presence of authoritative
sources  in the learning     environment.    Figure   2 summarizes     this shift  in  scientific knowledge     mediated     by
authoritative sources.

               appointment letter;     Internet resources;        Internet resources;       Internet resources;
               Internet resources      problem context;           problem context;          problem context;
       Everyday                Theoretical              Deconstructed           Reconstructed               Reflexive
      knowledge                 knowledge                  knowledge              knowledge                knowledge

 e.g., Friction           e.g., PEintial +          e.g., PE = energy       e.g., mgh = force x       Redefinition of
 causes cart to stop      KEintial + Wext =         cart has due to its     displacement x            Wexternal
                          PEfinal + KEfinal; KE     height on the slope     cosine (theta)
                          = ½ mv2; PE = mgh

                Figure 2.    Refinement of scientific knowledge mediated by authoritative sources

          From the findings in this study, a few learning points about the constructive use of authoritative sources
are drawn.  Firstly,  it is the role of    teacher's  authoritative  voice. The    study   shows  that   there  is  a  place for
teacher's authoritative   voice  in  a constructivist   classroom    (Mortimer     &  Scott,  2003).   However,     unlike   the
traditional didactic   teaching   approaches,      the  teacher's    voice  should    not  be  used    for transmitting      the
decontextualized theoretical knowledge found in textbooks and reference materials.                Instead, the teacher could
use his/her authoritative status in directing students' attention to the salient features and meaningful patterns of
meaning in the problem context which are often be missed by novice learners. For example, in this study, the
teacher's voice was used purposefully to direct attention to the subject matter energy change and to specify the
types of  semiotic   resources  that are   typically  used  for science   meaning   making.    The  result was      an efficient
gathering of theoretical knowledge associated with energy change inscribed in cultural-specific semiotic tools.
Hence, the chances of students' frustration setting in early in the meaning making process could be reduced.
          The  second    implication drawn     from   this study  is the  important   role of  reference   resources    such as
Internet  resources,  textbooks    and     encyclopedias    in  constructivist    learning environment.     Contrary     to  its
association with acquisition of decontextualized knowledge, the findings in this study show that the systems of
scientific meanings and semiotic resources introduced by reference resources such as Internet resources play an
important role in mediating science meaning making process. According to Vygotsky (1986), students are often
unaware of their own system of meaning derived from their daily experiences with the world around them. This
lack of consciousness thus makes it difficult for students to use their own concepts purposefully for meaning
making.   Instead, the   increased   awareness    of  these  systems   of  scientific  semiotic   tools,  made  available    by
authoritative sources, allows students to act consciously with them as the problem demands (Vygotsky, 1986).
          However, introducing theoretical knowledge into the sphere of students' consciousness only provides a
condition   conducive    for meaning       making.  If  the  process  stops    at this juncture,   the   depth  of     scientific
understanding will be compromised. What the students would have acquired from this information gathering
exercise  will be  a set  of decontextualized     semiotic   symbols   which   are  meaningless    to  them,   and    hence  not
transferable. Thus, what is necessary is to orchestrate purposeful meaning making of, with and for these systems
of semiotic tools. This brings us to the next learning point drawn from this study.
          All meaning is constructed in context (Lemke, 1990). Words and phrases are meaningful only when
associated with the physical phenomenon we are familiar with in our everyday life. Our findings show that
meaning making happens when the theoretical knowledge gathered by the students from Internet resources is
connected   to the  roller  coaster  context.   This   implies  the  co-constitution   of  theoretical   knowledge     and   our
worldly phenomena.       In other words, meaning making cannot happen without one or the other. According to
Vygotsky    (1986, p.  194),  "an   everyday    concept    clears a  path  for the  scientific concept    and   its downward
development    ... Scientific  concepts,    in  turn, supply   structures  for  the upward     development     of   the child's

                                                                                                                                    2-
         spontaneous and deliberate use". Just like the case example in this study, students' naïve understanding of the
         roller coaster context provided the affordance for meaning to be made of the semiotic tools while the systems of
         scientific meanings and semiotic resources provided the means for abstraction from the problem context. This
         dialectical meaning   making    process   simply   implies the   need to  provide  both abstract  knowledge    and a
         meaningful   context  for effective  science meaning    making.    In Lemke's  (1990,   p. 204) words,   "Everything
         makes sense only against the background of other things like it". Without a relevant and meaningful context
         alongside authoritative sources, effective science meaning making is unlikely to happen.
                 In   conclusion,  this study  uncovers   five  different ways  in which authoritative  sources can   be used
         constructively to mediate science meaning making. It also shows that, contrary to popular belief, authoritative
         sources are  necessary    for  effective science   meaning   making.  However,    they  cannot  function alone. The
         affordance of authoritative sources has to be coupled with a problem context so that meaning can be made of,
         for and with   social semiotic   tools.  Therefore,  instructional designers  have to   take into consideration  this
         structural coupling between context and knowledge in their design of constructivist learning environment in
         order to orchestrate meaningful sense making.

       References
         Halliday, M.A.K. (1985). An introduction to functional grammar. London: Edward Arnold.
         Halliday,   M.A.K. (1993).    On the language    of physical science.  In  M.A.K.  Halliday   &  J.R. Martin   (Eds.),
                 Writing science: Literacy and discursive power (pp. 54-68). London: The Falmer Press.
         Lemke, J. (1990). Talking science. London: Ablex Publishing.
         Mortimer, E. & Scott, P. (2003). Meaning making in secondary science classrooms. London: Open University
                 Press.
         Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (1999). Schools as knowledge building organizations. In D. Keating & C.
         Hertzman (Eds.), Today's children, tomorrow's society: The developmental health and wealth of nations (pp.
                 174-289). New York: Guilford.
         Scardamalia,  M. (2002).   Collective    cognitive responsibility for the advancement   of knowledge.    In B. Smith
                 (Ed.), Liberal education in a knowledge society (pp. 67-98). Chicago: Open Court.
         Stahl, G. (2006). Group cognition. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
         Vygotsky, L. (1986). The development of scientific concepts in childhood: The design of working hypothesis. In
                 Kozulin, A. (Ed). Thought and language (pp. 147- 209). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
         Zhang,  J., Scardamalia,   M.,   Lamon,   M.,  Messina,    R &    Reeve,  R. (2007).   Socio-cognitive dynamics    of
                 knowledge     building   in the  work  of   9- and  10-year-olds.  Educational  Technology    Research   and
                 Development, 55, 117-145.

       References
         This on-going research is funded by the Learning Sciences Lab, Singapore. (Project code: LSL 1/04 TSC)

2-0
