"Current is the one that's mean": The development of engineering
                            student trajectories of identification
    Andrew Jocuns, Reed Stevens, University of Washington, Box 353600, Seattle, Washington 98195-3600
                           Email: jocunsa@u.washington.edu, reedstev@u.washington.edu

          Abstract:    The role  of identity construction in learning  to become   an   engineer  is explored
          through the examination of ethnographic interviews over the course of four years and video
          data  from   group-work   in  engineering  senior  design projects.   Focusing   upon  engineering
          students'  identity development     within  the   figured world   of   engineering   we    trace the
          development of trajectories of identification. We focus upon what can be traced over time
          along trajectories of identification in becoming an engineer.

Introduction
          Our   poster describes  identity development    along  trajectories of identification  (Wortham,     2006)  of
engineering students in the context of learning to become an engineer. Through the examination of ethnographic
interviews across four years and discourse analysis of video transcripts, we trace the trajectory of identification
of two engineering students, Colin and Simon.      In our analysis we highlight some features of talk focusing upon
the content   of responses    to questions,  and  some   themes  that we    can  trace across  students'   trajectory of
identification.  We argue that becoming an engineer involves appropriating the behaviors within the figured
world (Holland et al., 1998) of the occupation of engineering, and developing a sense of individual agency
within that figured world.

Methodology
          The present analysis is drawn from data derived from the Academic Pathways Study (APS), a multi-
year, multi-method study that spanned four academic institutions in the United States. The ethnographic aspect
of  the Academic    Pathways     Study has  worked  with  16 engineering    students   on each of the  four  campuses
involved in the study.   Of the 16 students on each campus, 8 students (4 female and 4 male) were selected to be
involved with more intimate ethnographic work involving observations of classes, study groups, and other on-
campus activities.   In a few cases we were able to obtain video and/or audio data from engineering students'
work on their senior design/capstone projects. The APS has used a variety of ethnographic methods in a variety
of engineering education contexts: ethnographic interviews and focus groups with engineering students; the
observation of engineering spaces and engineering activities within the College of Engineering on campus (e.g.
career fairs, meetings about the application process); ethnographic observations both in and out of class; and the
analysis of official and unofficial texts from the College of Engineering (e.g. handouts about the application
process, course syllabi, guides on getting through the major produced by students).          The present study works
with two aspects of this methodology ­ longitudinal ethnographic interviews and video data from senior design
and capstone projects.

Identification
          An important part of our ethnographic work on the APS project is how identity develops over time.
The approach we follow for identity development is similar to Wortham's (2006) discussion of trajectories of
identification,  which  enables   one  to consider  how   identification is a process   that develops  across   events,
contexts, and timescales (Lemke, 2000) in conjunction with academic learning. This developmental approach
enables us to focus upon how students within our study become engineers along divergent trajectories and to
consider identity as an on-going process.     Some questions we consider are how/when do students maintain an
engineering identity (O'Connor et al., 2007; Garrison et al., 2007)? What makes up and influences that identity
(Stevens et al., 2005)?     What    experiences  outside of  the curriculum   have fostered   the growth    of such   an
identity? We have focused our attention on the double-sidedness of identification: the identity one projects and
the identity as perceived through such projections by others.
          Holland   et al. (1998)   have  argued that in  a similar manner    to how   nation-states  create imagined
communities (Anderson, 1983), other aspects of lived experience are also imagined. In this case we are referring
to the occupation of engineering as a figured world ­ socially and culturally constructed spaces where meanings
are attributed   to social  actors  and   value placed on   certain actions.  Engineering    students  engage   in and
appropriate from instructors, mentors or internship supervisors, the behaviors of their future occupation during
coursework, internships or co-ops, and most importantly working with their peers on group projects during a
senior design project or capstone course. Through such interactions they develop identities that involve such
practices as constructing circuit boards for an amplifier or designing an aircraft.

                                                                                                                            3-
      Case One: Colin
                 One of the features of Colin's trajectory of identification that emerges over time is his use of technical
       language   during   ethnographic   interviews.    Here   we   emphasize   that  over   time, as  we   follow    the  emergent
       trajectory of identification in Colin's engineering education, he reaches a point where he can talk engineering.
       By   talk engineering  we    are referring  to  his  use of scientific   technical jargon  in   order   to explain   electrical
       engineering concepts.     Over time we notice that Colin's ability to talk engineering is enhanced through his use
       of anthropomorphic     referents   such  as  mean,   hungry,   and   eat in  discussing   technical  electrical   engineering
       concepts.

      Case Two: Simon
                 In terms  of Simon's     trajectory  of  identification we    also notice  that  his  ability to  talk  engineering
       emerged    more   significantly  over  time.  However,     the context   through   which   this developed      in Simon   was
       different. Whereas Colin learned talk engineering through coursework, Simon had the advantage of working in
       an engineering lab on campus where he performed actual engineering work, working alongside both engineering
       students   and professional   engineers.   We   also observe   how   his  navigational    practices  (the  various   practices
       involved in navigating through an engineering program) perform an important role in creating networks that we
       can trace along his trajectory of becoming an engineer.
                 In tracing the trajectories of identification of two engineering students we note some of the differences
       that emerge    in both  their  discourse    and  their  actions.  Colin's trajectory   emerged    with     his ability to talk
       engineering    in two disparate  contexts,   the  ethnographic    interview   and  lab interaction   amongst    his  electrical
       engineering peers. Simon's trajectory of identification was also marked by his ability to talk engineering.               Yet
       while his use of scientific jargon was present in interaction with his peers, his trajectory was also marked by his
       developing navigational practices, e.g. working in an engineering lab on campus. Trajectories of identification
       enable us to perceive how the figured worlds that students aspire to be a part of are highly relative.                 That is,
       while there are similarities, the differences in both discourse and action reveal how figured worlds are imagined.

      References
       Anderson, B. (1983). Imagined communities. London: Verso.
       Garrison,  L.,   Stevens, R.,   Sabin,  P., &   Jocuns,   A.   (2007).   Cultural  models    of the  admission      process in
                 engineering:  Views    on   the  role  of  gender.   American   Society    for  Engineering    Education     Annual
                 Conference, Honolulu, Hawaii.
       Holland,   D.C.,  W.  Lachiocotte,    D.  Skinner,   and  C.   Cain. (1998).    Identity and   agency   in  cultural   worlds.
                 Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press.
       Lemke, J. (2000). Across the scales of time: Activities, artifacts, and meanings in ecosocial systems. Mind,
                 Culture, Activity. 7, pp. 273-290.
       O'Connor,    K.,  Amos, D.,   Bailey,  T.,  Garrison,  L., Loshbaugh,     H., Jones,   M., Seward,    D.,  Perhamus,    L., &
                 Stevens  R.  (2007).   Sponsorship:    Engineering's    tacit gatekeeper.  American    Society    for   Engineering
                 Education Annual Conference, Honolulu, Hawaii.
       Stevens, R. & Hall, R. (1998). Disciplined perception: Learning to see in technoscience. In M. Lampert & M. L.
                 Blunk   (Eds.),  Talking   mathematics     in  school:  Studies    of teaching   and   learning      (pp. 107-149).
                 Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
       Stevens,   R., Amos,   D.,   Jocuns,  A.,  &   Garrison,   L.  (2007).  Engineering    as  lifestyle and   a   meritocracy  of
                 difficulty: Two    pervasive  beliefs   among   engineering    students  and   their  possible   effects. American
                 Society for Engineering Education Annual Conference, Honolulu, Hawaii.
       Stevens,   R., O'Connor,   K.,   & Garrison,    L.  (2005).   Engineering    student identities  in  the   navigation  of   the
                 undergraduate curriculum. Association of the Society of Engineering Education Annual Conference,
                 Portland, Oregon.
       Wortham, S. (2006). Learning identity: The joint emergence of social identification and academic learning.
                 New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.

      Acknowledgements
       This material is based on work supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant No. ESI-0227558,
       which funds the Center for the Advancement of Engineering Education (CAEE). CAEE is a collaboration of
       five partner   universities: Colorado   School    of Mines,    Howard    University, Stanford    University,    University  of
       Minnesota, and University of Washington.

3-0
