  Advancing a New Perspective on Decision-Making about Socio-
    Scientific Issues: The Study of Memes and Memetic Processes
 Susan A. Yoon, Graduate School of Education, University of Pennsylvania, 3700 Walnut Street, Philadelphia,
                                           PA 19104, yoonsa@gse.upenn.edu

         Abstract:     The   study seeks    to  advance   the    socio-scientific  issues  knowledge     base    by
         addressing the complexity of these issues using methodological and analytical tools that reveal
         information about individual, collaborative and situational outcomes. In this case study of a
         grade 7 classroom investigating the topic of genetic engineering, a memes analysis indicated
         that several memetic mechanisms potentially affected how and why ideas were taken up in the
         learning   system.   Mechanisms     included    processes    such as `do   as the smart     students do',
         friendship  selection,   and  meme-coupling      influences.  Implications  for  education  in  terms   of
         student decision-making about socio-scientific issues are discussed.

Argumentation, Socio-Scientific Issues and Complexity
         As a challenge to traditional practices of school science, a substantial body of research has advocated
for educational experiences to simulate the discursive practices of the scientific community that are predicated
on language, communication, and argumentation (Driver et al., 2000; Newton et al., 1999; Osborne et al., 2004).
Argumentation     enables  the  critical evaluation  of   scientific  and  technological   claims    (Driver  et al., 2000),
develops logical reasoning skills (Osborne et al., 2004), encourages the use of evidence to challenge and support
theories (Sandoval     &  Millwood,    2005),   creates  classroom    environments   that  promote   multiple    perspective
taking (Driver  et  al., 1994),  requires   active  participation  and  co-construction   of   knowledge  (Newton      et al.,
1999), and engages students in decision-making about scientific and technological issues (Jimenez-Aleixandre
& Pereiro-Munoz,     2002).   Researchers   have    sought  to   document    student attitudes   and beliefs  about    socio-
scientific issues  and   have also investigated    the  efficacy  of  curricular  interventions  on  student  learning    that
incorporates many of the necessary reasoning, argumentation, and decision-making skills listed above. Results
have shown that students hold a wide range of beliefs about what is acceptable use of certain socio-scientific
research   (Dawson & Schibeci, 2003). They also lack an understanding of essential processes and often display
widespread uncertainty about socio-scientific knowledge (Lewis & Wood-Robinson, 2000). Moreover, despite
extensive   curricular interventions,   some   studies  have  found   that student   attitudes largely remain    unchanged
(Dawson & Schibeci, 2003; Olsher & Dreyfus, 1999).
         Sadler    (2004) presents   detailed   and plausible    recommendations     for researchers   to pursue    in order
improve    student attitudes  and  beliefs  however  much     of the  literature reviewed  focuses   on  interventions    that
involve students interacting with concepts and issues through teacher or researcher selected texts. The same
article acknowledges that socio-scientific research often involves cutting edge or frontier forms of scientific
activity, thus people need to rely on multiple sources when forming opinions about such research. This situation
suggests that the manner in which students acquire and evaluate these information sources must be studied in
addition to studying their reasoning abilities or understanding through text analyses. Several researchers have
also stated that some of the difficulties in understanding socio-scientific concepts lie in the inherent complexities
of these issues and provide insights into constructing programs that both encourage access to and evaluation of
these multiple decision influencing sources, which include peers. For example, Kolstoe (2000) advocates for a
process of consensus-building in projects premised on the presentation and defense of data with the expectation
that ideas are debated, opposed and negotiated by fellow classmates (there are other robust and long-standing
research programs, e.g., Bereiter, 2002 that do not focus exclusively on socio-scientific issues but nonetheless
promote    similar knowledge-building      peer-to-peer   activities. Hmelo-Silver   and   Azevedo    (2006)  suggest     that
learning   how to  design   appropriate  and    effective curricular  contexts   when    dealing with  complex    scientific
phenomena, requires efforts by researchers to investigate the cognitive, metacognitive, and motivational skills
and strategies that  affect  not  only  the individual,   but also collaborative   and   situational outcomes.   The   study
seeks to advance the socio-scientific issues knowledge base by addressing the complexity of socio-scientific
issues using  methodological     and  analytical   tools that reveal  information    about individual,   collaborative    and
situational outcomes.    As  part of  a  larger research  program     investigating  the efficacy of   a complex    systems
approach in science and technology education            (Yoon,   2007)  this smaller   study investigates  the   subfield  of
memetics (e.g., the study of how information moves across cultural systems as well as individuals) that attempts
to address the aforementioned problem of understanding how students acquire and evaluate information sources.
The question under investigation is: What educational insights do the study of memes and memetic processes
provide in terms of understanding what and how students learn about socio-scientific issues?

                                                                                                                                 2-
        Memes and Memetic Processes
                   Hogan and    Maglienti  (2001)     found among     other  things   that scientists and   non-scientists  (including
         middle  school  students)   differed in  their reasoning     skills in  that the  former   group  drew   on   epistemological
         standards constructed by the scientific community such as the use of empirical evidence to make conclusions
         while the latter group used personal opinions to make judgments about knowledge claims. Kuhn et al. (1997)
         discuss the importance of dyadic interactions on improving a host of argumentation skills such as consideration
         of alternative perspectives and greater differentiation of justifications. Missing from the literature are studies
         that  reveal why   students    have  great   difficulties reasoning      in  the  first place. Studies     in the  social  and
         psychological sciences on copying mechanisms suggests that there may be robust influences that stand in the
         way of effective reasoning skills. These copying mechanisms, also known as memetic processes, are thought to
         exert powerful  control   over  decision     making  through   informational      units called memes     that  get passed   on
         unintentionally from person to person through interactions. First introduced by Richard Dawkins (1976) in his
         book  The  Selfish  Gene,   over 25  years   ago,  the  concept     of  the meme   is   generally  understood   to be  a   self-
         propagating   unit of  cultural  transmission.    Stanovich   (2004)    suggests   that  a  meme    "is  a  brain  control  (or
         informational) state that can potentially cause fundamentally new behaviors and/or thoughts when replicated in
         another brain" (p. 175). Dennett (1999) states that a meme "is an information-packet with attitude--with some
         phenotypic   clothing  that has  differential  effects  in   the world    that  thereby  influence   its chances   of  getting
         replicated". There is some contention in the literature about how to define a meme due to the lack of empirical
         studies in the field of memetics (Blackmore, 1999). However, a commonly cited characteristic of memes is that
         they are not always beneficial to the host and often act only in the service of their own ends. Thus, as Dennett
         (1999) states, they can be thought of as hitchhikers or symbionts that have more or less beneficial effects on the
         host. The    mechanisms     by  which    memes     propagate--memetic        processes--can     therefore   be  explained   in
         intentional vs. non-intentional terms or by reflective or non-reflective selection (Stanovich, 2004). Similar to the
         "virus" or "contagion" metaphor and popularized by recent books such as Gladwell's (2000) The Tipping Point
         and Godin's (2000) Unleashing the Ideavirus, non-reflective selection of memes are thought to be "caught" by
         the  host irrespective of their  utility or  degree  of benefit.    Non-reflective  selection   may  also   be thought   of as
         parallel to such concepts in memetic literature as non-content selection bias (Gil-White, 2004), socially based
         mechanisms of transmission (Castelfranchi, 2001) or unconscious selective forces (Dennett, 1999). Reflectively
         acquired memes conversely are ones that have been scrutinized against selection criteria, ultimately serve the
         ends of the host rather than the meme itself and are intentionally admitted to our corpus of understanding. They
         are  equivalent to  memetic     selection    through content     selection   bias (Gil-White,     2001),   cognitively based
         transmission mechanisms (Castelfranchi, 2001) or methodical selection forces (Dennett, 1999). Most adherents
         of memetics would also agree that memes arise from social learning (Aunger, 2002), of which the principal
         medium of transmission is language (Dennett, 1995), creating the "infosphere" in which cultural development
         occurs (Dennett, 1995). From this description, there are obvious similarities to the argumentation literature in
         that  language  and communication        are understood   to  be    the primary   sources   through  which    arguments    and
         decisions are made. This study presents an alternative but not mutually exclusive account of why understanding
         of complex socio-scientific issues might be difficult through revealing what memes and memetic processes exist
         in the science classroom.

       Methodology
        Participants
                   The  research   reported   is  a case   study   of one    grade    7 classroom    in which     a complex    systems
         intervention  was  employed.    There    were  18  student   participants,   ten  males  and   eight females,   with  varying
         cognitive levels, social abilities and ethnic/cultural backgrounds from a junior high school in Toronto, Ontario.
         One-third  of  the students  were,   either  formally   or   informally,    identified  as  special education   students   and
         worked under modified individualized education programs while being fully integrated. Another four students
         were  designated   second   language    learners.  The  teacher     participant,  Ms.   Saunders   was   an   enthusiastic and
         energetic teacher who had a solid understanding of each student's social and cognitive history. She was involved
         in all planning phases and provided insight into the nature of group dynamics through observation notes, formal
         interviews, and informal discussions.
                   Although  data  was   collected  and  analyzed     from   all participants,   due to the  complex    nature of   both
         individual level and group level patterns of interaction, and to highlight the notion that memetic processes exert
         influence both at the individual and group levels, a subgroup of six students in the class are profiled in the
         analysis. While population-based statistical analyses are normally used in cultural evolution and anthropological
         studies to demonstrate changes at the group level, an individual agent-embeddedness approach is used due to the
         belief that memetic processes can be most accurately understood at the individual level in educational settings.
         These six students detail cases of social and conceptual behaviors that best illustrate themes generated in the
         data and provide a rich context through which group level results are interpreted.

2-2
Cognitive and Social Profile of Six Students in the Subgroup
         The   following information    about  students   in the subgroup    was  gleaned    from  questionnaires,    school
records, teacher interviews   and observations    from  researcher   field notes. Subgroup    1:  Ben   and   Natalie  were
highly  respected  members    of  the   class  in terms   of   their  academic    abilities. Both     had  a  sophisticated
understanding of current events and advanced verbal and written reasoning skills, relative to other students in
the class. Each indicated on their preliminary questionnaires and in informal conversations with the researcher
that they  had heard  of  the term  genetic   engineering    from  media   sources  as  well  as  their family    members.
Socially, both students appeared to have a good deal of influence on others. Subgroup 2: Thomas was one of six
students in the class identified with a learning disability. Yasmin was an English language learner and frequently
experienced difficulties comprehending written materials and verbal instruction. What set them apart from other
similar students in the class was that they had developed fairly advanced coping strategies. For example, over
the course of the study, they publicly asked questions for clarification and often took advantage of after-class
review sessions. While maintaining a few close personal friendships in the class, they held low status amongst
their peers. Subgroup 3: Greg was highly regarded academically. He received excellent grades, was an active
participant in all school-related   activities and    was    the most  popular   student  in    the   class. Marshall    was
exceptionally bright and was not challenged by the standard curricula. He often appeared bored or distracted.
Despite his enormous potential, he was an underachiever. Greg and Marshall were best friends with differing
social status, i.e., Greg having hi status and Marshall having low.

Context, Data Sources and Analyses
         The study took place over 17 days and 24 hours of instructional time. Students explored a number of
multimedia    and   print  materials    on    the   socio-scientific      topic  of  genetic     engineering      including
xenotransplantation,  cloning   techniques,   ethical issues   in  the genetic   engineering    of  animals    and    genetic
engineering applications in crop farming. These materials were carefully chosen to represent a variety of critical
arguments both for and against genetic engineering research. The pedagogical strategies used to promote the
learning of concepts were designed to develop deep and complex understanding of the issue. These strategies
included   constructing  risks/benefits charts examining      tensions    between   environmental     and    societal goals;
developing concept maps of relevant social, political, economic and environmental stakeholders; participating in
several whole class cocktail parties (described below); and debating special interest group positions in a town
hall meeting.
         The   majority of analyses    were completed     using  data  generated  from  three   Thinking     Tags  Cocktail
Party (1) activities. This was designed to simulate a discursive environment in which argumentation processes
would spontaneously emerge. Students were required to rate the question, "Human use of the natural world for
genetic  engineering  purposes   is acceptable,"   on  a  number     line ranging   between   ­5    (unacceptable)    to +5
(acceptable) and provide rationales for their rating. Students were then asked to share their ratings and rationales
in paired discussions with every student in the class. Each student was required to wear a wearable computer
called a Thinking Tag (Colella, 2000), which displayed how many people they talked to and the number of
students who agreed with their statement. After each discussion, students were asked to register one of three
votes on their partner's Thinking Tag: Yes, I agree with the rationale; No, I do not agree with the rationale; or I
am undecided. Each Thinking Tag was programmed to keep a record of which students had met and at what
time, each  partner's respective  ratings and  what   each    student  had voted  after their   paired  discussions.   This
cocktail party activity was performed three times; at the beginning (Day 2, T1), in the middle (Day 10, T2) and
at the end (Day 16, T3) of the study. A content analysis of 51 student rationales was completed in which 105
memes were identified (further description of the meme analyses follows in the section below). On Day 10 (T2)
and Day 16 (T3), students were also asked to rank each student in the class from 1-18 in terms of the degree of
like-mindedness.   An   in-degree score   for  each   student  was   calculated  from   the  average    of   students' like-
mindedness rankings for each time sample (see Table 4). In social network analysis the in-degree score is a
measure of the total number of connections that is directed toward an actor (Scott, 1991). In-degree scores can
be used to represent an actor's prestige or status in a system (Wasserman & Faust, 1994). In the case of prestige
or status,  in-degree measures   attempt  to  quantify    the rank   that an  actor has  within     a given   set of  actors
(Wasserman & Faust, 1994). In this study, the in-degree score was used to determine the status that either the
students  themselves  or  their  ideas  had within    the larger  learning   system  at different     points  of  the study.
Although the primary data sources were students' written rationales at each of the three time samples and the in-
degree scores, some of the other data sources collected for the larger study were used for interpretation and
triangulation. Chief among those were the sources generated from our teacher participant.
         The selection of the units to be analyzed was based on ideas found in the rationales that could have a
differential effect on how many students would agree with another student's rationale. Accordingly, reasons or
evidence used to justify a position or opinion were deemed the unit of analysis. Meme clusters and meme types
were  superordinate   constructs that  emerged    from  the   identification and  labeling   of the   meme    units.  Meme
clusters and types were first negotiated between the researcher and a graduate assistant. A categorization manual

                                                                                                                                 2-
         was constructed around 11 meme types within four meme clusters. Meme clusters emerged around: (a) ideas for
         or against genetic engineering research for anthropocentric purposes, i.e., the natural world exists only to serve
         human ends; and (b) ideas for or against genetic engineering research for biocentric purposes, i.e., the natural
         world has intrinsic value. A final category of meme type was added for ones that were not applicable or were
         unable to  be coded    due  to ambiguity.   Two    raters with   previous   meme   coding   were trained.   92%    inter-rater
         reliability was obtained on the entire data set of 105 memes. Codes for the eight memes in which discrepancies
         occurred were negotiated until a consensus was reached on the specific code to be assigned.

       Results and Discussion
                   Results from the meme analyses are organized into 3 tables for population or group and individual
         level perspectives on the data. Table 1 shows the 12 meme types that were combined and subsumed under the 4
         superordinate meme cluster categories. Table 2 shows aggregate frequencies of meme types occurring in each
         category obtained from student rationales during each of the three cocktail party activities (T1-T3). Table 3
         shows the frequency of meme types as they occurred in the individual student rationales in each of the cocktail
         party activities (T1-T3). Based on the memes analyses, data collected from the like-mindedness rankings and
         other data sources such as teacher participant observations, the following sections present memetic processes
         hypothesized to be operating in the classroom.

        Memetic Processes
                   In this section, three processes thought to be influenced by memetic mechanisms are described: i. 'Do
         as the Smart Students Do': The Influence of Status; ii. Identity Influences: and iii. Meme Coupling Influences.

        i. 'Do as the Smart Students Do': The Influence of Status.
                   As  previously    described,  social   network    in-degree   scores    were  calculated   from   students'     like-
         mindedness rankings. This data and analyses are presented in Table 4. A ranking of number 1 indicates that this
         student, Lisa for example on Day 10, held the highest status in terms of the aggregate student rankings on the
         like-mindedness   criteria. By  contrast, Mark     on  Day   10  occupied   the  lowest  ranking.   From   Table   4,  on the
         measure of like-mindedness, at T2, Natalie, Ben and Greg had the 2nd, 3rd and 4th highest in-degree scores. From
         all data  accounts, the  top   four students  in  this category  were   considered   the smartest    students   in the   class.
         However,   at T3,   while  Natalie  occupied   the top    position,  Ben's  ranking moved    to  11th, and   Greg's   to  18th.
         Thomas    and Yasmin    moved   up   in their  positions  from   8th and   11th to 2nd and  3rd respectively.   What   could
         account for such a seemingly unusual shift in ordinals? When these data were presented to Ms. Saunders, her
         response shed some interesting insight. She believed that the pattern was not unusual but rather exactly how the
         dynamics   should   have   unfolded.  Based    on  her  professional    experience,  she  felt  that   the topic   of genetic
         engineering was cognitively advanced for a grade 7 integrated special education class albeit important to address
         given the potential for cultivating the curricular goal of complex relational understanding of scientific issues. In
         her classroom observations prior to T2, she felt strongly that the majority of the students didn't understand the
         concepts being addressed in the curriculum. This in addition to the method of instruction being so strikingly
         different from   their normal  classroom    activities, for  students   who  typically  needed   more   time  to   settle into
         routines, it was  likely  that they  chose   a strategy   of "do   as  the  smart  students do". In    the face  of   learning
         challenges many of the students consciously or unconsciously identified themselves with the smartest students
         implying a selection force based on the social influence of status was operating at the group level.
                   There is some evidence to substantiate this claim. In the meme analysis data (Table 3), the rationales
         used to identify memes at all three time samples were constructed by students individually prior to any paired
         discussions occurring in the cocktail party activity. At T1, Ben's, Natalie's and Greg's rationales presented the
         most balanced and reasoned justifications to their ratings. For example, Ben wrote the following:

                   I think this because sometimes we are helping the animals or we are hurting them. If we clone
                   animals, those that fail will hurt the animal, bit if it does work we could help many people or
                   things. Xenotransplantation    is  just  hurting   the animals    because  we   have   to  kill  them  to
                   complete  the  operation   and we    are not  sure  that  it will always  work,   but if  it does  many
                   problems would be solved for people who need organ donations.

         This was Thomas's rationale for the same time sample:

                   Why I think my answer [is] at 0 was because I think it's [w]rong to do that to animals and it's
                   right because[there] will be more of them.

         Comparing the two responses, we can see clearly that Ben presents two sides of the issue, uses terminology
         accurately   and  provides  several  pieces of   evidence  to justify   his rating. Thomas   however,      does  not  provide

2-
substantive evidence. It is also not entirely clear what he means by the statement it's right because [there] will
be more of them, suggesting that there is a lack of understanding.
         The fact that Yasmin and Thomas moved into 2nd and 3rd position at T3 further substantiates the claim
of "do as the smart students do" and suggests that a qualitatively different dynamic had emerged somewhere
between T2 and T3. At T3, Thomas writes:

         I chose 0 because I think it's good and bad. I'll start off with good. Well, I think it's good
         because we are gaining more crops for use to survive. Now I think it's bad because when they
         do that process, we don't know if it is safe for us to eat because we don't know what is in it
         and we don't know what can happen...like if somebody gets ill or some one can die that's why
         I chose neutral.

A closer look at the curriculum concepts being addressed during that time sheds some light on the new dynamic.
Just after the rationales were recorded at T2 the topic shifted from genetic engineering applications involving
animals, to genetic engineering      involving   farming and crop  manipulation.    Thomas's    response reflects  the
growing concern of uncertainty of future effects and safety issues surrounding genetically modified crops which
was salient in the class's general conceptual system at T3. Table 2 shows the largest shift in meme frequencies in
meme type 7 from T2 to T3. While Ben continued to provide reasoned arguments throughout the study, his
rationale at T3 became entirely concerned with a 'cruelty to animals' idea, the meme type (9) that took the most
substantial frequency drop from T2 to T3. It is suggested that students were no longer operating under the "do as
the smart students do" mechanism but were now making decisions about like-mindedness based on conceptually
decisions.

Table 1: Meme clusters and meme types.

Meme Clusters                              Meme Types
For GE: Anthropocentric Purposes           1.  Represents human progress, knowledge or technological advancement
                                           2.  Helps to improve world hunger crisis or aids the population increase
                                           3.  Improves human life, enhances human health
                                           4.  No other reliable alternatives to using non-human organisms
Against GE: Anthropocentric                5.  Processes are not natural
Purposes                                   6.  Economics (e.g., GE is too expensive)
                                           7.  Safety concerns, uncertainty of future effects, processes are risky
For GE: Biocentric Purposes                8.  Environmental/non-human species improvement
Against GE: Biocentric Purposes            9.  Cruelty to animals
                                           10. Tampering with natural processes
                                           11. Not necessary, waste of life, other alternatives
Other                                      12. N/A or answer cannot be coded due to ambiguity

Table 2: Frequency of memes occurring in individual meme types at each of three time samples.

Meme Type/          1      2       3    4      5    6     7    8      9     10       11    12     Total
Time Period
  Day 2 (T1)        3      0       7    1      0    1     5    2      9      2       1     1         32
  Day 10 (T2)       6      1       7    1      1    1     2    1     10      3       1     1         35
  Day 16 (T3)       3      5       6    0      1    1     7    1      6      2       5     1         38
Table 3: Categories of meme types found in each                   Table 4: Student's in-degree scores based on a
student's rationale at three time samples.                        ranking of like-mindedness.

Time/Student  Day 2 (T1) Day 10 (T2) Day 16 (T3)                  Ranking   Student    In-degree    Student     In-degree
                                                                            (Day 10)    Score       (Day 16)       Score
    Mark      10           6             9                          1         Lisa        6.1        Natalie       5.8
    Lisa      -            1, 3, 4       3, 11                      2        Natalie      6.6        Thomas        6.4
  Miranda     3, 7, 12     5             3, 6                       3         Ben         7.6        Yasmin        6.7
    Ebby      3, 6, 7, 8   10            2, 7                       4        Greg         8.0         Ebby         7.1
   Patrick    -            -             9                          5        Janice       8.5        Norah         7.2
   Marshal    4            12            12                         6        Ebby         8.5         Mark         8.1
    Ben       3, 9         3, 9          9, 11                      7         Joel        9.1       Miranda        8.4

                                                                                                                          2-
             Natalie    8, 9         1, 2, 9, 10   1, 2, 3, 9, 10, 10, 11         8       Thomas         9.1       Annie         8.5
              Greg      3, 3, 9      1, 1, 3, 11   1, 3, 11                       9      Marshall        9.2        Lisa         8.5
              Sandy     3            3             1, 2                          10       Norah          9.4       Janice        8.6
              Norah     1, 3, 9      9, 9          2, 3, 7, 7                    11       Yasmin         9.8        Ben          9.6
             Yasmin      9           3, 3, 7, 9    3, 9                          12       Sandy          11         Joel         9.6
              Annie     7, 7, 7, 9   3, 9, 10      7, 8                          13       Annie          11        Patrick       9.8
              Janice    9, 10        7, 9          5, 9                          14      Miranda         11         Saul         10
               Joel     1            1, 8, 9       7                             15       Patrick        12        Avery         11
              Avery     1, 9         10            7, 11                         16        Saul          13        Sandy         13
             Thomas      9           1, 9          2, 7                          17       Avery          13       Marshall       13
              Saul      11           -             -                             18        Mark          13        Greg          13

        ii. Influences of Friendship.
         Data analyzed on who students selected as the most like-minded also provide evidence of memetic mechanisms
         influencing group dynamics. This data is summarized in Table 5. On Day 10 (T2), the top line of the table
         shows that Natalie who has a rating of 0 selects Lisa and Ben who also have a rating of 0. Through researcher
         observations and informal discussions with students and corroborated by Ms. Saunders in interviews, student
         friendship clusters within the class were determined. At T2, Table 5 shows that 62% of students selected their
         first choice for like-mindedness as someone in their friendship cluster. In roughly half of the cases, student
         ratings were dissimilar and three out of the thirteen students had one meme in common. At T3 that percentage
         dropped to 22% where three out of the four students had the same ratings and three out of the four students had
         one meme in common.

         Table 5: Student selections of most like-minded others who are part of their friendship cluster.

                                   Day 10 (T2)                              Day 16 (T3)
                                   Natalie (0) Æ Lisa (0), Ben (0)          Greg (+2) Æ Marshall (+4)
                                   Sandy (+5) Æ Janice (0)                  Yasmin (0) Æ Miranda (0)
                                   Ebby (-2) Æ Janice (0)                   Miranda (0) Æ Yasmin (0)
                                   Greg (+1) Æ Marshall (+3)                Patrick (-3) Æ Ben (-3)
                                   Lisa (0) Æ Natalie (0)
                                   Marshall (+3) Æ Greg (+1)
                                   Janice (0) Æ Ebby (0)
                                   Norah (0) Æ Lisa (0)
                                   Yasmin (0) Æ Miranda (0)
                                   Miranda (0) Æ Yasmin (0)
                                   Sandy (0) Æ Ben (0)
                                   Ben (0) Æ Natalie (0)
                                   Totals 12/18 = 67%                       Totals 4/18 = 22%

         In addition to the "do as the smart students do" social dynamic occurring at T2, it is hypothesized that another
         social bias mechanism, i.e., selecting on the basis of friendship, contributed to decision making at the group
         level. There is other evidence to support this hypothesis. During small group collaborative activities in the first
         half of the study, students were allowed to exercise free choice as to who they wanted to work with. At T2,
         generally, students chose to work within friendship clusters. However, during the period prior to T3, a number
         of students indicated a preference to be assigned to groups. There are several plausible explanations as to why
         the dynamic shifted. One reason may have been that similar to the first social mechanism, just until after T2,
         students had difficulties grasping the concepts and felt more comfortable discussing ideas with students who
         they had an established social connection or positive identity, mitigating the possible negative judgments they
         may perceive. As students gained more confidence in their understanding, this identity bias was displaced by a
         more evidence-based content-specific bias that may have been a direct impact of the learning events embedded
         in the complex systems heuristic. As greater volumes of information entered into the cognitive system, where
         students cycled through both individual and group level metacognitive processing in conjunction with discursive
         activities in which students were required to publicly display their knowledge, an important conceptual feedback
         loop was established. This feedback loop may have served as a selection mechanism that, influenced greater
         variability in decision-making.

        iii. Meme-Coupling Influences.

2-
         Table 3 shows that at T1, in their written rationales, students most often selected memes in the meme
type category of 'Cruelty to Animals' (9). Where there is more than one meme represented, this meme type was
most often coupled (44% of the time) with memes from the categories of 'Improves human life, enhances human
health' (3)  and  'Represents   human   progress,   knowledge       or technological  advancement'   (1). The   curricular
materials during this phase of the study, in fact, focused on genetic engineering technologies such as cloning and
xenotransplantation that required students to examine their beliefs about the value of non-human animal species
relative to human life. This result can perhaps be viewed as the emergence of ambivalence, which were also
evident  anecdotally   in  verbal  discussions  between     students.   This   ambivalence    may have  been   manifested
through  equal   consideration    of  both  sides  of   the   issue that forced   students   to take a  neutral  position.
Furthermore, at T2, this coupling effect increased in frequency to 66%. While statistical claims based strictly on
the numbers cannot be made, potentially significant cognitive memetic mechanisms at play can be explored
through examination of student subgroup rationales.
         In  a previous   section, data that  illustrated   a social   mechanism  of  'do  as the smart students do'  was
suggested to account for differences in like-mindedness selections between T2 and T3. If at T2 the class was
generally imitating the high academic status students then it is reasonable to conclude that reasoning inherent in
explanations of the smart students would be mimicked. At T1 three of the four rationales that represented the
meme coupling in the categories of 1, 3 and 9 were posited by Ben, Natalie and Greg. And either coincidentally
or not, the  number    of meme  coupling    instances   of  this type  increased  at T2.  Both  Yasmin  and  Thomas   are
among the group that employed this potential mimicking strategy. At T2, the high status students continue to
take neutral stances on the issue. However at T3, there appears to be an interesting shift. However, Ben and
Greg    change   their neutral  stances    to negative    (against     genetic engineering)   and  positive (for   genetic
engineering) respectively. It is suggested that the meme coupling effect resulting in the evolution of the neutral
stance  created  a  strong  selection force   that actively    selected  against more   parochial  views  that may   have
influenced the drastic drop in rankings for Ben and Greg at T3. Furthermore, as previously discussed, at T3,
Thomas moves to the second position in the like-mindedness ranking where his rationale reflected concerns in
the curricular focus at the time (crop farming). His selections included memes in the meme type categories of
'Helps to improve world hunger crisis or aids the population increase' (2) and 'Safety concerns, uncertainty of
future  effects, processes  are risky'  (7)   resulting in  a  neutral  stance.  Tables  2 and  3 show   increases in the
frequencies of memes occurring in these categories at T3 and also demonstrate that when they occurred they
were most often (38% of the time) coupled with each other. Ebby and Norah, ranked 4 and 5 respectively, also
presented rationales that included this meme-coupling. This result provides additional evidence supporting the
meme-coupling claim advanced here.

Implications for Education
         Within the science education literature, argumentation has been identified as a pedagogical strategy
that could improve practices and understanding about socio-scientific issues. While the argumentation research
has been focused on demonstrating how students reason with or without the practice of argumentation, few
studies have been undertaken to reveal why difficulties in reasoning exist. It has been shown that the study of
memes and memetic processes can provide potential insights about several memetic influences that appear to
exert  differential affects on  what  ideas   are  salient  in the  learning   system of   a  classroom when   studying a
complex socio-scientific issue. When the classroom is viewed as a group of interacting agents, the complex
network of relationships formed give rise to behaviors that can evolve over time. Within this complex system,
this study provides some evidence to show that memes and memetic processes can have the potential to provide
information about how the system is performing. The study of memetic processes can allow teachers to gain a
better understanding about why students make decisions before and during an intervention (e.g., influences of
friendship). After   the  intervention, it  can also    potentially  allow teachers   to  understand  how   decisions are
constructed, and what ideas are selected or not (e.g., meme-coupling). An additional advantage along this line of
thinking is that it attends to the social and intellectual factors that impact our ideas. These are the components
that need coordinated attention if students are to develop their ideas about socio-scientific issues that are of
central importance in our society.

References
Aunger, R. (2002). The Electric Meme: A New Theory of How We Think. New York: The Free Press.
Bereiter, C. (2002). Education and Mind in the Knowledge Age. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Blackmore, S. (1999). The Meme Machine. New York: Oxford University Press.
Castelfranci, C. (2001). Towards a cognitive memetics: Socio-cognitive mechanisms for memes selection and
         spreading. Journal of Memetics - Evolutionary Models of Information Transmission, 5, 1-14.
Colella, V. (2000). Participatory simulations: Building collaborative understanding through
         immersive dynamic modeling. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 9(4), 471-500.

                                                                                                                             2-
        Dawson, V. & Schibeci, R. (2003). Western Australian high school students' attitudes towards biotechnology
                processes. Journal of Biological Education, 38(1), 1-6.
        Dennett, D. (1995). Darwin's Dangerous Idea. New York: Simon & Schuster.
        Dennett, D. (1999). The Evolution of Culture. The Charles Simonyi Lecture, Oxford University. [Web Resource]
                Available Online. http://www.edge.org/3rd_culture/dennett/dennett_p2.html.
        Driver, R., Asoko,  H., Leach,  J., Mortimer, E. &   Scott, P. (1994). Constructing scientific knowledge in   the
                classroom. Educational Researcher, 23(7), 5-12.
        Driver, R., Newton, P. & Osborne, J. (2000). Establishing the norms of scientific argumentation in classrooms.
                Science Education. 84, 287-312.
        Gil-White, F. J. (2004). Common misunderstandings of memes (and genes): The promise and the limits of the
                genetic analogy to cultural transmission processes. In S. Hurley and N. Chater (Eds.). Perspectives on
                Imitation: From Cognitive Neuroscience to Social Science. Cambridge: MIT Press.
        Gladwell, M. (2000). The Tipping Point. New York: Little, Brown and Company.
        Godin, S. (2000). Unleashing the Ideavirus. Do You Zoom, Inc.
        Hmelo-Silver, C. & Azevedo, R. (2006). Understanding complex systems: Some core challenges. The Journal
                of the Learning Sciences, 15(1), 53-61.
        Hogan, K. & Maglienti, M. (2001). Comparing the epistemological underpinnings of students' and scientists'
                reasoning about conclusions. International Journal of Science Education, 38(6), 663-687.
        Jacobson,  M. (2001).   Problem solving,  cognition, and    complex systems: Differences between     experts and
                novices. Complexity, 6(3), 41-49.
        Jacobson, M. & Wilensky, U. (2006). Complex systems in education: Scientific and educational importance and
                implications for the learning sciences. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 15(1), 11-34.
        Jimenez-Aleixandre,   M.  &  Pereiro-Munoz,    C.  (2002).   Knowledge   producers  or knowledge     consumers?
                Argumentation    and decision   making    about environmental   management.    International Journal  of
                Science Education, 24(11), 1171-1190.
        Kolstoe, S.D. (2000). Consensus projects: Teaching science for citizenship. International Journal of Science
                Education, 22(6), 645-64.
        Kuhn, D. (1997). Effects of dyadic interaction on argumentive reasoning. Cognition and Instruction, 15(3), 287-
                315.
        Lewis, J. & Wood-Robinson, C. (2000). Genes, chromosomes, cell division and inheritance--do students see
                any relationship? International Journal of Science Education, 22(2), 177-195.
        Newton, P., Driver, R. & Osborne, J. (1999). The place of argumentation in the pedagogy of school science.
                International Journal of Science Education. 21(5), 553-576.
        Olsher, G. & Dreyfus, A. (1999). The ostension-teaching approach as a means to develop junior-high student
                attitudes towards biotechnologies. Journal of Biological Education, 34, 24-30.
        Osborne, J., Erduran, S. & Simon, S. (2004). Enhancing the quality of argumentation in school science. Journal
                of Research in Science Teaching, 41(10), 994-1020.
        Sadler, T. (2004). Informal reasoning regarding socioscientific issues: A critical review of research. Journal of
                Research in Science Teaching, 41(5). 513-536.
        Sandoval, W. & Millwood, K. (2005). The quality of students' use of evidence in written scientific explanations.
                Cognition and Instruction, 23(10), 23-55.
        Scott, J. (1991). Social Network Analysis: A Handbook. London: Sage Publications.
        Stanovich, K. (2004). The Robot's Rebellion. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.
        Wasserman,    S. &  Faust, K.   (1994).  Social  Network    Analysis:  Methods  and  Applications.   Cambridge:
                Cambridge University Press.
        Yoon,   S. (2007). An   evolutionary  approach  to harnessing   complex  systems thinking  in   the  science and
                technology      classroom.      International       Journal     of    Science     Education,      DOI:
                10.1080/09500690601101672.

2-
