         The Game Ontology Project: Supporting Learning While
                   Contributing Authentically to Game Studies

             José P. Zagal, Amy Bruckman, College of Computing, Georgia Institute of Technology,
                                    85 5th Street, NW Atlanta, GA 30332 USA
                                   Email: jp@cc.gatech.edu, asb@cc.gatech.edu

         Abstract: Learning research has argued the importance of providing authentic contexts for
         learning. However,    traditional  learning   environments   are   often disconnected    from  external
         communities     of  practice. For    example,    students  might   design  and   carry   out  scientific
         experiments    that are  valuable pedagogically,    but do   not contribute  to science  itself. In this
         study, we used the Game Ontology Project (GOP), a wiki-enabled hierarchy of elements of
         gameplay used by games studies researchers, in a game design class. Students found it useful
         for learning. However, encouraging sustained participation was challenging because students
         tended to view the GOP as a static source, rather than a participatory and editable resource.
         Expert analysis of the student's contributions to the ontology found them to be useful and
         significant.   We   conclude  with    thoughts   on the   importance   of  these  kinds  of   authentic
         environments in traditional learning.

Introduction
         Learning   research   has argued    the importance    of  providing  students   with  an authentic    context   for
fostering learning (Shaffer & Resnick, 1999). For example, project-based inquiry science (e.g., Blumenfeld et
al., 1991), has focused on ensuring that what students do in the classroom somehow reflects or recreates some
aspect of the real world outside of the learning environment. Others help learners interact with subject matter
experts  or non-school   members    who    can serve   as mentors,  share   knowledge,   or answer    questions   (Ellis &
Bruckman,   2002;  O'Neill   &   Gomez,  1998;   Songer,   1996).  It has  also been   argued  that using  the  tools  and
methods  of   a  discipline  encourages  learning   in that  community     of practice   (Lave  &   Wenger,    1991).  For
example, students should learn history by "making history" as professional historians do (Kobrin et al., 1993) or
engage   with   mathematical   problems    as  mathematicians     (D'Ambrosio,    1995).  However,     most    learning  in
traditional environments is disconnected from external communities of practice and disciplines. For example,
students might design and carry out scientific experiments that while valuable pedagogically, do not contribute
to science itself. Allowing students to meaningfully participate in authentic practices that contribute to a larger
body of knowledge is difficult for a variety of reasons. For instance, real-world science is often not accessible to
students because   authentic  activities that  are interesting to  students   are too  open-ended   and   require content
knowledge and scientific thinking that students do not have the supports to realize (Edelson, 1998).
         If we   understand   learning as  a   process  of transformation   of  participation  (Rogoff,   1994),  of   both
absorbing and being absorbed in a "culture of practice", the lack of meaningful connections between novices
(students) and larger communities of practice (experts, scientists, etc.) can be problematic. Lave and Wenger
(1991)  describe  how   learning  occurs   through  legitimate   peripheral participation   (LPP).  LPP    describes   how
novice members of a community often begin participating in peripheral tasks that contribute to the goals of the
community. These activities, while typically simple, are valued and important to the community as a whole
(Lave & Wenger, 1991). Thus, how we can design learning environments that: 1) are approachable to learners,
2) allow learners to contribute legitimately to external communities of practice, 3) support visibility and access
to the practices of a broader community?
         This   article describes how    a research  project   used   by  members   of the  field of  game     studies was
integrated with a university-level games class so as to help students learn and develop a critical vocabulary for
talking about games while providing them with the opportunity to meaningfully, and authentically, contribute to
the emergent field of game studies. We will outline how this particular games studies project and the technology
on which it was implemented scaffolded and afforded the exploration, reflection, discussion, and contribution of
concepts and terminology related to videogames. Our analysis also includes the evaluation by games studies
experts  on  the quality,   type, and  role   played   by  the students'   contributions.  Finally,   the results  of  this
experience, both positive and negative, help frame our discussion of unsolved issues as well as future directions.

Background
Challenges of Studying Games
         Students  taking    games  classes    are often   challenged    by issues   surrounding    the   lack of  critical
vocabulary   for talking  about   games    (Zagal  &   Bruckman,    2007).    Among      other things,  despite   years  of
experience playing games, students often have difficulties articulating and expressing ideas about games and

                                                                                                                               2-
         gameplay. Although they often have a good feel for gameplay aspects, they find it challenging to describe what
         these aspects are, and how they interact with each other to produce a game experience. When asked to provide
         in-depth game  analyses,  students  often dwell on  superficial features  of   games  and   use a language  and  style
         modeled  after game   reviews   from  mainstream    games   journalism. Unfortunately,    game    reviews,  which  are
         written to help consumers decide whether or not they want to purchase a certain game, are a poor model for the
         kinds of critical writing they are expected to do for class. Also, students lack the vocabulary for understanding,
         and describing, what happens when they play games (Zagal & Bruckman, 2007).
                  These issues   are perhaps   unsurprising due  to the relative youth  of   the videogame   industry. In fact,
         game designers have also called for a design language (Church, 1999; Kreimeier, 2002), noting that designers
         currently lack a unified vocabulary for describing existing games and thinking through the design of new ones.
         Many of the proposed approaches focus on offering aid to the designer, either in the form of design patterns
         (Björk &  Holopainen,    2005), which  name    and describe design  elements,    or in  the closely-related notion of
         design rules, which offer advice and guidelines for specific design situations (Falstein, 2004). These approaches
         are constantly evolving,    growing,  and  adapting to  the ever-changing    landscape   of  videogames.    The  ever-
         growing  size  of  collections of gameplay  design   patterns, design   rules, or   terminology   can be daunting  to
         students who can easily feel overwhelmed and not know from where to start.

        Game Ontology Project
                  The  Game   Ontology   Project is  developing  a  game  ontology   that identifies  the  important structural
         elements of games and the relationships between them, organizing them hierarchically (Zagal et al., 2007). The
         term ontology  is  borrowed    from computer   science, and  refers to  the identification  and   (oftentimes formal)
         description of entities  within a   domain. Often,  the ontological   elements    are   derived from  common     game
         terminology  (e.g. level and   score) and  are then refined  by  both   abstracting more    general concepts  and  by
         identifying more precise or specific concepts.
                  Each ontology entry consists of a title or name, a description of the element, examples of games that
         embody the element, a parent element, potentially one or more child elements, and potentially one or more part
         elements (elements related by the part-of relation). The examples describe how the element is instantiated in
         specific games. There are two types of examples, strong and weak. Strong examples are "obvious" or canonical
         exemplars of a particular entry, while weak examples describe borderline cases of games that partially reify the
         element. Table 1 shows an example of a particular ontology entry called "To Own".

         Table 1: Example Ontology Entry - "To Own".

           Name                To Own
           Parent              Entity Manipulation
           Children            To Capture, To Possess, To Exchange
           Description         Entities can own other game entities. Ownership does not carry any inherent meaning,
                               other than the fact that one entity is tied to another. Changes in ownership can not be
                               initiated by the owned entity. Ownership can change the attributes or abilities of either
                               the owned or owning entity. Ownership can be used to measure performance, either
                               positive or negative. Ownership is never permanent; the possibility of losing ownership
                               separates ownership from an inherent attribute or ability of an entity. Ownership of an
                               entity can change in variety of ways, including voluntary and involuntary changes of
                               ownership.
                               It is important to note the difference between owning an entity, and using an entity. For
                               example, in Super Mario Bros, when Mario collides with a mushroom, the mushroom
                               is immediately used and removed from the game world. Mario never owns the
                               mushroom.
           Strong Example      In Super Mario World, Mario can collect mushrooms (or fire flowers or feathers) to use
                               later. Mario owns these entities and can choose when to use them.
           Weak Example        In Ico, the player character must protect a girl called Yorda. While the player only
                               directly controls Ico, his actions are very closely tied to leading, guiding and protecting
                               Yorda. One could argue that Ico, in effect, owns Yorda because of the way they are tied
                               to each other.

                  The Game Ontology is a tool developed and used by academic games researchers. Its primary function
         is to serve as a framework for exploring research questions related to games. It also contributes a vocabulary for
         analyzing and critiquing games. It currently consists of more than 190 elements at varying levels of abstraction.
         The Game Ontology is publicly available, and editable on a wiki-enabled website (see www.gameontology.org).

2-00
Affordances for Authentic Learning and Legitimate Participation
         We hypothesized that the Game Ontology Project, used in the context of a games class, provided a
unique   opportunity for  students to not  only learn and  acquire a  critical vocabulary  about  games   but also  to
participate in the   creation of  new   knowledge   about  games.  In  particular, we  felt  that   the structure and
organization of the ontology together with some affordances of the technology on which it resides would be
valuable for learning.

Game Ontology Project Affordances
         As  described   earlier, the GOP   distinguishes itself from  other   games studies approaches    due   to its
reliance on strong and weak examples as well as its hierarchical approach. By relying on strong, or canonical,
and weak or borderline examples, the GOP affords the exploration of the space of game design. Distinctions
aren't binary, leaving ample room for discussion and revisitation. The ontology's reliance on examples also
provides a clear entry point for students to legitimately and peripherally participate. Students could leverage
their own personal knowledge by adding examples from games they are familiar while also refining those that
already exist. In this way, students can begin to associate what they know about games with the knowledge
created in the GOP as well as identify those things they may know implicitly.
         The GOP can be characterized as a knowledge building endeavour. Knowledge building is a process by
which ideas that are valuable to a community are continually produced and improved. For example, doctors
working to cure cancer are knowledge builders engaged in a knowledge building community. Their collective
goal is to advance the frontiers of knowledge as they perceive them. As they report their findings to each other
and discuss their implications, they create and modify (as a community) public knowledge about their field. The
result of knowledge building is the creation and modification of public knowledge-- knowledge that lives "in the
world" and is available to be worked on and used by other people (Scardamalia & Bereiter, 2002).
         Scardamalia and Bereiter (1991) have taken this idea into the realm of formal learning by proposing
knowledge building activities as a way of altering discourse patterns in the classroom so that students would
assume what they called "higher levels of agency". The core elements of successful knowledge building are
ideas as objects to think with, ideas as improvable and idea diversity. As learners better understand the problems
and questions they are exploring, these ideas change and improve. Knowledge building systems also require a
critical mass of articulated ideas before they become useful. The GOP provides an existing structure and content
that serves to mitigate this challenge. The existing content thus scaffolds knowledge building by providing a
guide for what entries should look like, and how they are structured and organized.
         Knowledge building discourse is decentralized with a focus on collective knowledge. The knowledge
of those who are more advanced does not circumscribe what is to be learned or investigated and novices push
discourse towards definition and clarification. In the case of games, not everyone is an expert in every game.
Thus, there is room for everyone to provide their own examples and knowledge. Also, the non-static nature of
the entries implies that anyone can provide examples that push discourse towards refining and clarifying entries.
It is often the case in the GOP that when an entry has too many weak examples its definition either needs to be
refined or a new sub-entry needs to be created for which those weak examples become strong examples.
         Knowledge building discourse should interact productively within more broadly conceived knowledge
building communities.    Students   using the GOP   have  the opportunity    to interact, contribute and   participate
directly of an  on-going  project   that is active and used   by  games  studies   researchers. In  this  sense,  their
contributions are not isolated or in a vacuum. In summary, for students, the GOP facilitates:
         x  Leveraging the use of   personal knowledge of games
         x Browsing and learning by incorporating varying levels of abstraction
         x An environment focused on discourse where knowledge is continually refined and improved

Wiki-Related Affordances
         The GOP currently resides on a wiki-enable wesite. A wiki is a type of website that allows users to
easily add and edit content (Leuf & Cunningham, 2001). It is a simplification of the process of creating HTML
web pages combined with a system that records each individual change that occurs over time, so that at any
time, a page can be reverted to any of its previous states. A wiki system thus allows anyone with a web browser
to easily edit, write and create webpages.
         The   GOP   uses Mediawiki,   the  same technology   used  by Wikipedia.    Wikipedia,   a popular end-user
editable online encyclopedia, can be considered an example of a knowledge building environment and is among
the most prolific collaborative authoring projects ever sustained in an online environment (Bryant et al., 2005).
It's success as a knowledge building tool can be partly explained by certain features normally absent in other
wiki implementations. Mediawiki allows registered users to maintain "watchlists" of pages they wish to pay
attention to. Users are notified whenever a page on their watchlist is edited. This feature allows users to "keep

                                                                                                                          2-0
         track" of the changes that a page might go through. Another feature is the talk page. Talk pages are secondary
         webpages, one for each primary page, where users can discuss issues surrounding the topics of the primary
         pages.   Should certain  content  be added,  deleted,   or moved   elsewhere?    Talk  pages  support  the process   of
         knowledge building by providing a space for users to discuss the knowledge they are creating. Also, novice
         users can use these pages to understand the evolution of a certain page and understand how consensus was
         achieved regarding the current state of a page.
                  The medium of knowledge building discussions is important. Features such as talk pages and watchlists
         help mitigate many of the challenges to knowledge building such as dealing with conceptual discussions that are
         "left in the air" (Cummings,   2003).   Talk  pages are    also different from  threaded  discussions,   which  can be
         problematic since they have no systematic way of promoting convergence of ideas (Stahl, 2001). In the case of
         Wikipedia, some researchers hypothesize its success lies in how it encourages community introspection: it is
         strongly designed so that members watch each other, talk about each other's contributions, and directly address
         the fact that they must reach consensus (Viegas et al., 2004). In this sense, novices to the Game Ontology have
         direct access to the practices, discussions, and reasoning of the games studies researchers that use it. Having the
         Game Ontology on a wiki-enabled web site also provides opportunities for people outside of the project to easily
         participate. There are many legitimate opportunities to help build knowledge in the ontology. Not only are there
         numerous   entries that  are lacking in depth   and examples,     but there are  also entire areas  that  haven't  been
         explored. In summary, the technology platform supporting the GOP affords knowledge building by:
                  x Providing separate spaces for content and content discussion
                  x Providing visibility to the discussions and process behind the creation of content
                  x Helping users keep track of content they are involved in

       Study
                  In early 2007, the Game Ontology was used as part of the regular curriculum in an introductory game
         design class. The class was an undergraduate lecture-style class with over 200 hundred students. In the class,
         students were   required  to play and  design   games,  read    scholarly articles, and turn in  written  assignments.
         Participants were recruited at the beginning of the term.

        Data Collection and Analysis
                  As  part  of their regular  coursework  students   were  introduced  to some   terminology   from    the GOP.
         Three weeks later students were asked to complete a game ontology assignment. For the assignment students
         had to pick two games they knew well. Then they had to find entries in the ontology and edit them in such a way
         as to add those games as examples (strong or weak). Students had to edit at least two entries (ex: game A as a
         strong example of one entry and weak example on another, and vice versa for game B), but they could edit up to
         four different entries. The only additional restriction was that at least two of the examples should be added to
         entries under the "Rules" sub-hierarchy.
                  Students  were   graded  only on  the  completion    of the  assignment.   Because  it is often  the case that
         disagreements   about  examples   has  lead  to the refinement    of  the  ontology,  grading   did not   focus on  the
         correctness of the examples. Additionally, students were offered the possibility of extra credit for participation
         that went above and beyond the assignment requirements such as meaningful contributions to existing entries,
         proposing new entries, and participating in discussions on the talk page. The researchers were not involved in
         the assessment though they did participate in the discussions that took place on the ontology wiki pages. The
         duration of the assignment was officially one week, though students could begin their participation sooner.
                  A total of 381 edits were made by 49 study participants. Edits varied from very minor (one or two
         characters, such as when correcting a typo) to one or two paragraphs in length. In total, 65 different ontology
         entries were edited and participants contributed a total of 128 different examples. Additionally, we conducted
         interviews with   sixteen students,  three of  the teaching   assistants, and  the  instructor. As  recommended     for
         qualitative research (Glaser & Strauss, 1967), we employ theoretical sampling in which cases are chosen based
         on theoretical (developed a priori) categories to provide polar types, rather than for statistical generalizability to
         a larger population (Eisenhardt, 1989). Interview subjects were selected based on their level of prior experience
         with  games    (novice,  intermediate,  gamer)     and  participation  on   the  GOP    (minimum     required,    active
         participation). All interviews were audio-recorded and transcribed. In addition to asking students about their
         experience participating in the ontology, our interview protocol includes questions about potential challenges of
         learning  about   games.  The  student  protocol   also includes   open-ended    questions   about  their expectations
         regarding  the  course and   changes they  would   make    to the assignments.   Interviews  were   semi-structured  to
         ensure that all participants are asked certain questions yet still allow them to raise other issues they feel are
         relevant. Data from the interviews was used to contextualize and provide additional insight to the analysis of the
         student participation. All interviewee names appearing in this article have been changed for reasons of privacy.

2-02
         We also analyzed the quality of contributions made by the students. Three subject matter experts, all
with prior experience working on the Game Ontology Project, were asked to evaluate a random selection of
examples written by the students. The goal of this evaluation was to determine whether or not their contributions
were valuable, ie. should the example remain in the ontology? We also wanted to get a sense of how these
contributions could be characterized. Of the 128 examples written, the experts evaluated a randomly selected
sample of 96. Assuming a normal distribution, this sample size is representative of the larger population for a
95%   confidence   level   and 5%   margin   of  error. Each expert independently   reviewed    32  different examples.
Additionally, for purposes of calculating interrater reliability, a separate random sample of ten examples was
independently evaluated by all three experts. As recommended by Lombard et al, two indices were selected to
determine interrater reliability (2002). In terms of percent of agreement, two of the three raters agreed 100% of
the time and all three agreed 60% of the time. Fleiss' kappa (1971) was calculated as 0.87, a value considered
acceptable in this case (Lombard et al., 2002).

Results
Overall effects and Student Perception
         In general, the students were positive about the role they felt the GOP played in the context of the class.
Anne felt that "it was a good assignment because it really made you think and try and really think about the
aspects of the games you had played." For the majority of the students, the ontology was a source of definitions.
Bert describes how "there were a lot of times where [the instructor] would just be rattling away all these terms
and I would be a little bit scared in my seat and I would write down what I didn't understand and I would go
home and check it out." Many of these students didn't perceive the GOP as a "living" source with definitions
that could  be    debated, edited  and  improved.   On   the other  hand, some    students  found  that using  the GOP
broadened their understanding of games. Frank notes that "I didn't really think about games along those terms
before and  it was   nice  to  have a new    perspective  on games."  Understanding     games   as the  combinations  of
structural elements   of gameplay    was  novel  to them.    Anne  comments   how   she  "thought  the  categories were
really interesting. I hadn't thought about the breakdown of games before so I really liked that." Finally, some
students felt  it was helpful  to  them   in the context  of their game   design  projects. Joe felt that  "when you're
making a game there a lot of choices you have to make and knowing your options made your choices clearer."
         Students also perceived the assignment as a legitimate activity and realized that their participation on
the ontology would be visible to people outside of the class as well as the games researchers that regularly
worked on the ontology. They realized they were making changes and adding content to a public resource and
that their work had consequences beyond the assignment. Mary notes how "I was sort of worried about putting
something in that wouldn't fit because it is an editable site and so I would put something in and it would be
like...oh that's really wrong, I'm going to mess things up for the game researchers." Mike, on the other hand,
describes how he was concerned with the correctness of his examples because "if somebody were to have put
things in  categories  that   they didn't belong...and    they weren't corrected,  then  they   might   have  learned to
opposite of what's true."

Navigation and Participation
         We hypothesized that the hierarchical structure would prove beneficial to the student's participation
and  understanding    of the  ontology. For   many  students,  this was   in fact their primary  way    of browsing   the
ontology and they often started with the entries suggested by the instructor. However, we found evidence of
other popular ways of navigating. Dave describes how "there's a list sorted by alphabetical order and I just
looked through which ones looked more interesting to me" while Chris opted to "just randomly bring a page,
just any random page. And this is how I navigated through that because I wasn't really sure what I wanted to
add." In addition to a hierarchical style of navigation, students made use of random and indexed navigation.
         The choice of navigation is tied to the way that students approached the task of adding strong and weak
examples. Some students approached the game ontology with a specific game in mind and then tried to identify
entries for which they could use that game as an example (strong or weak). The other approach was to start from
an entry they found particularly interesting or compelling and then try to come up with examples (weak and
strong) for it. Students with a game in mind favored indexed and random navigation while those focused on the
entries found the hierarchical scheme more useful.
         We also hypothesized that the use of strong and weak examples would prompt students to reflect on
games at a deeper level. Tom discusses how the game Oblivion forced him to explore some issues more deeply,
"It was really challenging to come up with specifically strong and weak examples of things because there were
some of them that you could come up with gray areas for. In Oblivion, depending on which version of the game
you have, you may get a strong ending or a world exhaustion [referring to the entry "Game Ends" and its child
entry "Gameworld Exhaustion"], because if you have the PC version you could download more pieces or more
modules to increase your game time and those are all part of the world so in a sense, the world never really
ends."  In this sense, the use of strong and weak examples in the ontology helped some students think more

                                                                                                                            2-0
         deeply about the entries and how they relate to what they see in certain games. In particular, the achieved a more
         nuanced  understanding.   While    coming   up  with strong  examples,   was  generally     considered easy   by  most
         students, having to identify weak examples and justify their reasoning elicited greater reflection and discussion.

        Challenges
                  There are many barriers to eliciting participation and collaboration on wiki environments (Guzdial et
         al., 2002) and our study was not the exception. Many students were not familiar with wikis and the features
         offered by Mediawiki. This confusion led them to erroneously believe that removing content from a page would
         affect the teaching assistants' ability to grade the assignments. When asked why he didn't edit other people's
         contributions, Chris comments how "if somebody had put that there and that was their contribution then it might
         not be a good   idea  to move   it for the sake of  their grade, if I moved   it, it would   look like they didn't put
         something." Also, only having one assignment probably limited the possibilities of students engaging more with
         the discussions surrounding the entry definitions and value of certain examples. For many students, completing
         the assignment was an issue of "fire and forget" as there was little incentive to return to the ontology, read what
         their classmates may have added and possibly refine the knowledge created on the site.
                  There is room for improvement. For example, the assignment could be changed to encourage continued
         participation. Another approach could be to try similar, but shorter, assignments and have students engage with
         the GOP more fully over the whole of the course. A broader issue to address is helping students move from
         viewing knowledge as something static and "given," rather than something that they can help create and define.

       Contribution to Game Studies
                  The  expert   evaluation  of  the  examples    written by  the students   was   quite  positive. The  experts
         determined that 60% of the examples should remain in the ontology while only 14.5% should be removed. For
         the remaining examples (25.5%) the experts were ambivalent. Most of the examples, including those the experts
         were  ambivalent  about,  could    benefit from further   proofreading  and editing.  Others   could be   improved  by
         providing further information that better contextualizes the example with respect to the entry where it appears.
         For instance, one expert notes,    for an example added to the "Boss Challenge" entry, how "[I] would like a little
         more  detail on the   structure of  the  `town' and  `gym   leader' situation for    those  of us who  are  Pokémon-
         challenged. I'm guessing you fight people in the town and work your way up to the "gym leader" boss." Other
         examples could benefit from the removal of unnecessary commentary or editorial such as the opinion of the
         relative merits of a game over its sequel. "There's valuable info here, just a little noise around the signal" notes
         one of the   experts. The expert   reviewers  also  found  some  examples   (10%     of all examples)  that should  be
         changed from strong examples to weak examples or vice versa.
                  The results of the evaluation were also positive even when considering only those examples that should
         be removed. Few examples were considered "non-salvageable" (only 6% of all examples) because they were
         incorrect or did not apply to the particular ontology entry where they were included. More than half (56%) of
         those examples evaluated as "should be removed" were considered relevant, but not worth the effort to correct.
         One of the experts noted how "sometimes the students didn't seem to find the right words and simply explained
         the examples very poorly. I found 2 types of `bad' examples, the least of these were those that were not relevant.
         Most were relevant but poorly explained."
                  When characterizing the contribution made by the examples added by the students, perhaps the single
         most common feature was that the example helped add variety to the ontology (46% of all examples). This can
         mean referring to a game that many people have played or know about (46% of all examples), thus making the
         entry more accessible. When trying to understand a particular entry, it is helpful to have a variety of examples
         that refer to well-known or popular games so that people are likely to find a game they can relate their personal
         experiences to. Variety was also increased through the addition of examples that refer to games that are unusual
         or rare, yet still important for people to know about (12% of all examples). In this case, the example can help
         broaden students understanding by drawing attention to games they might not have heard about, or considered
         playing, otherwise. Many of these "rare" games are interesting, from a games studies perspective, because they
         can help illustrate the nuances and varying interpretations that an ontological entry can have (Zagal et al., 2007).
                  As  described   previously,   the majority  of the examples    provided   by   the students served   as direct
         contributions to the body of knowledge that is the game ontology. However, students' examples also contributed
         indirectly. The expert evaluators noted that some examples (5%) helped them realize something they hadn't
         noticed or thought about previously. Also, 9.1% of the examples helped the experts notice something about the
         ontology entry that needed to improve or be expanded upon. For example, in the entry "Games Ends" one of the
         students added a weak example referring to the game Pac-Man. Pac-Man, in theory, does not have a formal
         ending (you can't win, it just gets harder and harder until you lose). However, there is a notorious technical
         issue that causes the  game  to    crash when  the  player reaches  the 256th screen    (Sellers, 2001).  The student-
         provided example draws attention to an issue that was not considered in the original entry (game ends due to
         technical issue) and made him wonder if the entry should be modified to account for this.       Another example, this

2-0
time for the ontology entry "Agent Goals", made an expert realize an implicit bias in the entry. "The way the
entry is written, it sounds like we're talking about states in state machine AI. What we're getting at in the end
here is that AI controlled agents have a prioritized set of goals that they seek to fulfill (like a hierarchical goal
tree and the agents can switch modes between those goals according to the hierarchy of the goal tree)?" The
entry, as written, implicitly assumes certain details about how agent goals are implemented in videogames and
the expert wonders whether or not we want to leave the entry with that bias.
        Student   examples     also served as  a catalyst for  reflection on  broader  issues of the   game  ontology.
Experts indicated that 2.7% of the examples helped them think about something that should be added to another
part of the ontology. These examples drew attention to future areas of growth for the ontology including new
directions to pursue or new entries that should be added. In other words, student participation was more than just
an "efficient" way of generating new examples, it also helped propel experts' thinking in new directions. In
summary, we are confident in stating that the students' contribution to the ontology was not only useful to them,
pedagogically speaking, but can also be fairly characterized as a legitimate contribution, both direct and indirect,
to a body of knowledge that is part of the academic field of games studies.

Discussion and Future Directions
        We began this research considering how to make the GOP, and the terms and concepts it describes,
approachable and    useful  to students.  We  also wanted   to help students   leverage knowledge      they have  about
videogames.  From      that perspective,  we  believe this  experience    was  a success.    Many students    chose  to
participate beyond the minimum requirement. For instance, 28% of the students used more than two games and
34% edited more than four ontology entries. The GOP was approachable to the students and they also felt it
played an important role in the context of their games education in general.     Fran describes how "if you're going
to study game design it's important to have standardized terminology. I think that with the game ontology wiki
it's interesting that you standardize terms and that you have many specific examples for each term and that's
very important in terms of understanding the different parts that make a game or different aspects from different
games." We also wondered if the student contributions would be meaningful, or useful, to the game ontology
project itself. On this point, we feel that we have succeeded in providing a learning environment where students
were able to legitimately contribute to an emergent field of study.
        However, the students' misperception of the game ontology as a static and monolithic source is an
issue that needs    further  exploration.  In particular, we   wonder  if  having students    provide  examples     only
reinforced the definitions provided in the ontology rather than encouraging them to challenge those definitions.
Student provided examples helped the subject matter experts reflect and think in new directions; however this is
something that ideally the students should also engage in. Further work is required to look at how to achieve the
delicate balance between reinforcing and building upon existing ideas and challenging the status quo in such a
way as to promote new ideas. Also, it is not clear to us how many students participated less due to concerns of
"messing things up." In this sense, the legitimacy and authenticity of the assignment may have also acted as a
barrier to participation.
        Finally, there is an issue regarding the sustainability, and scalability. Are the positive results of this
experience the result of students being able to take advantage of the "low-hanging fruit"? If we were to repeat
this experience,  how     many   entries would   become   saturated with  a  too many   similar  examples    that   only
marginally help illustrate an entry? This concern can be addressed by making changes to the structure of the
game  ontology   to support   larger numbers   of  examples   or provide  users  with  tools to filter the  information
provided. Users could filter the examples for an entry so as to only display examples that refer to games for a
certain hardware platform or display examples of games released after a certain year. However, the nature of the
medium also helps mitigate the "too many examples" problem. Older games are frequently unknown to younger
students and are also often inaccessible due to technical reasons such as hardware obsolescence. The Game
Ontology Project will always need to update the examples in order to remain accessible and understandable to
its users as well as allow for new games to force the re-evaluation of existing entries.
        In summary, we feel that our experience shows that it is possible to design learning environments that
are  approachable   to learners, allow   them to contribute legitimately  to  external communities     of practice, and
support visibility and access to the practices of a broader community. However, careful consideration should be
made of the affordances of the technologies used together with those of the practices of the broader community
in which one wishes students to participate in order that students can effectively engage in practices that are
meaningful to them as well as the broader community.

References
Björk, S., & Holopainen, J. (2005). Patterns in Game Design. Hingham, Massachusetts: Charles River Media Inc.
Blumenfeld, P. C., Soloway, E., Marx, R. W., Krajcik, J. C., Guzdial, M., & Palincsar, A. (1991). Motivating
        Project-Based     Learning:  Sustaining  the Doing,   Supporting   the Learning.  Educational     Psychologist,
        26(3&4), 369-398.

                                                                                                                           2-0
         Bryant, S.,  Forte, A.,   &  Bruckman,  A. (2005).   Becoming     Wikipedian:   Transformation   of  Participation    in a
                  Collaborative    Online  Encyclopedia.    Paper  presented   at the  GROUP      International Conference      on
                  Supporting Group Work, Sanibel Island, FL.
         Church, D. (1999, August, 1999). Formal Abstract Design Tools. Game Developer.
         Cummings,     M. (2003,   April 2003).  Knowledge    Building  Discourse    Offline: A  Teacher's   Perspective.   Paper
                  presented at the Annual meeting of the American Educational Research Association, Chicago, USA.
         D'Ambrosio, B. S. (1995). Implementing the Professional Standards for Teaching Mathematics. Mathematics
                  Teacher, 88(9), 770-772.
         Edelson, D. (1998). Realizing authentic science learning through the adaptation of scientific practice. In B. J.
                  Fraser & K. G. Tobin (Eds.), International Handbook of Science Education (pp. 317-331). Dordrecht:
                  Kluwer.
         Eisenhardt,   K. M.  (1989).  Building  Theories   from  Case  Study   Research.  Academy     of Management     Review,
                  14(4), 532-550.
         Ellis, J., & Bruckman, A. (2002). What Do Kids Learn from Adults Online? Examining Student-Elder Discourse
                  in  Palaver  Tree.  In Proceedings   of  ICLS 2002,   International  Conference     of the Learning   Sciences.
                  Seattle, WA.
         Falstein, N. (2004). The 400 Project. Retrieved Oct 29, 2004, from http://www.theinspiracy.com/400_project.htm
         Fleiss, J. L. (1971). Measuring nomnal scale agreement among many raters. Psychological Bulleting, 76, 378-382.
         Glaser, B.,  &   Strauss, A.  (1967). The  Discovery   of  Grounded    Theory:  Strategies   for Qualitative   Research.
                  Chicago: Aldine.
         Guzdial, M., Ludovice, P., Realff, M., Morely, T., & Carroll, K. (2002). When Collaboration Doesn't Work.
                  Paper presented at the International Conference of the Learning Sciences, Seattle.
         Kobrin, D.,   Abbott, E.,   Elinwood, J., &   Horton,  D.  (1993). Learning   history   by doing    history. Educational
                  Leadership, 50(7), 39-41.
         Kreimeier,    B.  (2002).    The  Case    for  Game     Design    Patterns.       Retrieved     Oct  29,     2004,  from
                  http://www.gamasutra.com/features/20020313/kreimeier_01.htm
         Lave,  J.,  & Wenger,     E. (1991).  Situated Learning:   Legitimate    Peripheral  Participation.   Cambridge,      UK:
                  Cambridge University Press.
         Leuf, B., & Cunningham, W. (2001). The Wiki Way: Quick Collaboration on the Web: Addison-Wesley.
         Lombard,    M.,  Snyder-Duch,    J.,  &   Companella,   C.  (2002).   Content   Analysis   in   Mass  Communication:
                  Assessment and Reporting of Intercoder Reliability. Human Communication Research, 28(4), 587-604.
         O'Neill, D. K., & Gomez, L. M. (1998). Sustaining mentoring relationships on-line. In Proceedings of the 1998
                  ACM conference on Computer supported cooperative work (pp. 325-334).
         Rogoff, B.   (1994). Developing   Understanding     of the Idea   of  Communities    of Learners.   Mind,    Culture, and
                  Activity, 1(4), 209-229.
         Scardamalia,  M.,   & Bereiter,  C.  (1991).  Higher   Levels  of Agency    for Children   in Knowledge      Building:   A
                  Challenge for the Design of New Knowledge Media. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 1(1), 37-68.
         Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (2002). Knowledge Building. In Encyclopedia of Education, 2nd Edition. New
                  York: Macmillan Reference.
         Sellers, J. (2001). Arcade Fever: The Fan's Guide to the Golden Age of Videogames. London: Running Press.
         Shaffer, D. W., & Resnick, M. (1999). "Thick" Authenticity: New Media and Authentic Learning. Journal of
                  Interactive Learning Research, 10(2), 195-215.
         Songer, N. (1996). Exploring Learning Opportunities in Coordinated Network-Enhanced Classrooms: A Case of
                  Kids as Global Scientists. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 5(4), 297-327.
         Stahl, G.   (2001).  Webguide:   Guiding   Collaborative   Learning    on   the Web     with  Perspectives.   Journal    of
                  Interactive Media In Education, 1.
         Viegas, F., Wattenberg, M., & Kushal, D. (2004). Studying Cooperation and Conflict between Authors with
                  history flow Visualizations. Paper presented at the CHI 2004, Vienna, Austria.
         Zagal, J., & Bruckman, A. (2007). From Gamers to Scholars: Challenges of Teaching Game Studies. In A. Baba
                  (Ed.), Proceedings of the Digital Games Research Association International Conference (DiGRA) 2007
                  (pp. 575-582). Tokyo, Japan.
         Zagal,  J., Mateas,  M.,  Fernandez-Vara,     C., Hochhalter,  B.,   & Lichti,  N. (2007).    Towards  an    Ontological
                  Language    for  Game   Analysis. In  S.  de  Castell &   J. Jenson  (Eds.),   Worlds   in Play:    International
                  Perspectives on Digital Games Research (pp. 21-35). New York: Peter Lang.

       Acknowledgments
         We would like to thank the class instructor, teaching assistants, and students for their time and valuable insight
         as well as Brian Hochhalter, Nolan Lichti, and Clara Fernández-Vara for serving as expert evaluators.

2-0
