The Organization and Management of Informal and Formal Learning
    Kimberly Austin, University of Chicago, 1313 E. 60th Street Chicago, IL 60637, kaustin@uchicago.edu
   Nichole Pinkard, University of Chicago, 1313 E. 60th Street Chicago, IL 60637, npinkard@usi-schools.org

          Abstract: This display sketches one element of the Digital Youth Network, a program aimed
          at producing     digitally literate youth.  The    practices   of  program    leaders  blend those   of
          mentoring and teaching. Despite the potential conflict between these roles, program leaders
          structure activities to support role transitions. The management of youth behavior within this
          structure supports    the  successful  transition. This   design  creates  a  complex  learning  space
          where informal and formal learning simultaneously occurs.

          The Digital Clubhouse, one of the earliest models for digital literacy learning, imagined an informal
space  where  youths   interact  with  technologies   under  the    guidance of  adult  mentors  (Center   for Children   &
Technology (CCT), 2001). Evaluations of this model value adult skills but speculate pedagogical knowledge
would   increase   learning outcomes     (CCT,  2001).  The   Digital  Youth  Network     (DYN)   follows  this advice    by
creating a space that blends formal and informal learning. The following poster explores how adults negotiate
this hybrid space. Initial evidence suggests DYN leaders organize events in a way that draws upon teaching
practices at  the  opening  and   closing of  sessions and   mentoring     practices in the  middle.  Language   is   key in
signaling these shifts to youths. This design produces a space geared toward providing the benefits of formal
and informal learning.
          Multiple definitions of informal learning exist (Sefton-Green, 2004). In contrast, formal learning occurs
within schools (Sefton-Green, 2004) where a knowledge authority selects strategies and tools for instruction.
Intentionality and structures differentiate the two (Sefton-Green, 2004). DYN exists in a formal school setting
but the  space  it fashions    straddles formal  and  informal  models.    DYN    leaders, therefore,  act both as    formal
learning  leaders,  i.e., teachers,  and as  informal ones,   i.e., mentors. These   roles,  however,  are  not uniformly
compatible. Teachers occupy a well-defined role of knowledge holder, which places them in a dominant relation
to  students  (Waller,    1932;  Larkin,  1973;  Meyer    &   Rowan,     1974;   Hurn,  1985).   In  contrast,  reciprocity
characterizes the tie between mentor and protégé (McPartland & Nettles, 1991; Rhodes, Grossman & Resch,
2000).  Substantively,    this means  teachers   profess some    knowledge    set;  whereas,  mentors  respond     to youth
interest and share knowledge on this basis.
          This analysis sits in a larger research project examining the program's impact on digital media literacy.
DYN started in Old Orchard Middle School, a technology-focused school in Chicago. The school serves about
140 middle-to-low    income     students  who   are mostly   African   American,     aged  11 to 14  years.  The   program
reaches all learners through a series of required media arts courses that expose students to a breadth of skills.
After school   sessions   allow  students  to develop  skill  depth  by  concentrating    on  a particular medium.    DYN
leaders  attend   weekly    professional   development   sessions     that  provide  pedagogical    content    and  general
knowledge    (Shulman,     1986)    used  to  inform  instruction.   For   more  information    about  the  program    visit
http://www.iremix.org. Participant observations comprise the data set for this analysis. This work focuses on the
practice of three leaders ­ Marlowe, Anthony and Jeff. Field notes served as the basis for the coding schema
(e.g., Emerson et al, 1995) and relate to DYN leaders' practice including instructional delivery, assessment of
participant work, and collaboration with youths.
          Time   organizes   role   performances.   The  progression     of events   in DYN     sessions   resembles   most
American     classrooms   with   the instruction of  new  material,    guided  and   independent   practice,   and closing.
Leaders adopt roles associated with teaching in the opening and closing phases. Framed by a dry erase board
filled with the day's agenda, checklists, and resources, DYN leaders face students to dictate session objectives.
For example, Jeff, the leader of the introductory media arts session, said, "This semester we're going to work on
marketing our label... We're going to use ou[r] web site to help us with this..." Adults establish the order of
events. Youths    accept   these assertions   without question.  Youths     also accept the   new material   DYN    leaders
presented. DYN leaders authoritative edge over participants continues through guided practice. Anthony, who
leads film production sessions, explained the use of themes and symbols and asked students to identify them in
three public  service     announcements.   As  students  did  this  he corrected   student   understanding.  The   leaders'
request for knowledge aligns with a role more closely associated with oversight than collaboration. Questioning
during these phases also demonstrates power differentials between the adult and youth.

          [Marlowe] asked how many beats were in a bar. David raised his hand, Marlowe called on
          him, and he replied four. [Marlowe] asked the students to drum out a bar. Marlowe called on
          Andrew who beat out two measures (or bars) of four. Marlowe credited his effort...

                                                                                                                               3-
                In the above excerpt, Marlowe, like others, demands students to demonstrate knowledge.
                Independent   practice  marks  the  shift  to  behavior    more  closely    aligned with    mentoring.   Formal
      instructional tactics give way to discussing, guiding and suggesting. Physical changes occur. Students rearrange
      chairs, leave the room to record in the studio, and move freely about the room doing tasks related to being
      protégés. Teachers abandon their posts at the front of the room and offer assistance as mentors. Discussion and
      collaboration  offer   more egalitarian  forms  of   communication     than  direct   instruction and    questioning.  The
      following excerpt captures a conversation around a student's suggestion to wear T-shirts bearing the record
      label's name.

                Jeff tells him that's a "great idea" and asks, "but who's going to get the T shirts?" Turner
                protests that everyone has a white T-shirt and he offered to bring blue tape to but on T-shirts.
                Madison: Who wants to mess up a plain white T just to do this show?...Turner [says] that's
                why I said tape. Madison: You'll still have that black crap up on your shirt. Scott: I'm going
                to do designs and stuff on my T-shirt...

      Jeff does not offer a lecture on T-shirt design nor does he affirm or dismiss student suggestions. As a mentor he
      frames the opportunity for creation. He gives his opinion of the ideas (e.g., great idea) and challenges students
      (e.g., "but who's going to get the T-shirts?"), but protégés take the lead in the discussion. Collaboration offers
      another format for reciprocal adult-youth relations. Marlowe typically play instruments with youths during jam
      sessions, Anthony     works  with participant to  write   scripts, and Jeff  interviews   musical    groups. As  a fellow
      contributor they can guide musicians by changing tempo, share ideas, and develop storyboards.

                Nigel is on the drum machine and Nate is on the keyboards. Marlowe is also playing on the
                keyboards. Marlowe: faster. Nate: We do our part then you put beats on top. Marlowe adds
                some beats by pushing 1-2 keys on the keyboard while Nate and Nigel play.

                Marlowe directed the group to speed up the tempo, but Nate pushed back (i.e., he said wait).
      This excerpt   also points  to another  element   of the  mentor-protégé    exchange,    which    is suggestion.
      Leaders share ideas with protégés during this time. This allows them to share their expertise while also
      giving youth the latitude to accept or reject that knowledge.
                Performances by DYN leaders and youths are least consistent at the end of sessions. The trend appears
      to be a return to teacher-student relations but DYN members too often break character. We speculate the quality
      of the  informal   space complicate   this   transition. Participants  are  reluctant  to leave   autonomous     roles for
      hierarchical ones. Researchers theorize that individuals carry around multiple identities connected to disparate
      roles (Stets & Burke, 2000), but this is achieved because others in the social setting anticipate behaviors that are
      consistent  in a given   setting. DYN    violates this   since members    fulfill dual roles  in  a   single setting. This
      condition  results  in role confusion,   which  surfaces   in  the field notes  as  what  Goffman     (1959)  would    call
      "breaches."   DYN   leaders  respond  to these  slippages  by   re-asserting their  legitimacy    as  an authority figure.
      Unfortunately, space limitations prevent a more extensive discussion of these techniques.
                The program's design offers one model for the integration of informal and formal learning spaces. The
      proceeding analysis focuses on the dual roles member adopt in this integrated space. Future analysis will explore
      the effectiveness of this model in comparison with "purely" informal spaces. Nonetheless, this analysis bridges
      the gap between informal and formal learning. Early reviews of the paper noted that this is a long established
      phenomenon in teaching. This point is well taken, but the value added of DYN hybrid role is to theories of
      informal learning. First, DYN leaders devote most of their sessions to independent practice. In fact after schools
      sessions  are  longer  than classes. In both  forms, leaders   use   intentionality as a  frame   for independent  work.
      Second, thinking of this space in relation to the work of teaching misses the outcome of DYN. Production and
      creativity are the goals. Youths make music videos, TV shows, Web pages, robots, and video games. The space
      retains an  atmosphere   of  informality to  allow   student  ideas, thoughts,    and interests  to  guide products.   The
      instructional habits adopted at the opening and closing equip youths with the tools to pursue these interests.
      Thus, the leader in DYN is of an individual charged with the delivery of instruction that does not clamp down so
      tightly that it suffocates student self-direction. We submit that the leaders' organization of time-denoted role
      changes is one way to integrate informal and formal learning spaces.

     References
      Bidwell,  Charles   E.  (2006).   "Varieties of Institutional   Theory:   Traditions   and  Prospects    for  Educational
                Research."   Heinz-Dieter   Meyer     and   Brian    Rowan     (Eds.)   Advances    in  Institutional  Theory:
                Applications to Educational Scholarship. Albany, NY: State University of New York at Albany Press.
      Center  for   Children  and  Technology.     (2000). Evaluation     of the  Intel  Computer     Clubhouse    Network   for
                Education Development Center: New York City, NY.

3-
Emerson,   Robert, Rachel,  Fretz, and Shaw,  Linda. (1995).    Writing Ethnographic  Field notes.  University of
        Chicago Press: Chicago, IL.
Goffman, Erving. (1959). The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life. Anchor: Garden City, NY.
Healy, Charles C. and Welchert, Alice J. (1990). "Mentoring Relations: A Definition to Advance Research and
        Practice." Educational Researcher 19 (9): 17-21.
Hurn, Christopher. (1985). "Changes in Authority Relationships in Schools 1960-1980." Research in Sociology
        of Education and Socialization 5: 31-57.
Lortie, Dan C. (1975). Schoolteacher. University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL.
James M. McPartland; Saundra Murray Nettles. (1991). "Using Community Adults as Advocates or Mentors for
        At-Risk    Middle  School  Students: A two-year  evaluation   of  project RAISE."  American   Journal  of
        Education 99 (4): 568-586.
Meyer,  J. W.,  and  B.    Rowan.  (1977).   "Institutionalized Organizations:   Formal  Structure as Myth  and
        Ceremony." American Journal of Sociology 83:340-363.
Murphy,  Joseph.   (1990). The Reform   of American  Public     Education in the  1980s: Perspectives and cases.
        Berkeley, CA: McCutchan Press.
Noblit, George W. (1993). "Power and Caring." American Educational Research Journal 30 (1): 23-38.
Pinkard, Nichole. (2006). "iRemix America: Empowering Youth to Appropriate New Media Literacies to Find
        Their Voice in a Global Media World" for the John D and Catherine T MacArthur Foundation.
Rhodes, Jean E., Grossman, Jean B., and Resch, Nancy L. (2000). "Agents of Change: Pathways through which
        mentoring relationships influence adolescents' academic adjustment. Child Development 71 (6): 1662-
        1671.
Sefton-Green, Julian. (2004). "Literature Review in Informal Learning Outside of School." Futurelab Series
        Report.
Shulman, Lee. (1986). "Those Who Understand: Knowledge growth in teaching." Education Research 15(2): 4-
        14.
Stets, Jan and Burke, Peter. 2000. "Identity Theory and Social Identity Theory." Social Psychology Quarterly 62
        (2): 173-189.
Tyack, David. (1974). One Best System: A History if American Urban Education. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
        University Press.
Waller, Willard. (1961 [1932]). The Sociology of Teaching. New York: Russell and Russell.

                                                                                                                     3-
