              Questioning and responding in online small groups
                  engaged in collaborative math problem solving
                    Nan Zhou, Alan Zemel, Gerry Stahl, Drexel University, Philadelphia, USA
                          Email: Nan.Zhou@drexel.edu, ARZ26, Gerry.Stahl@drexel.edu

          Abstract: Question asking is central to the interactions that take place in Computer-Supported
          Collaborative Learning (CSCL) settings. We investigate questioning and responding practices as
          interactional processes and explore their roles in online collaborative problem solving. We present
          our analysis of a 12-minute excerpt of three students doing math problem solving collaboratively in
          an online chat environment as an effort to discover some underlying social practices involved in
          questioning and responding. The analysis suggests how questions and responses are produced and
          understood.  It also    explicates the  variety of   roles questions  can  play in the  organization   of
          participation and learning in such a collaborative math problem-solving setting.

Introduction
           Asking  questions    has been     considered   by many    researchers  to be   central to  theories  of  learning,
cognition, and education (e.g. Scardamalia & Bereiter, 1991; Graesser, 1994; Ram, 1991). Some believe that the
ability to ask  questions    is pivotal  in  processes of  reasoning,  understanding    and  learning.   Questions   are, for
instance,  a  powerful    and   ubiquitous   tool used    in instructional interactions.  An    IRE   (Initiation-Response-
Evaluation) model (Mehan, 1979) has been commonly used in classroom settings, the sequence of which is 1)
an instructor asks a question for which he or she already knows the answer, 2) students respond to the question,
and 3) the instructor evaluates their response (Fox, 1993; Wells, 1999). Studies of the role of teachers' question
asking in classroom settings have considered it a means by which teachers retain control within their students'
zones of proximal development (Scardamalia & Bereiter, 1991). Studies of questions in classrooms and one-to-
one tutoring settings have suggested certain questions for teachers to ask to guide student thinking and to shift
students toward more reflective discourse (e.g. Van Zee & Minstrell, 1997; Graesser, 1994). Previous studies
have confirmed    the importance    of     elaborated explanations    and shown   that  constructively   applying   the help
received   is beneficial  for   learners (e.g., Webb   et al., 2006).  In mathematics     education,  in particular, reform
efforts have   called for  student-centered     communication.    The   National  Council    of Teachers    of Mathematics
(NCTM, 1991, p. 35) lists a number of desired teacher behaviors such as "posing questions and tasks that elicit,
engage, and challenge each student's thinking; listening carefully to students' ideas; asking students to clarify
and justify their ideas orally and in writing; and monitoring students' participation in discussions and deciding
when and how to encourage each student to participate."
          Although question asking is believed to lie at the heart of learning, it is well documented that students
very infrequently ask questions in the classroom, and that their questions tend to be "lower-level" questions
(Webb,   Nemer,   &   Ing,   2006). Educational     researchers  have   frequently   advocated    educational  settings   that
engage students in active learning and problem solving, which often involves students in formulating their own
inquiries and asking effective questions. CSILE (Computer-Supported International Learning Environments) is
a  prominent    example    of   a learning    environment    designed   to support    students'   intentional  learning   by
encouraging    students   to  ask questions     and then  using  these  questions    to guide   their knowledge     building
(Scardamalia and Bereiter, 1994).
          Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning (CSCL) is a branch of the learning sciences concerned
with studying how people can learn together with the help of computer technology (Stahl, 2006b). It proposes
the development of software environments that bring learners together and stresses productive social interaction
among students. Students are encouraged to learn by expressing their questions and pursuing lines of inquiry
together. Within such environments, students usually tend to be more willing to ask questions in a peer group
without the pressure from a classroom setting. During collaborative problem solving, students in a small group
have to   coordinate  their     activities and  work   together  to  "construct  and  maintain    a  joint  problem  space"
(Roschelle,   1996) to   collaboratively    engage  in producing     solutions. Such  a collaborative    process  inevitably
involves activities such as: posing a question, making a proposal, critiquing, providing assessment, agreeing,
disagreeing, etc. Collaborative problem solving in a CSCL environment can thus provides a particularly fertile
opportunity to examine question asking. Understanding questions in such settings can have an important value
in understanding    collaboration   and    learning in  CSCL    environments,    since  collaboration    is often  organized
around the action of question and response.
          Surprisingly there has been little empirical analysis of question asking and responding in online small-
group interactions, specifically in CSCL settings. We have examined the questions in small groups that are
engaged in math problem solving in an online chat environment. We are interested in understanding different kinds of

                                                                                                                                  2-0
         questions asked in this particular setting by analyzing: (1) How is a question designed and produced by participants so
         that it's adequacy is made evident to participants? (2) What kind of work does a question do in collaborative problem
         solving? (3) What   roles do  questions  play in collaborative learning?  Question-response   is one of   the common
         "adjacency pairs" in ordinary conversations (Sacks, 1992). We hold that questions (and responses) are particular and
         locally situated social facts, and we are interested in questions as the lived achievement of actors who are engaged in
         the work of doing them. In this paper, we present a detailed analysis of one episode of students' interaction, drawing
         on aspects of conversation analysis (Sacks, 1992) and ethnomethodology (Garfinkel, 1967), as a preliminary step of
         understanding questions in an online small group setting.

                                        Figure 1. The VMT Chat environment of the session

                  Our    analysis  focuses  on  a 12-minute    excerpt   of  three students   doing   math   problem    solving
         collaboratively in an online chat environment. This is a rich episode of interaction, where a series of questions
         and responses are produced. We show that questioning and responding plays an important role in productive
         collaboration and knowledge building in a variety of ways. Some questioning/answering practices have better
         potential to engage the group in activities that are more consequential for their collaborative experience. For
         example,    the longer   sequence of  question-answer-test-assessment     is significant for learning. Our    example
         analysis below demonstrates that the question, "How did you get it?" played an educationally significant role in
         the group's  collaboration   and  problem solving.   It initiated the production  of  an  account,  which  organized
         participants around   it and engaged   them   in collaborative  meaning   making,  and   eventually  led  them  to the
         proposal of an alternative approach to solving their problem.

       Data Analysis
                  The data for this analysis is an excerpt taken from a Spring Fest 2006 session of the Virtual Math
         Teams (VMT) service at http://mathforum.org/vmt. Teams consisted of 3 or 4 middle-school and high-school
         students who participated in four sessions over two weeks in an experimental online chat environment. The
         interactions including   conversations   and  other activities are preserved   in the system   for  later access   and
         examination. As a group, they work on a problem that requires them to find out the pattern of growth of a series
         of  figures made   of sticks forming  squares  like the  ones  displayed  in  Figure 1.  The  particular  team  in the
         following excerpt consists of three students from different parts of the US. This excerpt is near the beginning of

2-0
their second session, which    is split into three parts   for the convenience     of presenting  our  analysis. Two
participants with screen name 137 (replaced by dave in the transcript and analysis to avoid confusion with line
numbers) and Jason have participated in the first session and qwer is a newcomer for this session. In this online
environment, neither the participants nor the researchers know anything about each other (age, gender, etc.)
except what is revealed during the chat. Figure 1 is a screen shot of the replayer tool that reproduces this episode
as it originally appeared to the participants. The VMT environment consists of a chat program and a shared
whiteboard with  drawing  functions.    The  system  also   provides  an  explicit referencing    tool for  connecting
particular postings and objects on the whiteboard. The replayer tool has extra information at the very bottom,
which participants did not see in their environment. With this tool, researchers can replay a session in real time
and be able to watch how interaction unfolds, which makes possible detailed and precise analysis.

How question and response are designed
         In the first section of the selected excerpt (Figure 2), we see how a question and response are designed
and produced by the participants to be understood as a question and its response. Participants understand a
question or response by incorporating available resources such as the setting of the interaction, what happened
in the past, what has been posted, what the question or response seems to be projecting, and so on.

 Line#   Participant  Chat posting                                                 Time        Explicit reference
  362    Jason        so apparently there's something with a recursive             07.26.32
                      sequence that we should discuss
  363    dave         What was a recursice sequence again?                         07.26.55
  364    qwer         recursive sequence?                                          07.27.03    Reference to 362
  365    Jason        i think that an explicit formula is better, but a recursive  07.27.18
                      one would show how the number of squares/sticks
                      increases as N increases
  366    Jason        it's something like this:                                    07.27.35    Reference to 364
  367    Jason        a(n) = 5+ a(n-1)                                             07.27.45
  368    Jason        where the things in parentheses are supposed to be           07.27.53
                      subscripts
  369    Jason        so a recursive formula relies on the value of a previous     07.28.07
                      function
  370    dave         Ah, I see.                                                   07.28.09    Reference to 365
  371    Jason        thus, you must specify something first, like a(1) = 4        07.28.19
  372    qwer         i get it                                                     07.28.29    Reference to 369
  373    Jason        great :-)                                                    07.28.54
                                          Figure 2. Part 1 of the excerpt.

         This excerpt is taken from near the beginning of the second session of this group. In the first session,
that took place two days ago, the group worked on the problem and produced the general formula for the total
number of sticks and squares at stage N. Feedback has been provided for their first session and posted in a pink
textbox on the whiteboard by      the VMT    facilitators (see Figure 1), which   the facilitator of   this session has
oriented the participants to. With the prompt of the facilitator, the two participants who attended the first session
were trying to bring the newcomer, qwer, "up to speed." Jason's posting at 362 marks that they finished the
catching-up with "so," and proposes something for the group to do next, namely to discuss "something with a
recursive sequence." This would resume what the group was oriented to at the very beginning of the session,
"ok, so with this aside--i guess we should discuss our feedback from the last session" (posted by Jason at
timestamp 07.12.07).
         At this point, we encounter the first instance of questioning in this excerpt in line 363 and 364. There
was about half a minute silence after Jason's proposal at line 362 before the next posting of dave appears,
during which Jason started typing, and shortly after, dave and qwer started typing, as indicated by the awareness
information provided by our replayer software. When a proposed task for the group is put forward, it calls on
the participants to respond. To be able to respond to a proposal (and for that response to be seen as in some
sense legitimate), one has to be entitled to respond, that is, one needs to be recognizably in a position of being
able to understand it, assess it, agree with it or disagree, which organizes the subsequent actions accordingly. In
this case, both dave (at line 363) and qwer (at line 364) respond to the proposal with postings designed to be
read as questions regarding "recursive sequence." The two postings are designed somewhat differently. dave's
posting "what was a recursice sequence again?", uses the past tense "was," the word "again," and a question

                                                                                                                           2-0
         mark to display that it is to be read as a question calling on readers to respond. This indicates that there is a
         shared history of some sort in the group and that dave previously knew about recursive sequences but may not
         remember at the moment.(1) The way dave's question is designed is different from a question like "What is a
         recursive sequence?" in that they call for different response actions: the former may only need some information
         to "remind" him what it is while the latter demands information of the concept of recursive sequence that would
         help someone who does not know about it at all. The immediately subsequent posting at line 364 could be seen
         as (1) an other-initiated repair of dave's misspelling ("recursice" vs. "recursive") or (2) an information question
         that indicates he does not know what a recursive sequence is and is seeking an explanation. That qwer's posting
         was presented with a question mark served to indicate that, whatever the source of trouble, some explanation of
         recursive function was in order. How the questions are treated and taken up by the recipient, here Jason, is what
         is relevant to the participants and to their interaction. Therefore, that is what is relevant to our analysis as well.
         Understanding the questioning from the participant perspective requires that the analyst make use of the same
         sorts of resources as are available to the participants, including the interactional situation and the question and
         response as locally produced, situated phenomena (Garfinkel, 1967).
                  The  subsequent   posting  from    Jason at Line 365:   "i  think that an  explicit formula  is better, but  a
         recursive one would show how the number of squares/sticks increases as N increases" may first appear as a
         continuation of his posting at line 362 and not as a response to either of the questions.(2) When we examine
         more closely and turn to our replayer to replay the session and watch the interaction unfold, the awareness
         information shows that after Jason's first message was posted, Jason started typing before dave and qwer. Also,
         taking into account the fact that Jason's posting at 365 is relatively lengthy so that it may very likely take more
         than 15 seconds (as suggested by timestamp 07.27.18 and 07.27.03) to compose, it is reasonable to believe that
         Jason's  posting  is not  produced    to  address the two    questions  that appear   to  be  immediately  preceding.
         Nevertheless, the order that the postings actually appeared on the screen could be taken by participants as a
         reason to treat Jason's posting as a response to the question.
                  If we take into consideration the setting where the interaction takes place, we know that it is a kind of
         institutional setting, set up by VMT staff through teachers. The group had met once before (two days ago) and
         did some work on the same problem. In response to that work, VMT staff posted feedback for that prior session
         on  the shared   whiteboard. The  students   are now  oriented to   discussing  the feedback. With   all this in mind,
         Jason's posting at Line 365 seems to be referencing and responding to what has been raised in the following
         part of the feedback: "One question that was left unexplored was whether a recursive function shows better how
         the number of sticks and square grow.          Someone  offered  that  as  a possibility  but you  opted  for  using a
         summation notation. We notice when ideas or questions are stated in a group but not discussed. What do you
         think about that situation and how groups deal with it?"
                  Sequences of action are performed in ways that contribute to the progression of the interaction in a
         methodical sense (Stivers and Robinson, 2006; Schegloff, 2007). In this sense, the silence after Jason's first
         posting  and the  questions  posted   by  dave and   qwer interrupt  the progression   of interaction and  thus  make
         relevant actions to restore the unproblematic progression of interaction. Rather than simply proceed with the
         trajectory of work projected by his initial posting at line 362, Jason produces postings (lines 365 through 369)
         designed to further his discussion in a way that also responds to the questions posed by dave and qwer. In order
         for these postings   to be  constituted   as a response   to the questions   of dave   and   qwer, the   author  of the
         explanation (Jason) and the recipients for whom the explanation is produced (dave and qwer) must do some
         work. This is necessary to establish common ground among the interactants (Clark & Brennan, 1991).
                  The posting from dave ("Ah, I see.") with explicit reference to one of Jason's postings as well as that
         from  qwer   ("i get it") indicate their   engagement  in  such  processes   and  that they   are doing  the  work   of
         communicating to Jason their understanding of his explanation. Such responses are acknowledged by Jason
         ("great") with a smiley face emoticon. At this point, the question-response adjacency pair is complete and the
         group is ready to move on to subsequent action.

        How questions are used to organize participation
          374    qwer     for the number of squares, would that be: a(n)=n2-1                   07.30.07
          375    dave     so a(1)=1, a(n)=n+a(n-1)...                                           07.30.15    Reference to 371
          376    dave     For squares...                                                        07.30.18
          377    Jason    it looks right... lets check for a few values of N                    07.30.39    Reference to 376
          378    Jason    when N = 1, #squares = 1                                              07.31.06
          379    dave     When N is 2, a is 3.                                                  07.31.19
          380    Jason    yup, i think thats right                                              07.31.22
          381    dave                                                                           07.31.47

2-0
   382  dave    Oops.                                                                    07.31.52    Reference to 381
   383  dave    b(1)=4, b(n)=b(n-1)+4(n)-(n-1)-(n-1), b is the number of sticks...       07.33.06
   384  dave    So b(n)=b(n-1)+2n+2?                                                     07.33.30
   385  Jason   assuming only (n-1) is a subscript?                                      07.33.51
   386  qwer    what does the subscript mean?                                            07.34.32    Reference to 385
   387  Jason   read "b of n minus 1"                                                    07.34.57
   388  dave    Yes.                                                                     07.35.03    Reference to 385
   389  Jason   Ok                                                                       07.35.10
                                            Figure 3. Part 2 of the excerpt

         When a question-response adjacency pair is done, the actors can move on to other matters, or follow up
on what has been provided as a response, which seems to be what happened in this excerpt. The next posting at
Line 374 by qwer appears more than one minute later in the form of a yes/no question: "for the number of
squares, would that be: a(n)=n2-1". By producing this posting as a question (as indicated by its grammatical
construction), qwer "performs" his understanding of Jason's explanation in a way that calls on recipients to
assess his   treatment of recursion  as explained    by  Jason.  By  calling  for assessment     of his application   of  a
recursive sequence to the problem, qwer calls on recipients to evaluate that understanding and possibly diagnose
any problems with it. Dave's next post is produced as an assessable conclusion regarding the formula for the
number of squares that is presumably derived from Jason's explanation of recursion. Dave's posting appears to
be in a more complete form, considering the form of recursive sequences as just explained. About 20 seconds
later (which  is  a relatively large elapse  in online   chat),  it received  an  endorsement    from   Jason,   "it looks
right...", who, in the same post, proposes that it be checked for validity with "a few values for N" (Line 377).
The proposal by qwer is not taken up in the subsequent actions of the group.
         The    ways that  online  chat is  organized    are interactionally  different from   face-to-face   interaction
(Garcia & Jacobs, 1999). In a face-to-face situation when dyads are conversing, the turn-taking rules mandate
that one interactant's utterance ought to be taken up in order to produce meaningful interaction; so it is hard to
ignore someone's utterance in face-to-face interaction. However, in an online chat environment like VMT Chat,
more   than   two participants  are  "conversing"    by  exchanging    text   postings  and  through    activities on    the
whiteboard.   The   pace of interaction usually   is fast,  and  participants  need  to orient   most   of their attention
simultaneously to various activities going on, such as keeping track of the flow of the conversation, reading
social awareness    messages,   paying  attention to  the   shared  whiteboard   when   someone     is performing    some
actions, and so on. When three or more participants are posting, one message could be easily ignored simply
because of limitations of attention. Further, it is essentially reading's work (Zemel, 2005) that they are engaged
in with chat environments. Postings serve as resources for them to organize and accomplish interactional work.
In other words, a posting calling for response may not be taken up by the group for a number of reasons without
disrupting the general smooth progression of interaction.
         In our case, dave's seemingly more complete (or more correct) proposal is taken up by Jason, who has
been accorded the status of a situated, local authority regarding recursive sequences by dave and qwer who
solicited assessments from him. Jason and dave then engage in performing the task proposed by Jason, checking
the values of N to see whether the formula holds up. These actions along with Jason's explicit assessment affirm
dave's  provisional  understanding   at line 375,  and   thus   implicitly answer   qwer's   question   by  treating  it as
incorrect. Jason's confirmation after the checking work concludes his assessment of dave's candidate formula
and   serves to provisionally  propose  the relevance    of  moving  on  to a  new   action. However,    dave  is  not   yet
finished. Dave's multi-post question in lines 383 and 384 offers a formulaic version of his understanding of
recursion and is designed as a question (with a question mark) that calls for assessment.
         This   question  leads to  questions from    Jason   and   qwer   as response  to   the call.  Jason's  question
"assuming only (n-1) is a subscript?" is produced to establish a common ground (Clark & Brennan, 1991) on
their reading of (n-1). Only with the shared understanding of it can Jason be entitled to produce an assessment
of the  proposal.   Qwer's  question  "what   does   the subscript   mean?"   is  an information    question  that   seeks
clarification of  Jason's query   in 385.  This   question   is rather interesting  if  we  think   about  qwer's    earlier
announcement, "i get it," in responding to Jason's elaborated explanation on recursive sequence, which has a
subscript as one of its characteristic components. If we took qwer's statement, "i get it," as an indication that he
understood recursive sequences, his question about subscripts would be rather problematic. Maybe it is only
meant to be indicating that he "got" why they are using a recursive function. Other interactants--as well as we
as analysts--would have no way to know at that moment. This raises the issue of when a question is answered
sufficiently, which may have to be left to the subsequent unfolding of interaction to determine.

                                                                                                                                2-
                  Our preliminary analysis of this short episode reveals to us the richness of discourse of a small group
         engaged in collaborative math problem solving. Even in this short episode consisting of 16 postings within 5
         minutes or so, we witness various questions being produced during the collaborative problem-solving process.
         They do various kinds of work, including engaging the participants, organizing their participation framework,
         establishing common     ground,  and seeking   information.    In a sense, the participation   and collaboration   are
         organized   around  the  question-response    as it  unfolds.  Questioning  also plays   an   important role   in  the
         "understanding" work participants do together. Specifically, participants apply what has been explained to the
         problem situation and put the proposal out for assessment by asking a question.

        A question that leads to productive learning moments

             390   Jason       did u check that                                                              07.35.13
             391   Jason       looks correct                                                                 07.35.39
             392   Jason       how did you get it?                                                           07.35.45
             393   dave        There are n-1 overlaps here...                                                07.36.23
             394   dave        Wait.                                                                         07.36.24
             395   dave        Those.                                                                        07.36.36
             396   dave        And n-1 here:                                                                 07.36.43
             397   qwer        those?                                                                        07.36.45
             398   Jason       what do you mean by :"overlaps"                                               07.36.57
             399   dave        They're counted twise; they belong to two boxes.                              07.37.17
             400   Jason       are you guys still talking about that formula?                                07.38.13
             401   Jason       because i dont think the overlap in the diagrams matters                      07.38.22
             402   dave        Yeah...                                                                       07.38.23
             403   Jason       if you are only calculating the number of sticks                              07.38.36
             404   qwer        might be easier if you think of each square corisponding to 2 sides-the       07.39.02
                               right and bottom sides, and then add the upper left border
                                                   Figure 4. Part 3 of the excerpt

                  This   episode is a continuation  of part  2. Dave's  proposal  on the  formula   for the number   of sticks
         presented in the form of a question has not yet been assessed as it is designed to be. The participants were
         engaged in building common ground as a prerequisite for understanding the proposal and being able to make an
         assessment. Such grounding work has now been completed, so it is finally a relevant matter for the group to
         attend to the unaddressed call for assessment. This is what Jason is doing at the beginning of this excerpt. He
         first tries to elicit from the author of the proposal whether some checking has been done. After 26 seconds
         elapses, Jason  provides   his assessment: "looks    correct". The  subsequent  question   by  Jason, calling  for an
         explanation of the proposal ("how did you get it?"), echoes this rather ambiguous comment and positions him as
         in a status  of being not  prepared  to make  a  real  assessment.  This question leads    dave to  produce detailed
         explanations, which in this case are done both in text in chat and actions on the shared whiteboard (see Figure
         1). The chat area on the right in Figure 1 has little squares between dave's postings, which indicate the activities
         performed on the whiteboard. When we replay the session in real time, we can see that dave first marked three
         horizontal sides between squares in the diagram with scribble lines then marked three vertical ones. The deictic
         and indexical work is achieved by using the word "those", "here", along with directing interactants' attention to
         the whiteboard where actions are performed (Cakir, Zemel, & Stahl, 2007). The text postings would not make
         sense on their own if not taken together with whiteboard actions in a coordinated way.
                  The question "how did you get it" thus initiates the process of producing an account of the formula,
         which bears a lot of resemblance to a mathematical proof in this case. This is also a collaborative meaning-
         making   process, because   the participants  need  to mutually   engage and   participate in  the production  of  the
         account to construct meaning of it. The work of producing an account opens up the opportunity for exposing the
         work that has been done to the scrutiny of the group. It also provides the participant who is doing the production
         an opportunity to reflect while revisiting the work and producing a coherent account. In fact, during the process
         where dave is producing an account of his formula, Jason problematizes his approach, which takes into account
         the "overlaps" by presenting his perspective: "because i dont think the overlap in the diagrams matters" (Line
         40). The  process  is much   more complex    than  a simple   question-response  pair. We  see  sub-questions  posed

2-2
along this process such as qwer's question "those?" and Jason's explicit calling for explanation `what do you
mean by: "overlaps"'. Jason's problematizing move reveals different perspectives among the participants for
seeing the problem. This leads to Qwer's proposal of seeing the growth of the pattern in an alternative way,
which "might be easier": "might be easier if you think of each square corisponding to 2 sides-the right and
bottom sides, and then add the upper left border" (Line 404).
          In the subsequent interaction, which is not shown in the excerpt, qwer is able to produce a correct
formula for the number of sticks based on his proposed perspective of seeing the pattern of growth.                This is
rather a surprising achievement considering that for the whole time from the very beginning of the session, qwer
has not demonstrated high competency in working on this particular problem and has not made any significant
contribution to the group's problem-solving progress. However, he has shown that he has been trying hard to
follow and participate, e.g., from the number of questions he has posed at particular times of the interaction
sequence.   From    the analysis,  we   see that the   question  "how   did  you get  it" has  played   an  educationally
significant role in the group's collaboration and problem solving. It initiates the production of an account, which
organizes   participants    around it  and  engages    them   in collaborative   meaning    making  (Stahl,  2007),   and
eventually leads to the proposal of an alternative approach to solving the problem.

Discussion
          Questions and responses are used to perform a variety of actions depending on their design and the
circumstances of their use. In the episode we have just analyzed, questions posed by participants in a small
group  do   various   work   in  their collaborative  problem    solving. Our  preliminary    analysis  has  shown    how
questions   are  used   for organizing  participation,  coordinating   group  process,  establishing    common   ground,
seeking information, doing understanding work, etc. Often one question does multiple kinds of work. Questions
provide various resources in their design and production that reify epistemic relations among participants. They
are performed    in ways    that constitute actors  as participants  of various  sorts, i.e., determining   who  can  ask
questions and who is entitled to respond. Questions situate actors in a scene in relation to each other by making
evident who acts, of what those actions consist, and the provisional entitlements of actors to participate in the
performance of those actions. The entitlement to produce questions and responses is a matter of interactional
significance to participants. Questions play an important role in participants' understanding work. In the episode
we have just analyzed, participants apply what has been explained to the problem and make a proposal in the
form of a question to call for assessment. By putting out one's understanding for assessment, participant can get
feedback. This may reveal problems of understanding if there are any.
          Questions and responses do not just happen. There are various methods participants use to design and
produce   a question.   Participants   make use  of various   available resources  to make    evident   to each other  the
adequacy of the question and response, e.g.: the shared history of the group, what has happened in the session
recently  before,   what possibilities  for response   the previous   action projected,   awareness information    of  the
production of an action, the existing postings and activities performed on the shared whiteboard, etc. In the
VMT chat environment, postings are not meant to be "heard," but "read." The texts in the chat and artifacts on
the whiteboard are contingent, situated and produced to be interactional resources. A question on its own would
not make sense to participants nor to researchers unless put in the local context and treated as a locally produced
situated  social   phenomenon.     It  defines its  meaning    through  the  interaction  among    participants,   and is
interactionally accomplished.
          The uniqueness of the interactional setting built up as the interaction takes place is consequential for
how participants produce questions and responses and make sense of them. In the VMT environment, the shared
whiteboard,    the  referencing   tool  and the  social  awareness    information  accord     participants  resources  for
organizing their interaction and participation. The chat and whiteboard are used in a coordinated and integrated
way to produce the explanations a question is calling upon. The fact that there are more than two participants
and interaction is mediated in a chat environment shapes the way interaction takes place. Our analysis shows
that a question-response pair often takes more than two or three turns to complete. Questions often lead to sub-
questions that call upon sub-responses--a question-response pair can have nested sub question-response pairs.
          Our analysis has revealed in particular that questions calling for accounts of problem-solving work are
different from   "pure   information   questions"  as  traditionally conceived.  They   are not simple   inquiries where
sought information is directly provided as some static object. Rather, they call on elaborated explanations. In the
third part  of  the excerpt,  for instance, in response    to the question,  "how  did  you   get it?", dave  engages  in
producing an account of the formula he proposed. As participants collaboratively engage in such productions of
accounts,   they make    meaning   of   proposals  together.  Such   questioning  initiates a  potentially  educationally
productive episode of collaborative problem solving. Although the questioning actions analyzed in this paper
are utterly situated and must be analyzed as a unique case study focused on interactional sequentiality, we have
found the structure of such practices of questioning to be typical within our corpus of online math discourse.
Making math proposals, raising questions, responding with nested questions, providing accounts and reaching

                                                                                                                              2-
         conversational transitions are driving mechanisms for the interactional progression among students in the virtual
         learning world created by the VMT project.

       Endnotes
          (1)  Some information that seems to be relevant here is that the group did encounter the idea of using recursive sequences
               brought up by one of the participants in the previous session and the concept of recursive sequence was not problematic
               at the time.
          (2)  It is well known that in an online chat environment like this where more than two participants are interacting, the turn-
               taking rules for face-to-face interaction with dyads do not apply directly (Garcia & Jacobs, 1999). The characteristics of
               different "turn-taking" mechanism can result in confusion both for participants and researchers when examining the
               sequence of postings in chat (Herring, 1999).

       References
         Clark, H. & Brennan, S. (1991). Grounding in communication. In L. Resnick, J. Levine & S. Teasley (Eds.),
                  Perspectives on socially-shared cognition (pp. 127-149). Washington, DC: APA.
         Çakir, M. P., Zemel, A., & Stahl, G. (2007). The organization of collaborative math problem solving activities
                  across dual interaction spaces. Paper presented at the International Conference of Computer-Supported
                  Collaborative Learning (CSCL '07), New Brunswick, NJ.
         Fox, B. (1993). The human tutorial dialogue project. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
         Garcia, A. and Jacobs, J. B. (1999) The Eyes of the Beholder: Understanding the Turn-Taking System in Quasi-
                  Synchronous Computer-Mediated Communication. Research on Language and Social Interaction, 32,
                  4, 337-367.
         Garfinkel, H. (1967). Studies in ethnomethodology. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
         Graesser,  A.  C.   &  Person,    N. K.  (1994). Question   asking during  tutoring. American  Educational  Research
                  Journals, 31(1).
         Graesser, A. C., Person, N. K., & Magliano, J. P. (1995). Collaborative dialogue patterns in naturalistic one-to-
                  one tutoring. Applied cognitive psychology. 9 (6), pp. 495-522.
         Herring, S. (1999). Interactional coherence in CMC. Journal of Computer Mediated Communication, 4 (4).
         Mehan,     H. (1979).   Learning     lessons: Social   organization   in the classroom.   Cambridge, MA:     Harvard
                  University Press.
         Roschelle, J. (1996). Learning by collaborating: Convergent conceptual change. In T. Koschmann (Ed.), CSCL:
                  Theory and practice of an emerging paradigm. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
         Scardamalia,   M.,   &   Bereiter,    C. (1991).    Higher levels  of agency for children  in knowledge  building: a
                  challenge for the design of new knowledge media . The Journal of Learning Sciences, 3(3), 265-283.
         Scardamalia, M., &      Bereiter, C. (1994). Computer support for knowledge-building communities. The Journal
                  of Learning Sciences, 3(3), 265-283.
         Sacks, H. (1992). Lectures on conversation (Vol. 1&2). Oxford: Blackwell.
         Sacks, H., Schegloff, E., & Jefferson, G. (1974). A simplest systematics for the organization of turn-taking in
                  conversation. Language, 50, 697-735.
         Schegloff, E. A. (2007). Sequence Organization in Interaction: A Primer in Conversation Analysis. Cambridge,
                  UK: Cambridge University Press.
         Schegloff, E. A., Jefferson, G., & Sacks, H. (1977). The Preference for Self-Correction in the Organization of
                  Repair in Conversation. Language, 53(2), 361-382.
         Stahl, G. (2006b). Group cognition: Computer support for building collaborative knowledge. Cambridge, MA:
                  MIT Press.
         Stahl, G. (2007). Meaning making in CSCL: Conditions and preconditions for cognitive processes by groups.
                  Paper     presented   at the  International  Conference   of  Computer-Supported     Collaborative Learning
                  (CSCL '07), New Brunswick, NJ.
         Stivers, T., & Robinson, J. D. (2006). A preference for progressivity in interaction. Language in Society, 35,
                  367-392.
         Ram, A. (1991). A theory of questions and question asking. The Journal of Learning Sciences, 1(3/4), 273-318.
         van   Zee, E.  &    Minstrell, J. (1997). Using     questioning to guide student thinking. The  Journal of  Learning
                  Sciences, 6(2), 227.
         Webb, N. M., Nemer, K. M., & Ing, M. (2006). Small-group reflections: parallels between teacher discourse
                  and student behavior in peer-directed groups. The Journal of Learning Sciences, 15(1), 63­119.
         Webb, N. M., Ing, M., Nemer, K. M., & Kersting, N. (2006). Help seeking in cooperative learning groups (pp.
                  45-88). In R. S. Newman and S. A. Karabenick (Eds.), Help Seeking in Academic Settings: Goals,
                  Groups and Contexts. Erlbaum.
         Wells, G. (1999). Dialogic inquiry: Towards a sociocultural practice and theory of education. NY: Cambridge
                  University.

2-
Zemel, A. (2005). Texts-in-interaction: Collaborative problem-solving in quasi-synchronous computer-mediated
       communication. Paper presented at the International Conference of Computer-Supported Collaborative
       Learning (CSCL 05), Taipei, Taiwan.

Acknowledgments
The ideas in this paper have benefited tremendously from the discussions we have had in data sessions within
the VMT project, in which the whole VMT research team has actively engaged . This research is supported by
USA NSF grants awarded to the third author for digital library services (NSDL), innovative technologies
(ITR/IERI) and the science of learning (SLC).

                                                                                                                 2-
