                 Designing for the Epistemological Entailments of Physics
                        through Game-centered Dialogical Activity Cycles
                             Steven J. Zuiker, Kate T. Anderson, Judy Lai Har Lee, & Yam San Chee
                             Learning Sciences Laboratory, National Institute of Education, Singapore
                                 Email: steven.zuiker@nie.edu.sg, katherine.anderson@nie.edu.sg,
                                           judy.lee@nie.edu.sg, yamsan.chee@nie.edu.sg

                 Abstract: This study examines a secondary-level science curriculum centered on a multi-user,
                 "serious game" called Escape from Centauri 7. The game engine depicts qualitative physics
                 phenomena       via  dynamics    tied  to    player  actions.   Players  progressively    engage   the
                 epistemological entailments of charged particles through new phenomena they encounter as
                 the game unfolds. We engineered discretely bounded gaming episodes to arrange transitions
                 between game play, small group, and whole class discussions. Together, these elements of
                 game      play and   discussion  constitute   recurring,   game-centered   dialogic  activity   cycles.
                 Through this design, we investigate how gaming fosters intuitive physics understandings, how
                 activity structures and materials engage learners and enlist gaming experiences in discussion,
                 and    how  both    game  play   and  discussion     shape  subsequent   participation.  Analyses  of
                 trajectories of participation in and across cycles underscore the plausibility of this approach
                 while also illuminating emerging tensions that we discuss in terms of epistemic reflexivity.

        Introduction
                 This study details our efforts to design for engaged participation across a series of problem scenarios
          involving the dynamics     of charged   particles. Using    the affordances  of a gaming    engine,  we  engineered   a
          "curriculum-based ecosystem" (Barab & Roth, 2006) through which students engage the functional properties of
          charged particles as a means to escape from a distant planet and, in this pursuit, to seek out more knowledgeable
          others who can guide ongoing engagement (e.g., Lave & Wenger, 1991; Rogoff, 1990).
                 Throughout     the  curriculum,  we   strive to   encourage  learners to  appreciate  the productive    tensions
          between formal science and the everyday world from which it emerges (Barab, Zuiker, et al., 2007). Generally,
          the work of scientists reifies natural phenomena in terms of seemingly abstract terms and principles. However,
          sociological studies of science illustrate the many ways in which such a process of reification generates a kind
          of audit trail (e.g., data files, log books, and charts) that ultimately points back to a very concrete origin (Latour,
          1987). Schooling, though, often presents scientific formalisms as a sort of independent reality (Bruner, 1995).
          Rather than a process of reification that transforms concrete everyday experience into formal notions, science as
          seen through the lens of traditional curricula appears to exist apart from our everyday experiences. In an effort to
          strike a balance between the necessary value of both content and context, our design effort attempts to engage
          students in a context-of-use through which science content can become meaningful, rather than simply framing
          content with an artifice of context. To this end, we use a gaming engine to facilitate immersive experiences in a
          science-fiction narrative where physics phenomena are deeply relevant to participating in and advancing through
          a progression of events. Importantly, representing the physical world in terms of multiple, simultaneous events
          in a game space contrasts with the linear, succession of equations and texts.
                 In   this curricular   endeavor, we   developed    classroom   activity  structures that engage  learners  in  a
          dynamic interplay between gaming, discussion, and reflection in order to support and extend students' intuitive
          understandings of physics (Chee, 2007). Such activity structures and supporting materials often remain under
          discussed, if not underspecified, in research involving technological innovations used in classroom communities
          (Bielaczyc, 2006). The   complementarity     that  we arrange   between   gaming  and  classroom     activity structures
          supports and illuminates students' sense-making practices. On the one hand, the multiple simultaneous features
          operating in the  game  embed    the epistemological     entailments  of a formal  discipline   like physics  (e.g., the
          interactions and relations that underlie Newtonian mechanics in the first place) as part of goal-directed activities.
          At the same time, these situated perspectives remain grounded in a player's intuitive understanding of particular
          game scenarios without an appreciation for their broader implications (e.g., Bereiter, 1997). Discursive activity
          in such scenarios helps to connect situated and general appreciations of physics by motivating deep reflection
          and a process  of  both negotiation  and  reification    of individual experiences  in relation  to  broader   webs   of
          meaning. Our efforts to embed game-based learning in classroom dialogic activity instantiate recurring cycles of
          experience  and  reflection.  As  we    theorize   these cycles,  the  curricular design    arranges  a  trajectory   of
          participation (Lave & Wenger, 1991) through which students work to reify game play in terms of the expert
          knowledge and the unique value system of scientists (Wenger, 1998; Rogoff, 1990). Given this perspective,
          three questions organize the design and analyses we report:
2-
     1.   In what ways can game play foster intuitive understandings of particle-field interactions?
     2.   In what ways do students and teachers enlist the intuitive phenomena of Escape from Centauri 7 to
          formalize their understanding of the dynamics of charged particles?
     3.   How does Escape from Centauri 7 transform or perturb epistemic practices and modes of participation
          in classroom learning ecologies?

Theoretical Background
          Relative to our three interrelated research questions, we theorize ways in which students and small
groups formalize their learning experiences as they engage in increasingly complex forms of activity (Rogoff,
1990, 1995). Consistent with situative theories of learning, we conceive of meaning as inherently perspectival
and  embedded     in pervasive    background     conditions  (Greeno   &     van  de Sande,   2007;    Rommetveit,    1998).
Meaning in this sense weaves together seemingly elemental aspects of perception and broader social themes. As
one  example,   Varela,     Thompson,    and  Rosch    (1991)   advanced     an  argument   as   to why     even   ostensibly
fundamental   qualities   of  our experience,   such   as color perception,   remain    inescapably    embodied    in both  a
biological and cultural history of structural coupling through which their meaning is instantiated. As another
example, Geertz (2000) details how a Zande boy and western anthropologist use the "same" data to explain the
boy's infection in terms of witchcraft and carelessness, respectively. From this standpoint, an individual's point-
of-view  coupled  with    a  network of  distributed   epistemological    entailments   constitute  meaning.   Grounded    in
these inextricable ties between perception, cognition, and culture, we discuss how our design efforts instantiate
and develop both a curricular design and local theory of game-centered dialogic activities.

Engaging the Dynamics of Charged Particles
          Many of the central insights of physics remain sequestered to atomic or sub-atomic levels and thereby
also  remain  elusive    phenomena      for learners   to  grasp. For     example,   students   traditionally only    engage
electromagnetism     quantitatively  in terms   of partial   differential equations.  While   these equations    provide   an
elegant summary, they remain an elusive shorthand for understanding the qualitative phenomena underlying
electromagnetism.    In  fact, the  calculus  involved    in predicting   the behavior   of charged    particles   in a field
preceded its scientific understanding by several decades (Feynman, 1963). That is, only some time after Newton
and Leibniz's mathematical inventions did physicists conceptualize forces that act at a distance, suggesting that
these   equations alone,    while useful,   were   not crucial  for  unlocking    these ideas.  Moreover,     many    science
educators  now    promote    the value  of  conceptual    physics (Forbus,    1984,  1997)  and  intuitive  understandings
(diSessa, 1993, 2000). Complementing these trends, several different technologies have been used to arrange
opportunities to  engage     physics qualitatively.  As   one  such  technology,    interactive  digital media   provide   an
altogether different foundation for learning grounded in the learner's experience of a dynamic representational
system and her efforts to manipulate it. For example, rather than allowing the dynamics of electromagnetism to
unfold through linear texts and equations, games (Squire et al., 2004) and simulations (Dori & Belcher, 2005)
provide multiple, simultaneous perspectives on physical phenomena that locate meaning in the player's efforts
to uncover the functional relations between charged particles and fields.

Dialogic Activity Cycles in Game-Based Learning
          Serious games are not a "technotopia" that can singularly transform classroom learning (Oppenheimer,
2003). Rather, games can be enabling tools insofar as they support social transactions among learners and with
teachers. Bearing    this  in  mind, we     have deliberately   designed     for the interplay   between    game   play  and
classroom discussion in our curriculum. Shared experiences engender a "reciprocal faith" (Rommetveit, 1985,
p.189) that learners have had the same opportunity to learn (Gee, 2005). That is, common gaming experiences
provide increasing degrees of collective intersubjectivity. These shared experiences, in turn, afford individuals
credibility in their joint work of negotiating scientific meaning. We seek to leverage both affordances in order to
engage   learners  in  dialogic   activity. Through    discussion    between     groups  and  with     the teacher,   gaming
experiences  can  be  reified  in  terms of  the concepts    and  language    of  physics. In this  way,   content  emerges
through context. As such, classroom discussions are shaped by prior experience while also working to shape
subsequent engagement.
          Our efforts to design complementary gaming and classroom activities in this study are grounded in
Rogoff's  (1995)     three  "planes"  of   sociocultural   activity. Personal,    interpersonal, and     community    planes
mutually  constitute  sociocultural   activity.  Recurring   game-    and  classroom-based     activity  structures   arrange
successive  material-social    transactions   while    students engage     a  looping   sequence    of activities.  As  it is
represented in Figure 1 below, each cycle begins with small groups of students working together side-by-side as
co-participants   in the   game   space.  By  coordinating    their  actions  to  achieve   functional   ends, peers    build
increasing degrees of intersubjectivity through language, gesture, game commands, and other meaning-making
strategies. The cycle continues as each small group works face-to-face to summarize and synthesize their shared
experiences. The cycle concludes with a whole class activity in which selected groups debrief their peers and                   2-
         engage in critical discussions. As necessary, the teacher may also provide just-in-time lectures that capitalize on
         tensions   that surface  during   discussions   or presentations.   In  both  the game   and  classroom    spaces,  student
         activity fosters a dialogic interplay in which learning is a transactional process of reifying gaming phenomena in
         terms of   more  formal     physics notions. Consistent     with Rogoff's    planes  of sociocultural  activity, this cycle
         arranges   a  trajectory    of participation through    which    students'  personal    experiences  with   the  game  and
         interpersonal discussions about shared game experiences create challenges that position the teacher to guide
         participation and mediate the practices of physics.

                              Figure 1. The interplay of activity structures across dialogic activity cycles.

       Methods
                   We    employed    a  concurrent-nested   approach     to multi-method   research    (Cresswell,  2002),  using a
         quantitative measure of performance on pre-post assessments to complement an overarching qualitative analysis
         of student participation with the curriculum. After describing the participants and the curriculum, we provide
         details about the data we generated and how we analyzed it in light of our research questions.

        Participants
                   We    maintain    an ongoing  partnership    with the  physics    department  at a  private, all boys  secondary
         school in Singapore. We have worked with one teacher, Mr. Ong (all names are pseudonyms), during both the
         current study for which he served as instructor and one previous study taught by our team. Thirty-six students
         (ages 14-15) volunteered to participate in a 12-hour elective physics module. As "express stream" students, all
         participants performed nationally in the top 20% on high stakes assessments, which is similar to gifted programs
         in the U.S.

        Curriculum
                   Building on current media and science discussions about Mars exploration, Escape from Centauri 7 is a
         serious   game   that encourages    students  to   assume   the    role of  stranded   astronauts.  Using  the  dilapidated
         technologies of previous inhabitants, players attempt to activate a Gauss gun, or coil gun, in an effort to send
         distress signals back to Earth. Around this storyline, students encounter a succession of machines that enable
         them to position electric and magnetic fields in order to manipulate the speed and direction of charged particles
         pulsing through the atmosphere. In this way, player actions connect qualitatively to particle dynamics in order to
         illuminate   underlying     properties of field-particle interactions.   These  electrostatic  principles   operate   across
         activities and  phenomena      in order  to facilitate what  diSessa    (2000) describes   as intuitive  understanding.  In
         addition to the range of specific interactive features that enable students to arrange electric and magnetic fields,
         we also created additional exaggerated features. For example, we attached phosphorescent trails behind moving
         particles  in order  to  illuminate changes   in   both their speed     and direction.  We  also elaborated   on the  sci-fi
         narrative by alerting players that astronaut respiration rapidly depletes oxygen tank levels. This created a fixed
         time limit that served to focus students on the game space and, thereby, ensure sufficient time to complete each
         dialogic activity cycle. Finally, we created a logbook that belonged to a fictitious astronaut previously stranded
         on Centauri that features an incomplete and often esoteric record of events, questions, photographs, and Post-it®
         notes from her experience on the planet. The logbook and the open questions that it presented served as a kind
         of  boundary    object   operating  between   astronaut     and  student,   Centauri 7  and   classroom,   and   game  and
         discussions.

                   Game   play    is complemented     by the collaborative    meaning-making     activities  that we  characterized
         above in terms of a Dialogic Activity Cycle. The curriculum also features a final project in which each small
         group constructs a gaming manual that communicates the principles underlying both the particle dynamics and
2-       the game   as   well  as their  reflections about  the  experiences     and process  necessary   to construct  the manual.
Building such an artifact challenged small groups to consolidate and generalize their intuitive virtual experience
and classroom discussions. Completing these (pencil and paper) astronaut logs also concretizes each group's
shared experiences relative to the range of game experiences and provides an accountability structure required
by the school.

Data Sources
         During classroom sessions, we simultaneously supported the curricular enactment, conducted informal
in-situ interviews, collected written artifacts, generated observational field notes, video-recorded two student
groups, and debriefed with Mr. Ong after lessons. Before and after the curriculum we administered pre-post
assessments of physics understandings and conducted focus group discussions. Our learning measure featured a
subset   of  eight multiple-choice    items  adapted  from    the Force   Concept    Inventory   (Hestenes,   Wells, &
Swackhammar, 1992), which assesses relevant Newtonian concepts against commonsense beliefs.

Data Analysis
         The   research   team    met periodically   during   the  implementation     to summarize    field  notes and
observations. We subsequently incorporated the range of data above with our initial impressions to comprise
methodic naturalistic inquiry (Lincoln & Guba, 1985). To this end, we progressively developed interpretations
of the data while simultaneously engaging in reflexive practices that illuminate and temper our subjectivities
(e.g., negative case analysis). We focus on two groups in the same class as it provides contrasting degrees of
participation and discourse. In this sense, the cases represent our efforts to feature maximum variation of the
curricular  enactment  in   order to  better understand   the plausibility   of our design   together with  a  qualified
understanding of challenges and tensions that remain. We reviewed the notes in each individual's log and well
as group presentation charts and final projects in order to inform our review of the groups' recorded activities.
Consistent with interactional analysis (Jordan & Henderson, 1995), we initially generated content logs for each
small group. We then met to discuss the documented group interactions with respect to our research questions
and returned to the data to transcribe a subset of roughly fifty episodes across cycles of dialogic activity. Our
aim in this process was to understand trajectories of participation across activities in order to trace how students
appropriated intuitive understandings of gaming phenomena in group and whole-class discussions as well as
how  these   achievements   shaped   subsequent cycles.   Our  findings  in  the next section  present a  paradigmatic
series of episodes across one dialogic activity cycle together with more representative episodes that serve to
qualify our successes and communicate some of the tensions surfacing in our ongoing efforts.

Analysis of Group Trajectories through Game-centered Cycles
         We present case studies of two student groups from the same class across the curriculum. The first
group  sometimes    provided  a   paradigmatic enactment   of  the   intended   curriculum  whereas   the second group
challenged us more often to re-examine our design efforts to formally anchor serious games to dialogic activity
cycles. To begin, we first determined that students in both classes developed a deeper understanding of the
behavior of charged particles relative to commonsense distractors. A paired t-test of the pre-post learning gains
suggests that gains for both classes were unlikely to have occurred by chance (t(33)=5.0, p<0.00). This measure
provides   a general  sense   of class-wide  performance.   While    both  groups   that we  consider  here  performed
relatively well, our general descriptions and analyses of transcribed episodes qualify fundamental differences.
We discuss these differences in terms of our three research questions and interpret them with respect to efforts
to refine our designs and to evolve a theory of game-centered dialogical activity cycles.
         The first group provides a paradigmatic enactment of the curricular intentions in and across cycles of
gaming   and  reflection.   The  following   descriptions warrant    the plausibility of  developing   serious  gaming
curricula in terms of dialogic cycles; however they are not representative of the whole class. The three boys in
this group   collaborated   productively  and  often appeared     to be  gaming   seriously. They   used  Escape   from
Centauri 7 to address the implicit physics questions raised in the logbooks, to collaboratively achieve game
goals, and, in later cycles, to link logbook information to game play. In small group discussions, this group
methodically   prepared   for presentations,  working to  formalize    their experiences   before writing   or drawing.
During   whole  class debriefings,   they asked meaningful    questions   of  other groups   and  presented reasonable
explanations. In focus group interviews after the curriculum, one group member explained how a debate during
the first debriefing framed subsequent inquiry during game play. Specifically, the boys in this instance used the
game to test whether or not they could use electric and magnetic fields to stop particles from moving. Moreover,
the group was among the four in the class that completed the game by effectively using the Gauss gun to send a
distress signal to Earth. Regardless of the degree of success, we only claim that it is a transactional achievement
between particular individuals and our curricular design.
         We now shift from a descriptive to interpretive analysis of transcribed episodes across one dialogic
activity cycle. The   first group's   (Gopal,  Zhang,  and    Seng   Chee)   enactment   of  the curriculum    illustrates
transactional achievements in terms of the mediating role we intended our design to facilitate. The first excerpt            2-
        presents  an early  episode during     the  first gaming   session.    The  group is interrogating   the game  space    and,
        through the language they use to structure their experience, they also appear to be surfacing physics phenomena.
                 Z:        How do you change this thing? (points at screen)
                 G:        Hmm. (looks at Z's screen) I have no idea what it is. You have to deflect the field
                           onto the - oh, NOW I get the point of asking those questions (reference to astronaut
                           logbook). Ey, cool, definitely cool. Okay, I- that's how the game works but I'm not
                           very sure right now.
                 S:        I didn't get it deflected. A bit too much
                 G:        Agree, but I think I found out how the thing works. But I am completely messed up.
                           Yeah, I am deflecting it in a wrong direction completely.
                 S:        I'm deflecting it in the correct direction but a bit too much.
                 The group uses formal terms like "particles" and "fields" as well as game space indexicals that vaguely
        reference features  with  "this"   and   "it." In this  way,   the group   works  to understand   the  (physics) principles
        underlying the changes they effect or, as Gopal says, "how the game works." However, their language remains
        largely  indeterminate  to  non-players.       Only Gopal's    advice--"you     have   to deflect the  field"--suggests   a
        functional understanding, albeit an inverted one in which particles act on fields. The running narrative in this
        transcript communicates the group's engaged participation and coordinated efforts to understand the dynamic
        relations between particles and fields. It is these kinds of shared gaming experiences that provide a productive
        foundation   for subsequent    discussions     and  debriefings    beyond   the  game   space. To  this  end, the   group's
        discussion during the same cycle considers phosphorescent trails that particles emit, illustrating their ongoing
        efforts to make sense of the game.
                 G:        (explaining to S) The length of the trail changes {...} the distance traveled by the
                           particle away from the point in the field {...} so if it moves faster, the trail will be
                           longer. The     first time   I didn't  know     what  to do   {...}  maximum    backwards,    it
                           bounced off and went backwards (gestures right then left).
                 Z:        Mine was a curve (gestures a curving path)
                 G:        Yes, same,   was    a  curve.  Backwards.      Goes  slightly in, moves    around  and "zing"
                           (gestures an about-turn).
                 In  contrast  to  the basic     terminology    that   the group   used  during   game   play, Gopal   and   Zhang
        specifically explain  the  significance     of particle trails in  terms of speed.   Gopal  also  comments    on his initial
        puzzlement during game play. While this discussion clearly draws upon game features and prior game play to
        make meaning, the students accompany several descriptions with hand gestures. In light of the transition from
        gaming experiences to classroom reflection, this episode highlights a converging understanding in more formal
        descriptions that  the  students   punctuate    with   gestures   and, in  contrast  to game   play,  without game    space
        indexicals. As a final example of the group's trajectory through one activity cycle, we briefly elaborate on their
        involvement   in a debate  during   the   aforementioned     whole   class  debriefing.   The group  challenged  another's
        assertions that particle trails represented wavelength and intervals between each particle represented frequency.
        Instead, they proposed that the length of particle trails represent speed. The ensuing whole-class debate arrived
        at the question of whether or not a field can "stop particles in their tracks entirely." This debate, in turn, shaped
        subsequent   cycles  of game    play     as the   group  worked     to engineer   conditions   under  which   particles are
        motionless. Thus, small group discussions about the initial experiences with particles and fields culminated in a
        whole-class debate about stopping particles, which the group later described in interviews as an important goal
        of subsequent episodes of game play. This trajectory through the first of four dialogic activity cycles illustrates
        how the interplay between game play and discussion, and between rich experiences and reflective exchanges,
        allows negotiations between increasingly formal understandings that can position students to generate their own
        inquiry activities. In this sense, game play establishes a two-way literacy through which students make meaning
        of phenomena and also generate new phenomena.
                 The second group that we consider provides an important contrast to the interpretations above. The
        three boys in this group (Troy, Alex, and Kevin) intermittently coordinated their gaming activities and typically
        collaborated only when a presentation was due. They rarely discussed their logbooks, choosing to complete
        them individually instead. Their group discussions were often sparse as each member individually completed the
        logbook entries, and they completed presentation charts by dictating logbook entries as one of them wrote.
        Similar to the first group above, they describe game features informally during the first cycle of game play.
        However, the following excerpt illustrates a typical discussion for this group in which they attempt to navigate
        the game space.
                 T:        I don't get it.
                 A:        Oh I actually see the beam moving.
                 T:        (looking at A's screen) How'd you do that? (laughs)
                 A:        I don't know. I'm making the beam move. Go that way (presses arrow keys).
                 T:        (reading instructions) Change speed using up arrow.
2-20
          A:        How to change speed? (A and T press arrow keys).
          T:        You can't even change speed!
          A:        Speed of what?
          T:        What are we supposed to do?
          Although they struggle to manipulate particles, Alex uses the term "beams" to note that he can bend, or
"move," particle trails. However, the group does not re-engage this encounter as the conversation proceeds.
Subsequent group discussion centering on the logbook introduces particle trails again and provides the group
with a second opportunity that they do take up collectively.
          T:        The particles should be like protons and electrons because they will be affected by
                    whatever field the vehicle is emitting.
          K:        I notice, right, that they are shorter (pointing to logbook figure) that means they have
                    slowed down.
          T:        No, it's just the stupid graphics. Look at this, this one also,
          K:        No, these (pointing at same logbook figure) are shorter. These (pointing at another
                    logbook figure) are the same. This one (pointing at first logbook figure) is like one
                    long stream.
          A:        What?  What?
          K:        This has one long stream, and this has- (dotted motion along paper) describes the
                    wave.
          T:        It means these are affected by the field emitted by the vehicle.
          K:        They represent wavelength, right?
          T:        Because it's a particle. Particle has mass. Has weight. Is affected by forces.
          T:        (To K) What     do  they represent?    (pause but  no response)     I'll just write  down
                    everything.
          K:        The speed at which they travel.
          Troy and Alex enlist a variety of physics terms, but Kevin explains the significance of the particle trails
using the logbook photos at hand and suggests an accurate explanation of what they represent. Ultimately, an
interpretation of trails as wavelengths, and not speed, is featured in the group's debriefing presentation, sparking
the aforementioned debate with the first group about stopping particles. In contrast to the first group, however,
this trajectory is without the necessary reciprocity in the conversational exchanges underlying their dialogic
activity cycles. In both transcripts above, group two struggles to productively engage one another's comments in
a way that builds shared understandings.

Conclusions
          In this  design study,  we   attempted  to   anchor  cycles of dialogic   activity to  the shared   contextual
grounding    that Escape  from   Centauri 7  provides   to  classroom  players. Based   on   a situative perspective  of
learning, we   engineered  a  process  through which    learners  might  formalize  the intuitive understandings     they
develop   with  the game.  In particular, we   used    logbooks  as a boundary   object  across   activities in order to
illuminate a concrete process of formalizing physics much like Latour (1987) describes in the laboratories he
studied. We investigated this concrete process in terms of Rogoff's (1995) three planes of analysis by asking
how gaming fosters intuitive physics understandings, how activity structures and materials engage learners and
enlist gaming experiences in discussion, and how both game play and discussion shape subsequent participation.
The cases we considered suggest that groups engaged in rich and challenging collaborations as they played the
game.  Their   engagement  fostered   a range  of intuitive  understandings,  suggested    by  often cryptic  comments
during play and subsequently illuminated as students used gestures and game-specific descriptions to talk about
the  formal  physics  principals underlying  the  game   mechanics.   At  the same   time, the   multiple, simultaneous
features presented in the game dynamics sometimes confused and frustrated players. In anticipation of this range
of experiences, we discretely bounded the game in order to arrange discussion and debriefing activities. The first
group we examined enlisted their gaming experiences to methodically formalize their understanding of physics
phenomena and challenged others to do the same during debriefings. These discussions in turn shaped later play.
However, understanding the less immediate influences of these cycles remains a challenging analytical task.
While it is reasonable to assume that students anticipated the prospects of discussions and debriefings in the
later cycles of game play, the relatively short duration of the curriculum obscures the ways in which it shapes
subsequent participation. Meanwhile, with respect to the second group, sequences of dialogic activity suggested
that efforts to   make  sense of their  experiences    were at times  reframed  in  terms  of  a patchwork   of  physics
concepts and at other times loose constellations of conversational turns, neither of which cohered into a process
of  formalizing   the dynamics   of charged  particles. In  summary,   these  somewhat    disparate  cases   suggest that
classrooms can foster a synergistic interplay between game experiences and group reflection but also that their
utility is a variable outcome of the learning ecologies through which they emerge.
                                                                                                                            2-2
       Discussion
                  A key assumption of serious gaming underscores that Escape from Centauri 7 can only ever frustrate
         and facilitate various trajectories of participation. In this sense, games are tools for mediating individual and
         collective goals   if anchored    in   social  activity. In our    study,  we  deliberately partnered  with  a  school that
         organizes module courses on cutting-edge topics in order to arrange both a stable physical place and a relatively
         flexible game space in which to work. Therein we aimed to develop a curriculum in which "learning is a way of
         being in a social world, not a way of coming to know about it" (Hanks, 1991, p. 24). Our findings suggest that
         game-centered contextual grounding facilitated students' efforts to formulate epistemic stances, or positions, on
         the dynamics of charged particles. The lethal mutations we observed in these cases and elsewhere suggest that
         dialogic activity  in serious games       may  entail   something  more    than  a process  of argumentation.   In  spite of
         learners' shared experiences with the game space, their collective intersubjectivity and our design efforts failed
         to foster a mutual willingness to re-examine particular epistemic stances in light of unfolding game dynamics.
         We find these tensions interesting in light of Bourdieu's ideas about the effects of a community on the beliefs,
         dispositions,  and practices  of  its  members,      as  reflected in  the notion  of  epistemic reflexivity  (Bourdieu   &
         Wacquant, 1992).
                  Epistemic    reflexivity considers      the tensions  associated   with   the inherent perspectivity   of  meaning
         making, as detailed above in our theoretical framework. In one sense, the challenge of epistemic reflexivity is to
         address the problems we never knew we had. In the context of this study, we organized serious play, dialogic
         activity cycles, and the notion of guided participation to create opportunities for individuals, groups, and the
         teacher to illuminate a range of such unknown problems along a trajectory towards shared understandings. The
         whole  class  debate  about stopping      particle motion   that   we showcased    in  our  analysis exemplifies   epistemic
         reflexivity at a group level. Nevertheless, it largely hinged on the teacher's skillful facilitation and remained a
         paradigmatic case rather than a representative instance. As we continue to design for the interplay between play
         and  learning,  we contend   that    a principled    approach  to  leveraging   serious games   across   cycles of  dialogic
         activity requires a deliberate effort to design not only for discussion and debate but for the translation of such
         talk back  into the   game  space.     In this way,   the concrete    features of  the game  mechanics    can   not only  be
         refashioned into ideas and beliefs that surface through dialogic cycles but also can, in turn, be used to fashion
         subsequent experiences of the game, potentially illuminating the problems learners didn't know they had.

       References
         Barab, S. A., & Roth, W. M. (2006). Curriculum-based ecosystems: Supporting knowing from an ecological
                  perspective. Educational Researcher, 35(5), 3-13.
         Barab, S.  A.,  Zuiker,  S. J.,   Warren,     S. J., Hickey,   D.  T., Ingram-Goble,     A., Kwon,    E. J., et al. (2007).
                  Developing a theory of formalisms: Situating socio-scientific inquiry for schools. Science Education,
                  91(5), 750-782.
         Bereiter, C. (1997). Situated cognition and how to overcome it. In D. Kirshner & J. Whitson (Eds.), Situated
                  cognition: Social, semiotic, and psychological perspectives (pp. 281-300). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
         Bielaczyc, K.   (2006). Designing      social  infrastructure: Critical   issues in creating learning  environments    with
                  technology. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 15, 301-330.
         Bruner, J. (1995). Meaning and self in cultural perspective. In D. Bakhurst & C. Sypnowich (Eds.), The social
                  self. London: Sage.
         Bourdieu, P., & Wacquant, L. J. D. (1992). An invitation to reflexive sociology. Cambridge, UK: Polity Press.
         Chee, Y. S. (2007). Embodiment, embeddedness, and experience: Game-based learning and the construction of
                  identity. Research and Practice in Technology Enhanced Learning, 2(1), 3-30.
         Cresswell, J. W. (2002). Research design: Qualitative, quantitative, and mixed approaches. Thousand Oaks,
                  CA: Sage.
         diSessa, A. (1993). Toward an epistemology of physics. Cognition & Instruction, 10, 165-255.
         diSessa, A. (2000). Changing minds. Cambridge: MIT Press.
         Dori, Y. J., & Belcher, J. (2005). How does technology-enabled active learning affect undergraduate students'
                  understanding of electromagnetism concepts? The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 14(2), 243-279.
         Feynman, R., Leighton, R. B., & Sands, M. (1963). The Feynman lectures on physics (Vol. 1). Reading, MA:
                  Addison-Wesley.
         Forbus, K. (1984). Qualitative process theory. Artificial Intelligence, 24, 85-168.
         Forbus, K. (1997). Using qualitative physics to create articulate educational software. IEEE Expert, May/June,
                  32-41.
         Gee, J. P. (2003). Opportunity to learn: A language-based perspective on assessment. Assessment in Education,
                  10, 27-46.
         Geertz, C. (2000). Local knowledge (3rd ed.). New York: Basic Books.
         Greeno, J. G., & van de Sande, C. (2007). Perspectival understanding of conceptions and conceptual growth in
2-22              interaction. Educational Psychologist, 42, 9-23.
Hestenes, D., Wells, M. & Swackhammar, G. (1992). Force concept inventory. The Physics Teacher, 30, 141-
        151.
Jordan, B., & Henderson, A. (1995). Interaction analysis: Foundations and practice. The Journal of the Learning
        Sciences, 4, 39-103.
Latour, B.    (1987). Science  in action  : How  to   follow scientists and engineers through   society. Cambridge,
        Mass.: Harvard University Press.
Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. New York: Cambridge
        University Press.
Lincoln, Y. S., & Guba, E. G. (1985). Naturalistic inquiry. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
Moss, P. (2005). Toward ``epistemic reflexivity'' in educational research: A response to scientific research in
        education. The Teachers College Record, 107(1), 19-29.
Oppenheimer, T. (2003). The flickering mind. New York: Random House.
Rogoff, B. (1990). Apprenticeship in thinking: Cognitive developments in social contexts. New York: Oxford.
Rogoff, B.    (1995).  Observing   sociocultural  activity   on three   planes: Participatory appropriation, guided
        participation, and apprenticeship. In J. Wertsch, P. del Rio & A. Alvarez (Eds.), Sociocultural studies
        of mind (pp. 139-164). Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Rommetveit, R. (1985). Language acquisition as increasing linguistic structuring of experience and symbolic
        behavior      control. In J. Wertsch     (Ed.), Culture,  communication,    and cognition   (pp.  183-204).
        Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Rommetveit,    R. (1998).  On    human   beings, computers    and representational-computational  vs. hermeneutic-
        dialogical approaches to human cognition and communication. Computers & Psychology, 4(2), 213-
        233.
Squire, K., Barnett, M., Grant, J. M., & Higginbotham, T. (2004). Electromagnetism supercharged!: Learning
        physics with digital simulation games. Proceedings of the 6th international conference on Learning
        sciences, 513-520.
Varela, F. J., Thompson, E., & Rosch, E. (1991). The embodied mind. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Wenger,  E.    (1998).  Communities    of   practice: Learning,   meaning,   and  identity. New  York:   Cambridge
        University.

Acknowledgements
The work in this paper is funded by a Learning Sciences Lab research grant, number R8019.735.SG01. We
thank the teacher and students who welcomed us into their classrooms and remain grateful to Ahmed Hilmy and
Liu Qiang for their game design, programming, and conceptual contributions and to Chen Jieyang for his
illustration.

                                                                                                                      2-2
