                 Discursive Approach for Studying Contexts in Students'
                                               Collaborative Activity

                  Maarit Arvaja, Institute for Educational Research, University of Jyväskylä, P.O. Box 35,
                             FI-40014 University of Jyväskylä, Finland, maarit.arvaja@ktl.jyu.fi

                Abstract: The aim of this study was, by means of discourse analysis (Gee & Green, 1998), to
                explore what contexts were built and reflected in a student pair's collaborative task which
                took place in a university course. The special focus was to develop methodological tools for
                studying the complex nature of learning embedded in a specific context. The study revealed
                three different context types  that  were  built through  the  students' discourse.   The students'
                prior  knowledge    (socio-cultural  context)   as  well as   local context,   for example   earlier
                discussion  with the  teacher, served  as main   resources   which  the students   drew  on in their
                immediate context. In the immediate context, a co-text, such as a written text or an earlier
                discussion, made up the complete shared context for reasoning and enabled collaborating in
                the task. The study demonstrated how the discourse both reflected and constructed the context
                in which it was used.

      Introduction
                Recently, in the area of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning (CSCL) research, interests have
       increasingly shifted from the outcomes and products of collaborative work towards the analysis of the processes
       of collaboration. This shift shows as attempts to gain understanding about the nature of productive joint activity
       and as identification of interactional features that are important for collaborative learning (e.g. Weinberger &
       Fischer, 2006). Whereas these studies, to a large extent, have focused on the processes of collaboration mostly
       from a cognitive and social perspective, there is a need to extend the perspective also to the physical and socio-
       cultural aspects of collaborative activity, and to the classroom contexts in which collaboration is embedded. In
       CSCL research studies that focus on how interaction is shaped by and is shaping the context in which interaction
       takes place are still rare (but see, e.g. Arvaja, Salovaara, Häkkinen & Järvelä, 2007; Staarman, Aarnoutse &
       Verhoeven, 2004). However, according to Wertsch (1991), it is not possible to study thinking and cognition
       independently from the social, interpersonal, cultural, and historical settings in which they occur. Cognition is a
       public, social process embedded within a historically shaped material world (Goodwin 2000) in the sense that it
       relies on conceptual and material resources and tools that originate from the culture (Bliss & Säljö 1999). To
       understand classroom activity and learning, we need to study how people appropriate and master the tools for
       thinking and acting that exist in a given culture or society (Wertsch 1991), and how these are reflected in the
       participation in communities of practice (Wenger, 1998).
                The   focus of this study was,  by   the means   of discourse  analysis  (Gee  &   Green, 1998),   to identify
       different aspects of the immediate and mediated contexts that were reflected in a student pair's discourse while
       they were  participating  in a collaborative  task in  a higher  education   context. The   aim was  to  explore how,
       through  discourse,  different past,  present and  future   contexts   were  constructed   and  re-constructed  during
       moment-to-moment interaction.

      Theoretical Background
                This study builds on the notion of contexts and situations as being socially constructed (Erickson &
       Schultz,  1981; Linell,  1998). This  perspective   targets  attention on   the dynamic    and  interpretive nature  of
       participants' actions and discourse, and how through these actions and discourse the participants shape and are
       shaped by the context being constructed (Gee & Green, 1998). Thus, context is not a predefined or objective
       environment    (Goodwin,  2000;  Linell, 1998),    but only  includes  those    contextual  dimensions  which   are  or
       become relevant to the participants in the activity (Erickson & Schultz, 1981; Linell, 1998). In this way the
       participants themselves produce and create the context through their joint activity (Goodwin & Duranti, 1992;
       Linehan & McCarthy, 2001; Linell, 1998). The context produced involves aspects of the physical, social and
       cognitive environments    that the participants   perceive,  believe,  or know   to be  relevant.  Thus, the   relevant
       contexts are constructed through language and communication, which means that contexts are, to some extent,
       communicative   constructs   (Linell, 1998).  For  example,   in  collaborative  situations  the  potential  context(s)
       provides resources for understanding and interpretating the topic under discussion (Goodwin & Duranti, 1992),
       and the relevant contexts are those referred to or oriented to in the discourse (e.g. Buttny, 1998).
                Linell's (1998)  notion of   contextual  resources  and  Gee's   and   Green's (1998)   notion  of  aspects of
       situation refer to the possible resources that participants use in their shared meaning-making and interpretation
       process in discourse and activity. These resources can be divided into immediate and concrete as well as into

1-
mediated and abstract. Immediate and concrete resources refer to the immediate (perceptual) environment which
includes, for example, physical spaces, persons, objects and artifacts that are present (Linell, 1998). Similarly,
Gee  and Green    (1998)  talk  about material   aspects of situation,  such as   actors, objects,  artifacts and   places
present (potential resources, Linell, 1998) or referred to (relevant resources, Linell, 1998) during interaction.
These   concrete  resources   and the meanings    attached  to them  guide   discourse  and   shared   activity. Another
immediate resource is Linell's (1998) notion of co-text, which comprises the participants' previous actions and
discourse that is actively used in the "new act of sense making" (p. 132).
         While the above described resources deal with the immediate contextual resources (Linell, 1998) or
aspects of situation (Gee & Green, 1998), others deal with resources that are mediated and abstract. In a sense,
these  contexts  or aspects  of situation  are reflected and   constructed through   participants'  discursive   activity.
These  include  background     knowledge,   experiences, assumptions    or beliefs  about   the things discussed    in the
discourse in question or about other persons involved in the discourse (Linell, 1998). It also includes socio-
cultural contexts. These are, for example, the abstract situation definition or the framework of "what is going
on" in the actual situation, as well as the specific organizational context with its regulations and hierarchies.
Also, Gee's and Green's notion of a socio-cultural aspect of a situation refers to personal, social and cultural
knowledge and beliefs. However, it also includes feelings and identities relevant in a situation. Identities refer to
norms   and expectations,   roles  and relationships,   and  rights and   obligations  that  are  constructed    to guide
participation and activity. Additionally, Gee's and Green's (1998) semiotic aspect refers to sign systems such as
speech, writing, images and gestures, and also more generally to cultural models. These cultural models, as well
as Linell's (1998) socio-cultural contexts, can be seen as resources that people use to guide their actions and
interpret new situations. Cultural models are like theories of action situated in social and cultural experiences
(Black,  2007),  or  general   ground rules   of organizing  shared    activities (Linehan   &  McCarthy,     2001).   For
example,  different     school  activities have  particular  meanings   for  the    students  depending   on     previous
experiences, attitudes and meanings they have attached to the activity through their extended participation in
their relevant (learning) communities (Wells & Arauz, 2006).
         Staarman, et al., (Staarman, Aarnoutse & Verhoeven, 2004) and their notion of intertextual connections
comes   close  to   the above   described   aspects  of  situation  and contextual   resources.    In  their  study  they
demonstrated how children used different intertextual connections, both explicit and implicit, to create meaning
in the  learning  situation taking place,   both in face-to-face   and Computer    Mediated     Communication     (CMC)
conditions. Explicit connections were explicit references to shared texts, including oral texts and other media.
Implicit connections were implicit references to personal experience or prior classroom discussions. The notion
of intertextuality provides a framework for understanding how different moments in time are tied together and
how people draw on past texts to construct present texts and implicate future ones (Floriani, 1993; Gee & Green,
1998; Pappas, Varelas, Barry & Rife, 2002).
         The  focus  of  this  study was   targeted especially to  understanding   how    a student pair, through    their
discourse, was negotiating, interpreting and making sense of their context, and what resources or aspects of
situation were relevant in their collaborative task which took place in a university course. The study used the
means of discourse analysis to highlight what contexts were built into the students' shared activities. The special
focus was to develop methodological tools for studying the complex nature of learning embedded in specific
context.

Methods
Participants and Context
         The  subjects   of the study  consisted  of one  small  group  of higher   education   students  studying     in a
course of educational psychology entitled "Learning Environments and Educational Technology". The group
consisted of two female students. The students were part of a larger international student group whose shared
language was English. The small group worked on a project work assignment which concerned the making of an
evaluative questionnaire for users (teachers and students) of a web-based learning environment in use at their
university. This paper concentrates on one lesson based on this project work and draws on empirical examples
from the classroom discourse. The task in this particular lesson was to revise and continue the development of
the questionnaire, which was drafted beforehand, outside the lessons. The students worked in front of a laptop,
where they had access to the drafted questionnaire and the web-based learning environment to be evaluated.

Data Collection
         Student pair work at the laptop was video- and audio- taped. The video camera was positioned so that
the laptop screen was also visible on the tape. However, the camera could not record, for example, the exact
words displayed on the screen, although one could still see from the tape the general view of the screen and the
section  on which    the students    were  working.  Additionally,  field  notes   were   written  based  on   the  direct
observations in the classroom.

                                                                                                                              1-
       Data Analysis
                 Verbatim   transcriptions of student   talk  were  made   from  audio   and   video  recordings. Non-verbal
       activity relating to discourse (e.g. head nodding, pointing at the laptop screen) and other activity (e.g. reading,
       writing)  was  also transcribed.   Transcribed video   and audio  data  were analyzed    through   an ethnographically
       grounded approach to discourse analysis (Gee & Green, 1998). According to this approach language is seen as a
       socio-cultural practice and social resource of the group, and the focus of analysis is more on what participants
       accomplish through their discourse rather than on what the form or function, as such, of the language is. This
       perspective of  language   and   discourse is seen  as simultaneously   reflecting and   constructing  the situation in
       which they are used. A particular area of interest was in analyzing which aspects of situation (Gee & Green,
       1998) and contextual resources (Linell, 1998) were reflected in the discourse and, thus, what contexts were
       considered  relevant and   built into the  shared  activity. Therefore,  the focus   of the  analysis  was in how  the
       students together negotiated, constructed and re-negotiated the social situation and the task context. In this paper
       the main findings are demonstrated through empirical examples.

      Results
                 In the lesson analyzed the particular focus of interest was on the task context of the students' activity
       and the  aspects of  situation and  resources  that were   relevant from    that perspective.  Three  different general
       contexts characterized the data:
                 Type 1: Immediate (perceptual) context
                 Type 2: Local context
                 Type 3: Socio-cultural context
                 These contexts and their specific aspects (Gee & Green, 1998) and resources (Linell, 1998) are now
       demonstrated through empirical examples and their interpretation through discourse analysis. The purpose here
       is not to present   the full categorization of resources   and aspects   of situation in the   analyzed lesson,  but to
       highlight what is typical of them in order to exemplify the analysis.

       Immediate Context ­ Artifact as a Mediating Tool
                 Immediate context refers to the immediate (perceptual) environment (Linell, 1998). It includes those
       concrete or material resources (Linell, 1998; Gee & Green, 1998) that are relevant in the participants' shared
       context of activity. In the student pair's work the laptop as a concrete resource played an important role in
       mediating their activity throughout the entire analyzed lesson. The drafted questionnaire as seen on the laptop
       monitor and the on-line environment to be evaluated were the most important concrete resources that mediated
       student  discourse  and  activity. Students also  drew  on   different semiotic  aspects of  situation (Gee &   Green,
       1998) in their collaborative task. Student shared activity was built on reading, writing, gesturing and speech.
                 The  following  example   demonstrates   how  the  drafted   questionnaire  serves  as a mediating  tool and
       reference point, enabling the student pair to make progress in the task. Since the nature of the written text is that
       of a permanent artifact it gives the students a chance to review and revise the questionnaire through dialogue
       and consequently, simultaneously, affects the nature of dialogue being mediated by the artifact (Excerpt 1):
                 Excerpt 1.
       1   Katrin: Ok. How often do you use the environment (reads whispering from the screen)? [Immediate context
           -  written text as  co-text] Maybe  then   we  should  start with  this one  which   tools are you  actually using
           (gestures at the screen and reads). [Immediate context - written text as co-text]
       2   Eva: Yhy.
       3   Katrin: And which ones are you not using (reads from the screen)? [Immediate context - written text as co-
           text]
       4   Eva: This one (points to the screen). [Immediate context - written text as co-text]
       5   Katrin: Yeah. I think we should ask maybe both. [Immediate context ­ previous discussion and written text
           as co-text]
       6   Eva: Yea, yea. How about this one? What are the difficulties (reads from the screen). [Immediate context ­
           written text as co-text]
       7   Katrin: Maybe we should leave an open-ended question rather to the end. [Immediate context ­ written text
           and previous discussion as co-text, referring to the question "what are the difficulties?"]
       8   Eva: But we. How are we going to rate these ones? [Immediate context ­ written text as co-text]
       9   Katrin: Rate? [Immediate context ­ previous discussion as co-text]
       10  Eva: Yeah.
       11  Katrin: You mean the last one. [Immediate context ­ previous discussion and written text as co-text]
       12  Eva: No, no the questionnaire are they open-ended or...? [Immediate context ­ written text and discussion
           as co-text]
       13  Katrin: No, we should make categories. [Immediate context ­ discussion as co-text]
       14  Eva: Yhy.

1-
15  Katrin: Maybe we should. I don't know.
16  Eva: Easy, not easy, stuff like that. [Immediate context ­ discussion as co-text]
17  Katrin: Yeah. Our first question (reads from the screen) how often do you use it. [Immediate context ­
    written text as co-text]
18  Eva: Very often, often, stuff like that. [Immediate context ­ discussion as co-text]
19  Katrin: Yeah, but maybe we should specify it. Like each day, twice a week, once a week, once a month or
    something. [Immediate context ­ discussion as co-text]
    [...]
20  Eva: So I put this (starts to revise the questionnaire). [Immediate context ­ written text as co-text]
21  Katrin:  Maybe     we should put   categories already  in brackets  if we  know   them (Follows    Eva's  writing).
    [Immediate context ­ discussion and questionnaire draft as co-text] Maybe. I don't know shall we agree five
    categories always. [Immediate context ­ discussion as co-text]
22  Eva: Yeah.
23  Katrin: I think it's the easiest. So how do we specify it? Once a day? [Immediate context ­ discussion as
    co-text]
24  Eva: Once a day, once a week, less... [Immediate context ­ discussion as co-text]
25  Katrin: Ok, let's go. (Eva starts to write, Katrin follows the writing).
          The above    excerpt demonstrates   how  the written  text -  the  drafted questionnaire   -  simultaneously
provides a focus for discourse and reasoning for the task (Turns 1-19), and also embodies the progress made
(Turns 20-25). Thus, the questionnaire serves as an `improvable object' for the students (Wells, 1999). It is also
used as   a shared reference   object  which  mediates student  discourse.    The written  text that is  explicitly and
implicitly referred to in the discourse serves as a co-text for the students, which is actively used in the "new act
of sense making" (Linell, 1998, p. 132) (Turns 1-8).       Discussion itself is also used as a co-text ­ that is, the
previous discussion serves as a co-text for reasoning further the subject in hand. This is well demonstrated when
students start to think about the categories and develop their ideas based on one another's suggestions (Turns 9-
19). Thus, they are not using the written text as a reference here, but instead, build their ideas on one another's
(verbal)  suggestions.  Co-text  is a  relevant indicator  of  building a  shared   immediate   context,  and also   its
prerequisite. In the students' activity building shared context is done through different semiotic resources (Gee
& Green, 1998). Reading and writing, co-textual references to written and read text, and building on furthering
discussion, as well as gestures to the monitor, are all semiotic means that serve in creating the shared context
and content base in the students' collaborative task.

Local Context ­ Continuity in Task Activity
          Local context   widens  the  notion of  immediate   context.  It includes  the immediate   context  but   also
references to past and future concerning the (task) activity at hand. It means that in the shared task context the
references to past and future discourse, or activities concerning the task, are relevant in order for one to proceed
and understand the task at hand. Local context can be seen as a task frame guiding the activity in the immediate
moment-to-moment interaction. It influences the goals and choices made in the immediate context:
          Excerpt 2.
1   Katrin: So then... which one of these I am not using? [Immediate context ­ referring to tools written in the
    drafted questionnaire, written text as co-text]
2   Eva: Also these (gesturing at the screen). [Immediate context - written text as co-text]
3   Katrin:  Yeah.   I would,  I would   also put it [Immediate  context    ­ written text as   co-text] in categories,
    because it's easier for us to do the statistics. [Local context ­ reference to the future activity]
4   Eva: Yhy. Yeah. But how can we do this why-part? [Immediate context ­ referring to the questionnaire in
    the screen, written text as co-text]
5   Katrin: Why? I think we have to categorize it afterwards, like qualitative. [Local context ­ reference to the
    future activity]
6   Eva: Okay.
          In Excerpt 2 student discussion is based on the drafted questionnaire. The students negotiate which of
the questions   they   will categorize and   which   they will leave   as  open-questions.  Katrin   suggests  making
categories for one of the questions because "it's easier for us to do the statistics" (Turn 3). Thus, she is referring
to future activity concerning the task in hand, which influences the decision-making in the immediate context. In
the next turn (4) Eva implicitly suggests that the "why" questions connected to the question "which tools do you
use / not use" cannot be categorized. Katrin implicitly agrees and refers to future activities when she says "we
have to categorize it afterwards" (Turn 5).
          Excerpt 3.
1   Katrin: Then he is really interested [Local context ­ past discussion with the professor] that one that what
    could be improved. [Immediate context ­ questionnaire on the screen as co-text]
2   Eva: Yhy.

                                                                                                                            1-
       3   Katrin: But maybe we can first ask this one (gesturing at the screen). [Immediate context ­ written text as
           co-text]
       4   Eva: Which one do you use [unclear, reviews the questions written whispering] or do you have difficulties?
           [Immediate context ­ written text as co-text]
       5   Katrin: Maybe, I mean we shouldn't do too many questions, I would say like one...
       6   Eva: Yeah.
       7   Katrin:   ...one page,  maybe  we   should leave  it away  and  just  ask what could  be improved. [Immediate
           context ­ previous discussion as co-text, referring to question "do you have difficulties (it) and what could
           be improved"]
       8   Eva: Oh, okay.
       9   Katrin: I don't know.
       10  Eva: Yeah, no problem.
       11  Katrin: I mean, oh what is more important we have to use this one `cause I think aa professor is really
           interested  in   that one.  [Immediate  context  -   referring to the screen  to the  question "what    could   be
           improved" (this one ­ that one), written text as co-text; local context ­ past discussion with the professor]
               In Excerpt 3 students are reviewing the questions in the drafted questionnaire and negotiating what
       should be left out. Katrin suggests leaving out the last question "do you have difficulties" and suggests leaving
       in a question "what could be improved" (Turn 7). She justifies this suggestion by referring to past discussion she
       had earlier with the professor teaching the course (Turns 1, 11). In their study Staarman, et. al., (2004) called
       these references to past (classroom) discussion with the teacher implicit intertextual references.
               The above described Excerpts 2 and 3 demonstrate how the local context provides continuity between
       different contexts. In the analyzed lesson the references to the past and future activities are typical justifications
       for decision-making and negotiation in the moment-to-moment interaction. It demonstrates how the participants'
       task frame crosses time and events outside the immediate perceptual context (see also Floriani's (1993) notion
       of intercontextuality).   Local context can  also be  a  concrete  resource.  The previously written version   of the
       questionnaire  serves  as  a main  local context  for   the students. It provides  a context for reference   and  for
       continuing the development of the ideas written earlier. In the immediate context it serves as a (written) co-text.

      Socio-Cultural Context ­ Tools for Thinking and Acting
               Both the immediate and local contexts are embedded in socio-cultural context.         For example, writing,
       artifacts and rules of conversation (including co-textual referencing) are all socio-cultural constructs. Thus, in
       practice these different contexts are difficult to separate, but here they are differentiated for analytical purposes.
       Socio-cultural context in this study refers to the prior knowledge and experiences related to the task content at
       hand, but also more broadly to the values, norms and identities reflected and constructed through the discourse
       and activity.

      Prior Knowledge
               All previously described excerpts also reflect the socio-cultural context. Excerpt 1 demonstrates how
       the students draw on prior knowledge on `rules of making research by questionnaire' in their discourse. Their
       prior knowledge both implicitly and explicitly stated in discussion indicates that in evaluative questionnaires
       you should    prefer categories instead  of open-questions   (Excerpt  1, Turns   8-13). The justification for this is
       explicitly stated later in Excerpt 2 where Katrin says that "it's easier for us to do the statistics" (Turn 3). `Rules
       of categorization' are implicitly referred (Excerpt 1, Turns 16, 18, 19, 24) and explicitly stated, such as "shall
       we agree five categories always?" (Excerpt 1, Turn 21), thus implicitly referring to a Likert-type scale. Katrin
       also differentiates between quantitative (implicit reference, Excerpt 2, Turn 3) and qualitative methods (explicit
       reference, Excerpt 2, Turn 5), referring to her knowledge on research activity. Thus, the students use their prior
       knowledge on `doing research' in their discourse and activity. This framework, consisting of rules for making a
       questionnaire and procedural knowledge for doing research, can also be seen as previously constructed and a
       learned cultural model (Gee & Green, 1998) that the students draw on to guide their discourse and activity in the
       current situation. Thus, certain implicit rules which are made explicit through discourse guide student activity
       and enable progress in discussion (see Excerpts 1 and 2). This is seen, for example, in the progress the students
       make in their discussion in developing the categories and specifying them (Excerpt 1, Turns 13-24). The rule of
       categorization is further applied in the next excerpt where the students are discussing the making of an open
       question into a closed one:
               Excerpt 4.
       1   Katrin: Which tools do we have? [Immediate context ­ written text as co-text]
       2   Eva: We did it like this, but I think it is too much. [Immediate/local context ­ referring to questionnaire,
           written text as co-text]
       3   Katrin: Yeah.

1-
4    Eva: `Cause if we talk about all the possible functions with these open questions. [Immediate context ­
     written text as co-text]
5    Katrin: You know what we could do... I have an idea if if we ask what functions are you not using and why
     then  we could   give  like three answers   and  one is like  [other... [Immediate  context  ­  written text  and
     discussion as co-text; socio-cultural context ­ rules of categorization/knowledge of making a questionnaire]
6    Eva:  [other.    Yhy.  [Immediate    context  ­  discussion   as co-text;  socio-cultural  context   ­  rules of
     categorization/knowledge of making a questionnaire]
7    Katrin: And here we could put for example, ymm... I don't know about the function...or I don't know all
     the  functions   or... [Immediate    context  ­  discussion   as  co-text;  socio-cultural context   ­  rules of
     categorization]
8    Eva: Yeah, ok, we can do that.
9    Katrin: And then we can also integrate the one with the difficulties and stuff. [Immediate context ­ earlier
     discussion as co-text (Excerpt 3, lines 4-7)] You know if we have like, I don't know like six six categories.
     [Immediate context ­ discussion as co-text; socio-cultural context ­ rules of categorization]
10   Eva: A-ha.
11   Katrin: I don't know about tools, I have difficulties... [Immediate context ­ discussion as co-text; socio-
     cultural context ­ rules of categorization]
12   Eva: A-ha.
          In the above excerpt Eva criticizes their earlier draft, where they asked what tools/functions of the
environment the users are not using and why (Turns 2, 4). The criticism concerns the "why" question, which is
an open question in this version, and Eva thinks it makes the questionnaire perhaps either too long or difficult to
complete: "I think it is too much" (Turn 2).   Katrin then suggests categorization of the "why" question and starts
to comment on possible categories (Turn 5).       Thus, she draws on socio-cultural knowledge of (questionnaire)
categorization and applies it again to this situation, where an open question is turned into a closed one. Students
also suggest, voicing   at  the  same  time, a category  "other"  (Turns  5-6), which  implies  that they share prior
knowledge of the practice of having a possible `other' category in a questionnaire. By applying the rule of
categorization Katrin is also able to integrate the open question which dealt with having difficulties - one which
they turned down earlier - by turning it into a category (Turn 9).
          According   to Valleala   (2006)   knowledge   construction  and   building  shared understanding   always
involves building a new context, thus making something previously unknown familiar or, according to Stahl
(2004), making tacit knowledge explicit, which can then become a context for a new object of discussion and its
understanding. In the above excerpt and in Excerpt 1 student prior knowledge of making a questionnaire is tacit
knowledge that is made explicit through the application of the rules it constitutes, and this creates a context for
discussion and for developing the object (content) of discussion further.

Values, Norms and Identities
          Some values and norms are also mediated through student discourse. In Excerpt 3 Katrin puts high
emphasis on the professor's preferences concerning the questionnaire: "What is more important we have to use
this one `cause I think aa professor is really interested in that one" (Excerpt 3, Turn 11).         Thus, when they
negotiate what questions they leave in and what ones they take out, Katrin feels that the professor's preferences
should exceed their own ("more important"). This signals certain norms, expectations and obligations in the
student-teacher relationship and thus reflects socially valued ways of thinking and acting in the present context
(Wells, 1999). It implies status differences where the professor carries strong authority over student preferences.
This is also a good example of how through discourse Katrin not only reflects but also re-produces institutional
norms and values of the community wherein she acts. Hence, this example also reflects identity applied in the
situation. Katrin's   discourse  reflects that she   identifies with  her place in the  student-teacher   community.
According to Wells (2007) identity construction is ongoing and occurs in the situated actions and discourses in
which    participants engage.    In new   situations one  might   apply   multiple identities coming   from   various
communities of practice whose values and scripts define our identities. In addition to the `university student'
identity reflected above, other identities are also mediated through the discourse. In the collaborative task the
fact that the students have different nationalities - particularly that one student is native (German-speaking) and
the other one non-native - influences from time to time to the students' activity and participatory roles. The
learning environment to be evaluated is available only in German. Thus, when the students are exploring the
web-based learning environment the non-native student has difficulties in interpreting it:
          Excerpt 5:
1    Eva: What's Überblick? [Immediate context ­ written text in the web-based learning environment as co-
     text; socio-cultural context ­ German language]
2    Katrin:  General   overview.   [Immediate   context  ­  discussion   as co-text; socio-cultural context  ­ prior
     knowledge of German language]
3    Eva: So, we don't have to write this one (points to the screen)? [Immediate context ­ written text as co-text]

                                                                                                                         1-
       4    Katrin: No, no, no.
            [...]
       5    Eva: What is this (points to the screen)? [Immediate context ­ written text as co-text]
       6    Katrin: This is yy working groups, you are in different working groups... [Immediate context ­ discussion
            and written text as co-text; socio-cultural context ­ prior knowledge of German language]
       7    Eva: Y-hy.
       8    Katrin: Ok. Shall we write Lernstudio? [In English: Learning studio] [Immediate context ­ written text as
            co-text]
       9    Eva: Do I have to write these ones (points to the screen)? [Immediate context ­ written text as co-text]
       10   Katrin: No, these are not tools. [Immediate context ­ discussion and written text as co-text; socio-cultural
            context ­ prior knowledge of German language]
       11   Eva: Okay.
            [...]
       12   Katrin: Foren, Mail [In English: Forums, Email] (reads from the laptop screen). Ok, maybe we just write
            them  down.  Ok,  Lernstudio,    Infothek [In  English: Info-center]. Shall  I write because   it's easier (Katrin
            starts to write on the drafted questionnaire)? [Immediate context ­ written text as co-text; socio-cultural
            context ­ German-speaking identity]
                  Language is a vital part of a person's identity and plays a role in the construction of that identity. The
       above excerpt demonstrates how the non-German speaking student, Eva, arrives at an unequal position because
       she does not know the German language (Turns 1, 3, 5, 9). This also influences the participatory roles in the
       situation, where the German speaking student, Katrin, not only interprets the web-based learning environment,
       but  also  gives herself  the writing  task as  well (Turn   12). Thus,   the concrete resource  (web-based     learning
       environment) itself contributes to the assuming of a minor position for the non-German speaking student and to
       an unequal participation in the immediate context. However, the students possibly recognize this disadvantage
       through these and other experiences in using this particular online learning environment, and through identifying
       themselves    as part of   an  international   student  group  and  community       (socio-cultural context).   This is
       demonstrated upon completion of the final questionnaire with the following statements: "I couldn't understand
       the interface as it was only available in German" and "The online environment should be available in other
       languages apart from German". Therefore, through the questionnaire and the (past) discourse it reflects students
       make an effort to change institutional practices they are part of in the study community.

      Discussion
                  As  Wells (1999)   states, greater  recognition should  be  given   to the  central  and formative   role of
       language in education. As this paper demonstrates, what should be stressed is, namely, the role of linguistic
       discourse in meaning making and mediating of knowledge, values and beliefs of the communities the students
       and  teachers  participate in and   `bring  along'  to new   contexts and  situations.  While   much  of  the work   of
       analyzing collaboration in the classroom context or in virtual contexts has concentrated on structures or nature
       of talk from a `productive discussion' perspective, less attention has been paid to discourse and the purposes it
       serves to accomplish.
                  The focus  of this study   was targeted  especially to  understanding    how a  student  pair through  their
       discourse was negotiating, interpreting and making sense of their context, and what resources (Linell, 1998) or
       aspects of situation (Gee & Green, 1998) were relevant in their collaborative task. The study used the means of
       discourse analysis (Gee & Green, 1998) to explore what contexts the students built in their collaborative task.
       With the help of the analysis the study was able to demonstrate how discourse both reflected and shaped what
       constituted knowing, doing and being in this particular classroom (Wenger, 1998).
                  The study revealed three different context types that were built and that characterized the students'
       working context. Student previous knowledge on making an evaluative questionnaire (socio-cultural context), as
       well as local  context(s)  in the form  of  earlier discussion with   the professor,  the draft questionnaire   and  the
       references to the future activities (based on scientific knowledge), all served as main resources that the students
       drew on in their immediate context, the main task of which in this analyzed lesson was to revise the previously
       drafted questionnaire. In the immediate context, the co-text, in the form of semiotic resources such as written
       text and earlier discussion, made up the shared context for reasoning and enabled collaborating in the task. Thus,
       the discourse both reflected and constructed the context in which it was used (Gee & Green, 1998).
                  This study demonstrated that in learning situations there are multiple immediate and mediated contexts
       that can have an affect on students' interpretations and meaning making in the situation. This means that in
       order to analyze collaborative learning we need to go beyond analyzing structures of talk separated from their
       contexts in order to also explore how socio-cultural aspects are manifested in students' activity (e.g. Black,
       2007). This means using methodological tools that reveal how past, present and future are embedded in the
       interaction between students as they are engaged in shared activity.

1-
References
Arvaja,   M.,  Salovaara,   H., Häkkinen,    P.   &   Järvelä, S. (2007).    Combining     individual  and   group-level
          perspectives for studying collaborative knowledge construction in context. Learning and Instruction,
          17(4), 448-459.
Black,  L. (2007).  Analysing    cultural models    in socio-cultural   discourse  analysis.   International Journal  of
          Educational Research, 46(1-2), 20-30.
Bliss, J. & Säljö, R. (1999). The human-technological dialectic. In J. Bliss, R. Säljö & P. Light (Eds.), Learning
          sites: Social and technological resources of learning (pp. 1-16). Amsterdam: Pergamon.
Buttny, R.  (1998).  Putting  prior talk  into  context: Reported    speech  and   the reporting  context.  Research  on
          Language and Social Interaction, 31(1), 45-58.
Erickson,  F.  &  Shultz, J.  (1981). When     is a context?   Some   issues  and  methods    in  the analysis of social
          competence. In J. Green & C. Wallat (Eds.) Ethnography and language in educational settings (pp.
          147-160). Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Floriani, A. (1993). Negotiating what counts: Roles and relationships, texts and contexts, content and meaning.
          Linguistics and Education, 5, 241-274.
Gee, J. P. &   Green,  J. L.  (1998). Discourse   analysis, learning    and social practice:   A  methodological  study.
          Review of Research in Education, 23, 119-169.
Goodwin, C. (2000). Action and embodiment within situated human interaction. Journal of Pragmatics, 32,
          1489-1522.
Goodwin, C. & Duranti, A. (1992). Rethinking context: an introduction. In A. Duranti & C. Goodwin (Eds.),
          Rethinking context: Language as interactive phenomenon (pp.1-42). Cambridge: Cambridge University
          Press.
Linehan, C. & McCarthy, J. (2001). Reviewing the "Community of practice" metaphor: An analysis of control
          relations in a primary classroom. Mind, Culture and Activity, 8(2), 129-147.
Linell, P. (1998). Approaching dialogue. Talk, interaction and contexts in dialogical perspectives. Amsterdam:
          John Benjamins.
Pappas, C., Varelas, M., Barry, A. & Rife, A. (2002). Dialogic inquiry around information texts: The role of
          intertextuality in constructing scientific understanding in urban primary classrooms. Linguistics and
          Education, 13(4), 435-482).
Staarman, J. K., Aarnoutse, C. & Verhoeven, L. (2004). Connecting discourses: Intertextuality in a primary
          school CSCL practice. International Journal of Educational Research, 39, 807-816.
Stahl, G.  (2004).  Building  collaborative  knowing.    Elements    of a  social theory   of CSCL.   In P.  Dillenbourg
          (Series Ed.) &   J. W.   Strijbos, P. A.  Kirschner   &  R.   L.  Martens  (Vol  Eds.),  Computer-supported
          collaborative learning, Vol 3. What we know about CSCL... and implementing it in higher education
          (pp. 53-85). Boston, MA: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Valleala,  U.    M.  (2006).  Yhteinen    ymmärtäminen      koulutuksessa     ja   työssä. Kontekstin    ymmärtäminen
          opiskelijaryhmän ja työtiimin keskusteluissa. [Shared understanding in education and work. Context of
          understanding   in  student  group    and   work  team     discussions]. Jyväskylä     Studies in  Education,
          Psychology and Social research 280. Jyväskylä: University of Jyväskylä.
Weinberger,    A. &  Fischer,   F. (2006).   A  framework   to  analyze    argumentative   knowledge     construction in
          computer-supported collaborative learning. Computers & Education,46, 71-95.
Wells,  G. (1999).   Dialogic   inquiry.  Toward    a  sociocultural practice and   theory    of education.  New  York:
          Cambridge University Press.
Wells, G. (2007). Who we become depends on the company we keep and on what we do and say together.
          International Journal of Educational Research, 46(1-2), 100-103.
Wells, G. & Arauz, R. M. (2006). Dialogue in the classroom. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 15(3), 379-
          428.
Wenger,    E.  (1998). Communities     of    practice: Learning,   meaning    and   identity.    Cambridge:  Cambridge
          University Press.
Wertsch, J. (1991). A sociocultural approach to socially shared cognition. In L. Resnick, J. M. Levine & S. D.
          Teasley (Eds.), Perspectives on socially shared cognition (pp. 85-100). Washington, DC: American
          Psychological Association.

Acknowledgements
I wish to thank Professor Frank Fischer's group for an inspiring context for doing research while I was working
as a visiting researcher at the University of Munich (LMU). I express my special thanks to Dr. Kati Mäkitalo-
Siegl for her collaboration and for commenting on this paper. This research was supported by the Academy of
Finland (project no. 108488).

                                                                                                                           1-
