   Self-directed learning in pre-vocational secondary education: An
          analysis of difficulties and success factors in workplace
                                                   simulations

        Helen Jossberger, Saskia Brand-Gruwel, Henny Boshuizen;            Open University of the Netherlands
                  Helen.Jossberger@ou.nl, Saskia.Brand-Gruwel@ou.nl, Els.Boshuizen@ou.nl
                                    & Margje van de Wiel; Maastricht University
                                        M.vandeWiel@psychology.unimaas.nl

          Abstract:  This study investigates success and failure factors related to workplace simulation
          learning in Dutch pre-vocational secondary education.           Research in other practical settings
          indicates that  self-directed learning,   self-regulated learning  and   deliberate   practice   are key
          competencies that positively affect learning outcomes. A focus group study with 20 teachers
          and 35 students was conducted. Similarities and discrepancies between theory and practice are
          put forward.    For  instance,  not   offering   choices interferes  with    a self-directed    learning
          approach.

          Workplace simulations in pre-vocational secondary education are authentic practice-oriented learning
environments, in which traditional vocational skills, generic skills, and domain knowledge are integrated. These
learning  environments     are supposed   to   meet the  characteristics  of the   learners, who    are  described  as   `do-
learners'. This description suggests that learning of theories alone is insufficient for these students to connect
and apply the theory to the context (Ogg & Kollaard, 2001). The pedagogical approach in workplace simulation
learning, however,   is  hardly  studied  and  not  much   is  known  about  the   way   students   learn, the  lessons  and
instructions  the teacher  provides,  and   if the  learning  environment    fits the  need  to achieve    optimal  learning
progress.
          Experience shows that students are mostly highly motivated in these learning environments However,
at the  same  time   inherent  difficulties arise.  For  instance, students  do    not know     what  to  do   or they have
preferences   for specific activities  at the  cost of   key  activities (Beckers,    Jacobs, &    Kerkhoffs,   2005).   The
problems students have with learning in workplace simulations have not yet been systematically investigated
and analyzed so that detailed insights into the processes underlying these problems is missing. Moreover, little is
known   about    students' success  and   failure  factors  in workplace   simulation    learning.    We   believe  that the
effectiveness of workplace simulation learning depends upon a number of factors. Factors of influence can be
rooted in learning related student characteristics, in the learning environment, or in the social environment like
peers and parents. The interaction between the different factors makes the difference between successful and
unsuccessful workplace simulation learning. The aim of the present study is to determine which difficulties arise
in workplace simulations in pre-vocational secondary education and which success and failure factors related to
learning can be identified from theory and practice.
          The fact that we are dealing with practical settings implies that learning from experience plays a very
important role. What and how students learn seems to depend on their ability to create learning opportunities
independently    and actively.   Moreover,     insight into  their own    learning  process   is   essential to   choose  an
appropriate learning path and to focus on performance aspects that need improvement. Important competencies
that are suggested to influence successful learning in workplace simulations are self-directed learning (Knowles,
1975), self-regulated learning (Zimmerman, 2000), and deliberate practice (Ericsson, Krampe, & Tesch-Römer,
1993).
          Self-directed learning, self-regulated learning and deliberate practice are closely related concepts that
describe how high-level performance can be achieved by high-quality involvement in learning (Van de Wiel,
Szegedi,  &   Weggeman,    2004).   We    use  the term  learner self-direction   and  define   it as the  ability to  direct
learning towards a desirable learning outcome, and the skill to manage and organise one's own learning needs,
strategy use, and learning opportunities. In order to be able to do so, the learner makes use of learning strategies.
Self-regulated learning is the foundation for a learner seeking to become a self-directed learner. Self-regulated
learning refers to a cyclic process of planning, monitoring, and evaluating actions to bring about successful
learning. The implementation of appropriate regulatory strategies is an essential ability of successful learners
who are clearly goal oriented (Zimmerman, 2000). A final approach in research on self-direction is deliberate
practice, which refers to a focused effort on the development of performance aspects that need improvement.
Improvement of performance is affected by both how much and how learners practice. The teacher plays a
crucial role  in  helping  students to  develop    learner self-direction by focusing    on  their  learning   methods   and
techniques, and providing informative feedback (Ericsson et al. 1993; Zimmerman, 2000). Deliberate practice,
self-regulated and self-directed learning can be practiced and learned but demand a lot of effort, time, and an

                                                                                                                                 3-
       appropriate learning environment. For students who are poor self-regulated learners, workplace simulations are
       likely to pose difficulties. These learning environments require initiative of the learner and responsibility for
       learning. Those who are able to direct and regulate their learning and practice vocational skills deliberately are
       expected to reach higher levels of performance then individuals who are less skilled in directed and regulated
       learning.
                 On the basis of a literature review in combination with a focus group study, success and failure factors
       in workplace   simulations     in pre-vocational    secondary   education  are  identified  and a model    of actions,
       interactions, and factors that influence learning was developed.
                 The  participants  are  20  teachers  and 35 students   of  different schools for pre-vocational  secondary
       education specialized in the sectors agriculture, engineering & technology, and care & welfare. Both groups are
       divided into several separate focus groups with a maximum of four teachers per group and between three and
       five students per group. Students are in the final year, aged between fifteen and seventeen, and have worked and
       learned in workplace simulations for at least one year. They follow an advanced vocational learning pathway.
                 The focus group interviews for students and teacher focused on four broad topics. Open questions were
       formulated concerning the learning environment (workplace simulations), the role of the teacher, the role of the
       student, and the role of significant others including parents and peers. Participants were asked to illustrate their
       answers with examples. The interviews were recorded and transcribed.
                 A grounded theory method (Strauss & Corbin, 1998) is used to analyze the data of the focus groups.
       Preliminary   results indicate   that workplace  simulations    (in  the participating schools) are highly  structured
       learning environments, in which tasks provide clear instructions of what to do and how to do it. Collaborative
       learning  is mostly   used  as method    of working  and  planning-   and  reflection  moments  are partly  integrated.
       Making choices, however, seems limited to a predefined set of possibilities. These environmental conditions
       seem to interfere with the idea of self-directed learning and students seem to be very dependent on the guidance,
       direction, and presence of the teacher. Success factors that are mentioned in the interview include discipline,
       effort, goal setting, will to learn, and ability to work independently. Results and conclusions of the focus group
       study will be presented at the conference.

      References

                 Beckers,  J.,  Jacobs,  H.,  &  Kerkhoffs,   J. (2005).    Competentiegericht  onderwijs    vmbo: de  eerste
       ervaringen in de praktijk (Vmbo-reeks deel 3). [Competency-based pre-vocational secondary education: the first
       practical experiences]. Enschede: SLO.
                 Ericsson, K.   A., Krampe,     R. T.,  Tesch-Römer,     C. (1993). The   role of  deliberate practice in the
       acquisition of expert performance. Psychological Review, 100 (3), 363-406.
                 Knowles,    M. S.  (1975).  Self-directed learning:   A guide  for learners  and  teachers.  Chicago: Follett
       Publishing Company.
                 Ogg, F., & Kollaard, L. (2001). Oriëntatie op leren met werkpleksimulatie (Deel 1). [Orientation on
       learning with workplace simulations]. 's Hertogenbosch: KPC Groep.
                 Strauss, A.,   &  Corbin,   J. (1998). Basics   of qualitative  research. Techniques    and  procedures  for
       developing grounded theory (2nd edition). Thousand Oaks: Sage.
                 Van de Wiel, M. W. J., Szegedi, K. H. P, & Weggeman, M. C. D. P. (2004). Professional learning:
       Deliberate   attempts   at developing    expertise. In H.    P. A.   Boshuizen,  R. Bromme,     & H.   Gruber   (Eds.),
       Professional learning: Gaps and transitions on the way from novice to expert (pp. 181-206). Dordrecht: Kluwer
       Academic Publishers.
                 Zimmerman, B. J. (2000). Attaining self-regulation. A social cognitive perspective. In M. Boekaerts, P.
       R. Pintrich, & M. Zeidner (Eds.), Handbook of self-regulation (pp. 13-39). San Diego: Academic Press.

3-
