            Bringing Representational Practice From Log to Light
         Richard Medina, Daniel D. Suthers, University of Hawai`i at Manoa, Department of Information
               and Computer Sciences, 1680 East West Road, POST 317, Honolulu, HI 96822 USA
                                  Email: rmedina@hawaii.edu, suthers@hawaii.edu

           Abstract:   People   implicitly    negotiate   use   of representations    during   learning,    even   in
           distributed online   settings, but  due to   the   temporally   and   spatially  distributed    nature  of
           interaction, special analytic tools are required to uncover the development of representational
           practices in such settings. In this paper we show how logs of online activity can be analyzed to
           recognize   patterns in   use  of  representations   and    show   how   negotiated   representational
           practices affect how learners collaborate and influence each other.

           Keywords: Representational practices, Interaction analysis, Online collaboration

Introduction
           Prior work  has   examined    how  shared representations--constructed,        manipulated      and interpreted  by
participants--both influence and are appropriated by participants in the course of their collaborative interaction
(Roschelle,    1996,   Suthers  &   Hundhausen,    2003).     Representational    practices    (e.g., how     inscriptions  are
interpreted  as  representations,  and   role specialization  with   respect  to construction   and   maintenance     of  these
representations)   are  implicitly   negotiated  through   cycles   of  innovation,   adoption   and   revision    (Danish   &
Eneydy, 2006; Dwyer & Suthers; Shipman & McCall, 1994; Stahl, 2006). Although much of this research has
been undertaken in face-to-face contexts, our data as well as others' (Overdijk & van Diggelen, in press) shows
that this happens in online settings as well as face-to-face, and can even take place over extended periods of
asynchronous     interactions. The   practices and roles   so   negotiated  have  implications   for   learning,  as  they  can
affect the extent to and ways in which learners collaborate and influence each other's views. However, it can be
difficult to see implicit negotiations and their consequences when interaction is distributed over time and across
workspaces,    as  is  common    in  media-rich  asynchronous       online  learning.  We    have     developed    an  abstract
transcript format, the contingency graph, and tools for manipulating this graph that are a first step towards a
toolkit for finding negotiated patterns of interaction and other relevant phenomena. A contingency (previously
termed "dependency") is a way in which participants' actions are visibly contingent upon prior actions and their
artifacts, for   example,    through  media   dependencies,     representational  similarity,   and   semantic     overlap,  as
discussed in Suthers, Dwyer, Medina & Vatrapu (2007a). A contingency graph provides the basis for analytic
interpretation in terms of concepts such as argumentation, co-construction, transactivity, etc. This paper reports
on how we used the contingency graph in conjunction with video screen capture data to identify meaningful
episodes of activity that illustrate the negotiation of representational practices, and how these practices led to
specific observed outcomes in a collaborative problem solving session.
           Computer generated log files of user interaction in collaborative online environments are commonly
used  as   source data  for  analysis of  collaborative   interaction  (e.g., Bruckman,    2006;   De   Wever     et al., 2006;
Larusson & Alterman, in press; Martinez et al., 2003). These machine readable histories of software events are
amenable    to   computational  methods    for  aggregating,    searching,  filtering, or  visualizing     sequential  data  in
support  of a    range of  analytical approaches   (e.g.,  Aviv,   2003;   Barcellini  et al., 2005;   Hmelo-Silver,      2003,
Landauer,   Foltz  &   Laham    1998;  Sanderson   &    Fisher,    1994). In  our developing    work       on uptake   analysis
(Suthers, 2006; Suthers et al., 2007a), we've also begun to explore computational environments for analyzing
collaboration from log files. In this paper we report on analyses undertaken using a prototype visualization tool
constructed by the first author, the Uptake Graph Utility (UGU). UGU is a collection of scripts packaged into a
small application     that controls  interaction between      a MySQL      database   and   OmnigraffleTM,     a  commercial
application for diagramming and graphing. UGU allows the analyst to control the visual rendering of a graph of
contingencies between logged events. Using UGU and Omnigraffle, the analyst can selectively filter elements of
the graph from view, generate subgraphs, or isolate certain structural or temporal properties of the data. Figure 1
shows  an   example    of  a contingency  graph  and    a portion   of the UGU    interface.   The    full contingency    graph
constructed from even dyadic sessions is very complex. Strategies are needed to select relevant portions and
make analytic interpretations. We used two practices for analytical exploration of a contingency graph.
           Segmentation (or chunking) is a way to shape the data into discrete partitions or episodes that provide
reference points for analysis (Jordan & Henderson, 1995). Segmentation supports micro and macro analysis, and
the granularity and scale are adjusted accordingly. The present analysis begins with individual acts of media
manipulations    and   contingency   relationships between      them   as the initial units of  analysis,     but then chunks
subgraphs of contingencies into episodes of recognizable activity on the part of the participants.

                                                                                                                                  2-
                            Figure 1. Portion of initial contingency graph with UGU panel visible.

                Tracing  is the act  of identifying certain elements    of interest as reference  points, and then    moving
       forward or backward along pathways in the graph to unravel the interaction context in which those elements
       were formed. The rationale for following a path is analytically motivated. At any given moment in the process,
       new elements uncovered may or may not warrant the definition of another data chunk, may inspire subsequent
       traces, may induce a closer examination of the data, or require establishment of new contingencies previously
       unidentified. The analytic strategy taken in this paper follows that of our previous work (Suthers et al., 2007a).
       In that work, we looked at post-interaction essays composed individually by participants to determine what each
       person concluded about the problem posed to them. We then traced back from these acts of writing through
       contingency   relationships to identify interactional   sequences   of expressive    and perceptual  acts  that could
       potentially account for their conclusions. In the case study presented below, we trace interactional sequences
       back from actions of the participants at the end of their interactive session rather than in their essays.

      Case Study
                The case study presented here illustrates a pattern of interaction between two individuals engaged in a
       joint-problem solving exercise while using a shared networked workspace environment. The data is drawn from
       a experimental study conducted for purposes reported in detail elsewhere (Suthers, Vatrapu, Medina, Joseph &
       Dwyer, 2007b). Using informational materials we provided in the workspace, the two participants (P1 and P2)
       worked to identify possible causes of a disease in Guam, ALS-PD (Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis-Parkinsonism
       Dementia complex). The software used by these participants provided both threaded discussion and graphical
       evidence mapping tools. The session took place over the course of approximately two hours. Participants were
       at different locations, and  each participant's view  of the shared    environment   was  updated  using   a software
       protocol that enforced asynchronous interaction by distributing respective workspace changes at intermittent
       times during  the interaction  (participants were  also able to  manually    request updates by selecting    a refresh
       button). The  analysis  undertaken here  seeks  to account   for ways   in which  participants  both converged     and
       diverged in their interpretations of causes of ALS-PD, by tracing out sequential patterns of representational
       practices enacted within the workspace. The analysis highlights an evolving transformation of a collaborative
       representational practice.  These practices  and the artifacts left in their  wake   provide an explanation    for the
       conceptual convergence and divergence in the conclusions expressed by each participant.

       Episode: Concluding Work
                The analysis begins with an important reference point in the interaction, a sequence of activity in which
       both participants express conclusions concerning the possible causes of ALS-PD. This episode takes place in a
       time span of approximately 10 minutes towards the end of the session. The beginning of this episode is indicated
       by P1's prompting for a conclusion ([17028] in contingency graph of Figure 2: nodes represent events such as
       participants' actions and arcs represent contingencies). P1 makes this request using a discussion posting. Despite
       the fact that P2  does  not read  the message   (P2  did not initiate  further  requests for workspace     updates), it
       indicates P1's plans to initiate a negotiated conclusion. This is evidenced by a subsequent act that proposes a
       "final"  conclusion  [17085]   incorporating  formative   elements   of  P2's   concluding   work,  [17897],    which
       coincidentally begins and is concurrently developed by P2 [17905], at approximately the same time as P1's

2-0
(unread) request. The episode ending is negotiated when P2 asks whether P1 is done [17919]. P1 reads and
responds    by stating; "Done"    [17135]  then immediately    makes  a final "For"     link  between   P1's and  P2's
hypothesis node [17136].

         Figure 2. Subset of contingency graph showing the conclusions expressed by both participants.

         Figure   3  shows   the  concepts  expressed  by participants  in  this   episode.   Each   person  integrated
information shared during their prior work into their respective fully developed conclusions. We are able to
trace this because information was originally distributed in a hidden profile design (Stasser, 1992.)          "Cycad
usage"   is cited in each  person's final conclusion.  This is significant because      both participants cite multiple
specific hypotheses     but only   converge  on   one. Given   that  very  little linguistically  explicit  negotiation
concerning    hypotheses    took  place during  the interaction,  an analytic     trace was   initiated to provide  an
interactional  account  of  this convergence on   "Cycad  usage". Also,   within  this  segment   P1 makes   "drinking
water" a salient factor in her hypothesis, [17028 & 17085], while P2 does not cite drinking water at all, although
information referencing "drinking water" was previously shared during interaction. Another analytic trace was
generated to account for this divergence. The challenge presented by this pair's interaction is that it involved
numerous    graph  manipulations.   Video  screen capture of the  session  was    used  to assist in interpreting their
actions. The contingency graph served as an index into the video data as needed.

                              Figure 3. Mapping of concepts expressed by participant 1 and 2.

         The following episodes are presented to provide an understanding of representational practices shared
by the participants during the sequential unfolding of the interaction. We present the trace concerning "drinking
water" first because it uncovered a larger scale phenomenon that led to understanding of the manipulations that
turned out to be important in the cycad convergence. Thus this sequence of examples illustrates how analysis

                                                                                                                           2-
       changes granularities, from tracing out relations between individual acts of media manipulations to relations
       between  episodes   of  such  manipulations  and   back  to fine-grained  analysis  of   appropriation of   graphical
       resources.

      Trace of conceptual divergence uncovers representational practices and roles
               One of the consistent concepts indicated in P1's argument during Segment A is that "drinking water" is
       one possible cause for the disease. An attempt to build an account of this concept through the interaction history
       began by forming a query (input into UGU) in order to highlight acts that reference that text string and the
       contingencies between those acts. The graph revealed references to "drinking water" that were included in the
       information provided to P1 in relation to aluminum as a potential cause of the disease. A second query was
       invoked to capture acts that also referenced aluminum, extending the trace. The resulting contingency graph is
       summarized schematically in Figure 4. In two particular instances P1 shares information with P2 related to the
       contamination of drinking water by aluminum. P2 acts upon this information by performing a series of moves
       evidenced by clumps of move events in the graph. These acts by P2 do not contain linguistic responses; only a
       series of moves (drag and drop acts) in the graph space. This pattern is consistent throughout the remaining
       portions of the session. The trace shown in Figure 4 could indicate that P2 is moving nodes around in order to
       see them, or to get them out of the way: dragging and dropping of graphical objects for these reasons is frequent.
       In this case however, the periodic-like pattern of P2's series of movements induced us to explore the video
       record for these episodes.

        Figure 4. Information sharing by P1 followed by systematic graph manipulations by P2 during the first hour of
                                                           the session.

               The video shows that P2 is not randomly moving nodes around, but performing a series of graph space
       reconfigurations  to organize   information  previously   shared  during the session.     After  P1 contributes new
       information, P2 moves nodes to create spatially distinct groups that provide conceptual delineation. In addition
       to this spatial organization, both participants create links between nodes within groups that further clarify their
       inclusion in the group. (Their work will be illustrated in detail in the next section.)
               Figure  5 illustrates this same   trace at a higher level  of  abstraction, as  a series of uptake   relations
       between episodic segments. Beginning at the left, P1 shares information containing a reference to aluminum in
       water as a contaminant in the first two segments [B1 & B3]. The third information-sharing event by P1 contains
       two references that correlate aluminum and neurological symptoms of ALS-PD [B6]. The reaction to the three
       sharing acts by  P2  is shown   as series of graph  space manipulations   [B2, B4,   B5   &  B7-10]. Intersubjective
       uptake is indicated by P2's visual transformation of the shared information nodes and is followed by a series of
       intrasubjective transformative acts on the part of P2, who continually appropriates the relation-indicating power
       of the graphical nodes. The fact that there is very little related action on the part of P1 during these acts indicates
       that P2 is accountable for subsequent transformations. As shown on the far right of the diagram, intersubjective
       acts again occur as the concluding work segment discussed above, is initiated [A1 & A2].

                                  Figure 5. High level view of uptake over the entire session.

               These   grouping   acts form a  representational artifact that foreshadows   each    participant's concluding
       work. P2's   organizing  work   creates two  separate groupings,   among  others,   for  the information   containing

2-2
      Figure 6. P2's screen, initial configuration.                Figure 7. P1's screen, appropriation of
                                                                     representational grouping practice.
aluminum: as an agent in metal intoxication and as water contaminant. One explanation for the divergence on
this concept is that the resulting visual organization provides a selection context from which each participant
performs  his or her concluding    work. The  emergent   representational artifact, the graph, facilitated  multiple
meanings  for each   participant to appropriate in  conceptually convergent    and  divergent ways. P1 apparently
appropriates this representational scheme initially enacted by P2 with a slightly divergent interpretation.

Episode: Appropriation of Representational Practice
        We turn now to a closer look at P2's organization of the graph, and P1's appropriation of this practice.
Their practices converged partially in the handling of data about cycads as a potential disease agent, providing a
representational practices account of this conceptual convergence. The patterns represented in the contingency
graph provided frames of reference and direct pointers, via timestamps, to relevant locations in the video record.
More  significantly, this  framing  made the  interrelation between   the two  separate video  streams salient   for
determining the emergence of a shared representational practice.
        At the beginning of the session, P2 creates and organizes data nodes into conceptual groups. These
groupings are specified through spatial proximity and the use of links between nodes. Figure 6 is a screenshot of
P2's screen after having   constructed  such an  initial graph  configuration.  An  important  dimension    of these
grouping configurations is that topic-based nodes are positioned as hubs to conceptually related information
nodes. At the bottom left of the graph workspace are four nodes that were rendered on P2's screen as a result of
a recent update from P1. At this point we see two distinct representational practices that are expressed at the
inception of the interaction. P2 has made conceptual organization a dominant method for representation. P1's
groupings  show   a  less defined representational  practice. Later, having received  a series of updates   of  P2's
organizational work, P1 demonstrates appropriation of P2's practice. Figure 7 shows the state of P1's screen
after she has created additional nodes and grouped them into a visual configuration that resembles P2's scheme.
In addition to visual organization, P2's conceptual structure is adopted, as P1 orients the nodes towards a central
conceptually labeled node. This node also represents an explicit expression of a hypothesis, /Disease caused by
aluminum/ which reveals P1's practice of articulating hypotheses through language (not adopted by P2).
        A concurrent activity during the episode depicted in figure 7 occurs on P2's machine. Figure 8 shows
the introduction of cycad information into the graph space. Following his own representational convention, P2
positions the label, /cycad info/, and three related data nodes into an identical configuration as the others. Figure
9 shows  a  subsequent    act on P1's machine where    she  introduces a  data node containing  information    about
/cycad/. (Time has elapsed, so P1's screen reflects the ongoing work of the two participants.) In this context, a
/cycad/ related node is created and positioned in a somewhat arbitrary location with regard to the ongoing visual
grouping. On receiving an update from P1 containing the cycad data, P2 reads the contents of the node, then
drags the node to a "member" position of the cycad conceptual grouping (circled in Figure 10). P2 then follows
this repositioning with the creation of a link between the node and the /CYCAD INFO/ hub, further expressing
its group membership.

                                                                                                                         2-
                                                                        Cycad seed noted with
                                                                        large amounts of
                                                                        cyanide gas, potentially
                                                                        deadly chemical”

                                             CYCAD
                                             INFO”

              Figure 8. P2 creates cycad representation.                Figure 9. P1 creates a cycad data node.

                                 Figure 10. P2 receives cycad data node from P1 (Fig. 9) and
                                        repositions and links into cycad group (Fig. 8)

                 Subsequently, each  participant brings  "cycad usage"  forward in distinct ways. P1  articulates  cycad
       salience through a statement placed in a Hypothesis node, /Disease caused by cycad seed usage/ (Figure 11, left
       side), while P2 posts   a short "themed"  node   expressing /USES  OF  CYCAD/     (Figure  11, right side). Each
       participant without knowledge of the other performs these respective acts. They coincidentally indicate cycad
       usage  at approximately   the same time.  In addition to posting her hypothesis  node, P1  integrates it into the
       /CYCAD INFO/ group configuration by creating four links to supporting data. P2 also groups and links data
       nodes to their expression ("USES OF CYCAD"). It is a mutual appropriation of a grouping practice. P1 and P2
       both begin wrapping up their work within five minutes after this episode and thus initiate the concluding work
       episode presented above.

2-
                                                                                                                 USES OF
                                                                                                                 CYCAD”

                                                               QuickTimeTM and a
                                                           TIFF (LZW) decompressor
                                                         are needed to see this picture.

    Disease caused by
    cycad seed usage”

                      Figure 11. P1 and P2 articulate new cycad groupings independently.

Conclusions
          The above analysis provides an explanation of one aspect of how the two participants converged and
did not converge on conclusions in a joint problem-solving task. The goal was to explore an application of the
uptake analysis framework, its representation and praxis, by way of taking a detailed look at how interactions
through   shared representations                                                            might account   for particular instances   of conceptual   convergence  and
divergence. We uncovered a case of interactional negotiation of representational practices, implicitly proposed
by one    participant (P2) through                                                            demonstration,  and   taken  up by   the other   participant. This shared
representational practice was particularly apparent in their handling of the question of cycad seeds as a potential
cause of the disease in question, a finding that is consistent with the fact that this was the one cause on which
both participants agreed. In contrast, information about the role of drinking water in relation to aluminum was
distributed in the graph in a manner that seems consistent with the lack of agreement on the importance of this
element and the fact that P2 received the bulk of evidence against the associated aluminum hypothesis.
          The primary significance of this analysis is that negotiated representational practices can be found in
asynchronous interactional settings, and can influence outcomes of a collaborative session. Such phenomena
merit further study to understand how learning is accomplished (Koschmann et al., 2005). However, due to the
fact that interaction is not immediately salient in asynchronous online settings, representations and tools that
make interaction patterns visible are needed. We have prototyped one such tool, and propose to develop further
tools based on the contingency graph as an abstract transcript, transcending differences in log file formats and
the distribution of interaction across media.                                                         The contingency graph is an abstraction of what is traditionally
thought of as a transcript. Enabling its representation and its relational structure in a computationally accessible
format promises to support sophisticated and scaleable analytical practices. Segmentation and tracing are two
such practices that are fundamental in working with relationally represented sequential data. It is through cycles
of segmentation and tracing that one is able to isolate aspects of interaction under investigation. One danger in
isolating data elements in this way is the potential for decontextualization ≠ losing sight of the full breadth of
contingencies at play in a given context.                                                         To counter this tendency, the video record was examined regularly. In
practice, the visual  distinction                                                         between  selected and  non-selected acts can    be leveraged within  cycles  of
selective transformation.  The                                                           Uptake Graph Utility   was developed  around  these  two ideas and   provides a
prototype for planned further development of related tools based on the contingency graph representation.

References
Aviv, R.,  Erlich, Z.,  Ravid,                                                           G., &  Geva, A.  (2003).   Network   Analysis of    Knowledge  Construction   in
          Asynchronous    Learning                                                            Networks.     Journal  of    Asynchronous    Learning    Networks,   7(3),
          http://www.sloan-c.org/publications/jaln/v7n3/v7n3_aviv.asp.
Barcellini, F., DÈtienne, F., Burkhardt, J.-M., & Sack, W. (2005). A study of online discussions in an Open-
          Source Software Community: Reconstructing thematic coherence and argumentation from quotation
          practices. In Proceedings of the Communities and Technologies Conference. Milan, Italy.

                                                                                                                                                                            2-
       Bruckman,    A.   S. (2006).   Analysis    of Log  File  Data    to Understand   Behavior   and  Learning    in an  Online
                Community.     In  J.  Weiss,  J.  Nolan,  J. Hunsinger,    &  P. Trifonas  (Eds.),  International  Handbook   of
                Virtual Learning Environments (pp. 1449-1465). New York: Springer.
       Danish, J. A. & Enyedy, N. (2006). Negotiated representational mediators: How young children decide what to
                include in their science representations. Science Education, 91(1), 1-35.
       De  Wever,    B., Schellens,    T., Valcke,   M.,  &   Van   Keer,   H. (2006).  Content    analysis schemes    to analyze
                transcripts of online asynchronous discussion groups: A review. Computers & Education, 46(1), 6-28.
       Dwyer,   N.  &  Suthers,    D.  D.  (2005).   A Study    of the  foundations  of artifact-mediated   collaboration.  In T.
                Koschmann, D. D. Suthers, & T.-W. Chan (Eds.), Computer Supported Collaborative Learning 2005:
                The Next 10 Years! (pp. 135-144). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
       Hmelo-Silver, C. E. (2003). Analyzing collaborative knowledge construction: Multiple methods for integrated
                understanding. Computers & Education, 41, 397-420.
       Jordan, B. & Henderson, A. (1995). Interaction Analysis: Foundations and practice. The Journal of the Learning
                Sciences, 4(1), 39-103.
       Koschmann, T., Zemel, A., Conlee-Stevens, M., Young, N., Robbs, J., & Barnhart, A. (2005). How do people
                learn: Member's methods and communicative mediation. In R. Bromme, F. W. Hesse, & H. Spada
                (Eds.), Barriers and Biases in Computer-Mediated Knowledge Communication (and how they may be
                overcome) (pp. 265-294). Amsterdam: Kluwer Academic Press.
       Landauer,   T. K.,   Foltz, P. W.,  &   Laham,    D. (1998).  An    introduction to  latent semantic  analysis. Discourse
                Processes, 25(2), 259-284.
       Larusson,  J.  A. &   Alterman,     R. (in press). Tracking   online   collaborative work   as representational    practice:
                Analysis and Tool. Communities & Technologies.
       Martinez,  A.,  Dimitriadis,    Y.,  Rubia,   B.,  Gomez,    E., &   de la   Fuente, P.  (2003).  Combining     qualitative
                evaluation and social network analysis for the study of classroom social interactions. Computers &
                Education, 41, 353-368.
       Overdijk, M. & van Diggelen, W. (in press). Appropriation of a shared workspace: Organizing principles and
                their application. International Journal of Computer Supported Collaborative Learning.
       Roschelle,  J. (1996).  Designing      for cognitive   communication:    Epistemic   fidelity or mediating   collaborating
                inquiry. In D. L. Day & D. K. Kovacs (Eds.), Computers, Communication & Mental Models (pp. 13-
                25). London: Taylor & Francis.
       Sanderson,   P.   &  Fisher,   C.  (1994).  Exploratory     sequential  data  analysis: Foundations.   Human-Computer
                Interaction, 9(3-4), 251-318.
       Shipman, F. M., III & McCall, R. (1994). Supporting knowledge-base evolution with incremental formalization.
                Paper    presented  at the  CHI94.    from  http://www.acm.org/pubs/articles/proceedings/chi/191666/p285-
                shipman/p285-shipman.pdf.
       Stahl, G. (2006). Group Cognition: Computer Support for Collaborative Knowledge Building. Cambridge, MA:
                MIT Press.
       Stasser, G. (1992). Information salience and the discovery of hidden profiles by decision-making groups: A
                "thought experiment". Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 52(1), 156-181.
       Suthers,  D.   D.  (2006).   A    qualitative   analysis  of collaborative    knowledge     construction  through   shared
                representations Research and Practice in Technology Enhanced Learning, 1(2), 1-28.
       Suthers, D. D., Dwyer, N., Medina, R., & Vatrapu, R. (2007). A framework for eclectic analysis of collaborative
                interaction. In C. Chinn, G. Erkens & S. Puntambekar (Eds.), The Computer Supported Collaborative
                Learning    (CSCL)     Conference    2007   (pp.   694-703).   New   Brunswick:    International Society   of  the
                Learning Sciences.
       Suthers, D. D., & Hundhausen, C. (2003). An experimental study of the effects of representational guidance on
                collaborative learning. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 12(2), 183-219.
       Suthers, D. D., Vatrapu, R., Medina, R., Joseph, S., & Dwyer, N. (2007). Conceptual representations enhance
                knowledge    construction     in  asynchronous     collaboration. In C. Chinn,  G.   Erkens  &   S. Puntambekar
                (Eds.), The Computer Supported Collaborative Learning (CSCL) Conference 2007 (pp. 704-713). New
                Brunswick: International Society of the Learning Sciences.

      Acknowledgments
       The authors thank Nathan Dwyer and Ravi Vatrapu for their valuable collaboration in this work. This work was
       supported by the U.S. National Science Foundation under CAREER award 0093505.

2-
