     Processes of argumentation and explanation in conceptual change:
                Results from protocol analyses of peer-to-peer dialogue
                       Christa  S. C. Asterhan, School of Education, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem,
                                     Jerusalem 91905, Israel, christa.asterhan@mail.huji.ac.il

                Abstract: Decades of research have proven that many misconceptions of scientific notions are
                difficult to uproot even after intensive instructional interventions. In this paper we examine the
                role of argumentation and of explanation development in dyadic dialogues and their relation to
                consequential individual conceptual change. Two quantitative dialogue coding schemes were
                developed with different granularity: The first assessed the interlocutors' dialog moves during
                the discussion   that pertained   to  argumentation   and    explanation   development.     The second
                scheme   characterized   the  dialogue   as a  whole  on   a number    of  social and  socio-cognitive
                dimensions.     The   results  emphasized     the   critical  role  of   engagement      in  dialectical
                argumentation for conceptual change, whereas explanation development and validation was
                not related to learning gains. This finding may explain why instructional interventions are too
                often insufficient to uproot robust misconceptions. The methodological implications for the
                study of conceptual change, as well as the practical implications for designing for productive
                argumentation are discussed.

      Introduction
                Research    on  inducing  conceptual   change    among    students has  been  heavily  influenced   by  Piagetian
       notions of learning, according to which intra-personal cognitive conflict leads children to seek equilibrium and,
       hopefully, to accommodate their pre-existing conceptions into new ideas (Piaget, 1985). Piaget, thus, describes a
       basic learning mechanism. Researchers have attempted to apply these descriptive notions to design learning
       tasks that are  assumed    to  induce   intra-personal    conflict among    students.   Such   designs  rely on   creating
       conditions in   which   students' naïve   conceptualizations  are  confronted    with  anomalous   data  or  contradicting
       views, and are generally referred to as the cognitive conflict paradigm in instruction (e.g., Limon, 2001).
                However, results from empirical studies that have applied this paradigm in instructional strategy are,
       overall, rather disappointing.    These   type of tasks are  cognitively    very demanding.    For   example,   Chinn and
       Brewer (1998) have shown that ignoring, rejecting, excluding, reinterpreting and expressing uncertainty about
       the validity of anomalous data are common responses among undergraduates. To engage in such tasks, students
       will need to be highly motivated and engage in, what has been referred to as, deep processing (Doyle & Sinatra,
       1998).
                The  cognitive   conflict paradigm    has   also been  implemented      in peer   collaboration settings  (socio-
       cognitive conflict) by pairing students with different initial conceptualizations or by presenting collaborators
       with  contradictory  information.   Theoretically,   collaborative    tasks seem    to be  more   promising  for  concept
       learning within this paradigm than individual settings: According to (neo-)Piagetian theory, the confrontation of
       different cognitions in combination with the equality in status are considered to induce high levels of cognitive
       conflict which are thought to be crucial for the occurrence of conceptual change (e.g., Mugny & Doise, 1978).
       The interaction with an equal-status peer may also promote reflection and awareness to the incompleteness of
       one's own understanding (Keil, 2006; Limon, 2001) and cause learners to engage in explanatory activities, such
       as the consideration of alternative ideas (Okada & Simon, 1997). In addition, having (a) partner(s) may reduce
       the cognitive load as a result of the combination of individual resources and the distribution of task-related
       cognitive demands among the participants (Dillenbourg, 1999).
                However, as the literature on peer collaboration has extensively and repeatedly shown, simply putting
       two people together is not sufficient (e.g., Coleman, 1998; King & Rosenshine, 1993). Even the creation of
       heterogeneous   groups   according     to personal   beliefs  and   performance     does   not  ensure   productive   peer
       collaboration. An increasingly large body of research seems to indicate that for collaborative task designs to be
       effective, more than anything else, participants have to actually transact on and engage in each other's ideas
       (e.g., Chan, Burtis & Bereiter, 1997; Rogoff, 1998).
                Recent post-hoc analyses of peer dialogues seemed to suggest that the key to substantive learning gains
       within the socio-cognitive conflict paradigm may be found in argumentation (Schwarz, Neuman & Biezuner,
       2000;  Schwarz   &    Linchevski,   2007).     This  claim was     experimentally   tested  in  a  study  on    conceptual
       understanding in evolutionary theory in which argumentation was treated as a condition (Asterhan & Schwarz,
       2007b):   Undergraduates     were   assigned   to   dyads  and     collaboratively  tried  to  explain   an  evolutionary
       phenomenon    (i.e., the evolution  of  webbed    feet of  ducks).  Half of  the   dyads   were instructed   to engage in
       argumentative dialogue on their respective explanations and received some written examples of argumentative

1-0
moves; the other half was merely instructed to collaborate. When controlled for pretest performance, delayed
posttest explanations   of students   in   the argumentative     condition were found   to  testify of better  conceptual
understanding than those of control students. However, in spite of these mean differences between conditions,
not all experimental subjects attained conceptual change and not all experimental dyads engaged in a dialectical
argumentative discussion, in spite of the instructions and task design. In the present study, we attempt to identify
critical features of dyadic dialogues with respect to conceptual change by exploring the factors that distinguish
between  the   dialogues  of  dyads   that achieved  substantive   conceptual gains  and   those that  did not.  Previous
findings lead us to focus on the role of argumentative moves within a dialogue.
         In addition to argumentation, acts of explanation development were also assessed. The importance of
explanatory activities, such as elaboration and the development of scientific explanation, has been proven in a
number of research works: for example on activities such as explanatory activities (Okada & Simon, 1997), self-
explanation (e.g., Chi, deLeeuw, Chiu, & Lavancher,1994; Coleman, 1998), elaborative talk (van Boxtel, van
der Linden   &  Kanselaar,    2000),  and   reciprocal  questioning    (King &  Rosenshine,    1993).  Even    though   the
operational definitions of some of these activities may have contained some argumentative elements, they all
focus on explanation-driven discourse. While in the same dialogue acts of explanation and argumentation often
occur interchangeably, they are two quite different epistemic actions that should preferably be distinguished.
         The act of explaining, for example, often resembles argumentation, which substantially complicates the
process  of identification.   They  are  both   acts of   reasoning and  have  therefore similar    syntactic  and formal
structures: They are made up of at least two propositions, in which one is presented as the starting point which
leads to the other, the end point. In addition, they often make use of similar indicator words, such as 'because',
'therefore', 'as a result of', and 'since'. Moreover, both explanation and argumentation are verbal and social acts
of reasoning. Explanations, like arguments, are of a transactional nature: They have recipients, whether this
occurs on the intra-personal plane between two individuals, or on the intra-personal level where an individual
explains   something   to  the  self. In   both  cases,   the goal  of  the explanation  is  to  expand    the recipient's
understanding (Keil, 2006).
         In spite of these resemblances, argumentation and explanation differ in at least one important aspect:
their purpose. An explanation has a clarifying function within a dialogue, in the sense that the recipient should
come to understand something better as a result of the explanation. It is often, but not always, preceded by
requests for clarifications. In argumentation, on the other hand, the proponent proposes reasons for the recipient
to come to accept a certain thesis (Walton, 2006). Baker (2002a; 2003) defines argumentation as an activity that
involves establishing specific types of relations between the propositions being discussed and other sources of
knowledge, the establishment of which is meant to influence the epistemic statuses of these propositions. Then
the distinction between argumentation and explanation should be made based on the context of the dialogue,
both in a local and general sense.
         It is imperative    to distinguish    between  processes   of argumentation    and explanation,   since  the two
testify of  different (socio-)cognitive    processes  each    of which  may  prove   to be  beneficial  in different  task
designs, different domains and different types of concepts. So as to optimize opportunities for learning, task
designs have to be contingent on the type of learning that is required. Within the conceptual change literature,
for example,    two   different   mechanisms     of  conceptual    learning  have   been   proposed:   There   are  those
misconceptions that require radical knowledge reorganization, whereas others may be repaired by accumulation
of additional, but crucial knowledge, a so-called incremental change (Chi, et al, 1994; de Leeuw & Chi, 2003;
Gentner,   Brem, Ferguson,      Markman,    Levidow,    Wolff    &  Forbus,  1997;  Vosniadou    &  Brewer,    1994). For
example, one domain that requires "mere" incremental change is the blood circulation system (Chi, et al, 1994;
de  Leeuw   &  Chi,   2003).   De  Leeuw    and  Chi   (2004)    found that  asking students  to self-explain   a  text to
themselves on the circulatory system lead to incremental changes by replacing one or more false beliefs with the
correct piece(s) of knowledge. Whereas such processes of consensual (co-)construction, which are characterized
by acts of explanation development and elaboration may indeed promote incremental conceptual change, they
may not suffice when a radical reorganization of conceptual knowledge is required (de Leeuw & Chi, 2004).
This is the case for misconceptions that are notoriously resistant to change, such as natural selection (Chi, 2005;
Ohlsson & Bee, 1992).
         So  as  to   distinguish between    processes    of  argumentation  and   explanation  development,    a  coding
scheme   was   developed   to distinguish   moves    that referred  to the epistemic status of  an  idea (argumentative
interlocutory moves) from those that developed ideas (moves that introduced new information to the discussion,
such as those that develop or expand on preceding contributions). An additional coding scheme was developed
to capture interpersonal and socio-cognitive features of the discussion as a whole that may distinguish between
gaining and non-gaining dyads.

Method
Participants

                                                                                                                              1-1
                  A total of thirty-eight  undergraduates    from    the Social  Sciences   and  Humanities    departments   were
       randomly assigned to dyads. The dialogues of three dyads could not be transcribed for technical reasons. The
       remaining 16 dialogues were transcribed and analyzed.

       Procedure
               All students participated in the following sequence of activities: (1) Individual pretest to assess prior
       evolutionary    understanding;    (2)  Instructional  intervention:    screening   of   instructional movie   excerpt    on
       evolutionary theory; (3) Collaborative intervention during which dyads solved two evolutionary problems, one
       warming-up and one transfer item; (4) Individual delayed post-test administered a week later. Pre- and posttests
       were administered to individuals in group format as paper-and-pencil tests and consisted of one warning up item
       and two target items in open format on different evolutionary phenomena. No differences in item difficulty were
       found.   The dialogs  analyzed    are those on   the  transfer item    in the interventional  stage,  according   to which
       subjects were asked to explain the evolution of webbed feet of ducks. All dyads received written instructions to
       engage in dialectical argumentative dialog on their respective solutions and some examples of argumentative
       moves within a discussion. They also received a short excerpt of a critical discussion of four turns between two
       (hypothetical) subjects which, they were told, had participated in the experiment a year earlier. The excerpt was
       handed   to  them  while  they  had   been working    on  the  target  question  (the   "ducks" question) for  at least 30
       seconds, so as to allow them to at least articulate their own solutions to the ducks item. They were told that the
       experimenter `forgot' to give them the item in time and that they had to read it and try to relate to it in their
       discussion.  The   discussion  in the  excerpt  modeled   a   critical discussion    on the ducks   item without  actually
       revealing or hinting at the correct solution (see Asterhan & Schwarz, 2007b, for further details).

       Coding procedures for conceptual change
                  Based on  and  inspired  by   previous  works  ten  qualitatively   different  explanatory   schemas (Ohlsson,
       2002)   were  identified  in students'  explanations   of evolutionary    change.    These  different schemas   were    then
       quantitatively  assessed   on  four   different dimensions:    Whether    evolutionary    change  was   considered   at all,
       whether this change was explained, whether some sort of selection mechanism was used and whether existing
       intra-species   variation was  considered.  Based     on the  appearance    of each   of  these four  dimensions,  the  ten
       qualitatively different explanatory schemas were assigned to one of five different categories. The score for each
       schema   category  was    based  on the  number    of dimensions    that  featured   in the schema   in that category.  An
       additional   null-category   was  added  to distinguish   between     explanations   that did not   consider evolutionary
       change (the lowest category) and those responses that simply did not answer the question at all (by stating that
       they   did  not know   the   answer   or by repeating     the data  given   in   the item   without  providing  additional
       information). This procedure thus yielded six explanatory schema categories with scores ranging between 0-5
       (see Asterhan & Schwarz, 2007b, for more details).
                  Based on this classification scheme the operational definition of what would be considered conceptual
       change   in  evolutionary  theory   was  defined,  and   what  would   account   for  a  "mere"  amelioration  of existing
       understanding: Whereas the generative schemata that underlie two explanatory schemas from the same category
       are qualitatively different, one cannot be considered superior to the other. An intra-categorical shift from one
       schema to another would, thus, not account for conceptual change. We therefore argue that only shifts from one
       explanatory schema category to another involve the substantive re-organization that is described in conceptual
       change theory and research. However, previous research has shown that students' responses to different test
       items are often not consistent in the explanatory schemas they applied on a given test occasion. Asterhan &
       Schwarz (2007a) found that more than a quarter of undergraduates were inconsistent in their use of explanatory
       schemas on the same test. A definition of conceptual change has to take this instability into account. Whereas a
       student who applied an explanatory schema of a one-point higher category on only one of the two test items
       (i.e., a mean    pre- to   delayed    post-test increase  of   .5   points) has   indeed    shown   improved   conceptual
       understanding, we argue that this does not provide sufficient proof for a substantive change. Sufficient proof for
       a more profound reorganization in conceptual understanding, i.e. radical conceptual change (DeLeeuw & Chi,
       2003), was therefore defined as an increase of at least one point from the mean pre-test to mean post-test score.

       Coding procedures of dialogues
                  The emphasis of the protocol transcription was accuracy of verbal content and sequence of turns, rather
       than other discourse properties. Turns were parsed based on speaker-continuous speech. When a speaker was
       interrupted but continued talking, then all the content was considered one turn, and the interruption as another. If
       an interruption caused the speaker to stop from speaking and pick it up later on, then the resumed content was
       considered an additional turn. Two complementary coding schemes were developed with different granularity:
       The first focused on the identification of dialogical moves (micro-level), whereas the goal of the second was to
       characterize  the  nature of  the interaction   as a  whole   on  a number    of dimensions   (macro-level).  The    coding

1-
schemes  were  developed   according     to a   procedure similar to  the verbal  analysis method   described by   Chi
(1997).

Micro-level assessment scheme: Dialogical moves.
         The unit of analysis in this coding scheme is what we refer to as a dialogue unit1. Maximally, these
consist of a  complete  speaker  turn.   It  is not uncommon,     however,  for  a speaker  turn to contain different
statements that refer to different topics or have different interlocutory intentions. For this reason a turn may be
subdivided in different units, based on pragmatic features, that is: when one turn contains more than one of the
dialogical moves described below. Thus, segmentation within a turn is in many ways also the product of the
coding scheme application. When a dialogue unit is interrupted by the other speaker but immediately picked up
again, it will be considered a continuation of the same dialogue unit.
         The  scheme   comprises   a  number    of  non-exhaustive,  but  mutually  exclusive categories that can   be
divided  into two  groups: The  first    group  contains  dialogical moves  of  an argumentative   nature, whereas   a
second group assesses those propositions that introduced new information and inferences into the conversation
in a non-argumentative manner (see Table 1). Argumentative moves are those contributions which content and
intent clearly indicate that the speaker posed a position x, or made a move to strengthen or weaken the epistemic
status of a certain position, x. Non-argumentative, on the other hand, contain an addition to or expanding of the
information   that was provided    in the   preceding dialogue,   provided  that  this addition cannot be  labeled   as
argumentative in nature. It includes both instances of elaboration and of providing and requesting information
(see Table 1). Acts of simple repetition or correction of the content that appeared in preceding contributions,
without significantly adapting or adding new information to it (e.g., paraphrases, corrections of mistakes), are
disregarded.

Table 1: Categories of different dialogical moves.

Category                                                 Description of category
Claim               A proposed solution s (or part of it) to the ducks phenomena
Request for         Request for a solution, or request for an evaluation of a proposed explanation (or part of it)
claim               or to take a stance towards a solution that has been proposed.
Support             Any verbal, reasoned utterance that is intended to strengthen the epistemic status of an
                    explanation x.
Agreement           Overt verbal utterances of unreasoned agreement, a simple reconfirmation of the correctness
                    of (part of) a certain s, provided that it is embedded in a non-critical preceding constellation
Challenge           Any verbal, reasoned utterance intended to weaken the epistemic status of a solution s.
Opposition          Overt verbal utterances of unreasoned disagreement, simple opposition to (part of) a certain
                    solution s without providing any further justifications / reasons of why they think so.
Rebuttal            Response to a "explanation(s)-challenge(to s)" chain that is intended to strengthen the
                    epistemic status of s by weakening the challenge to s
Concession          Any overt verbal expression of agreement in a critical constellation, that is: when the
                    content the discussant agrees to was previously opposed by him/her
Request for         Request for further information or clarification (this excludes questions that are intended in
information         a critical way, to questions the content of a previous statement)
Information         When pure information is provided (usually in response to a question ) so as to clarify
                    something that is not clear, or provide information about a subject unknown to the partner
Elaboration         One of the discussants builds upon the content of own or partner's previous turn in a co-
                    constructive way, he is transacting on own or    the partner's idea in the previous turn(s) or
                    immediate preceding discussion, develops it, continues it
Repetition          The speech repeats the content of previous turns, does not include any new information or
                    inferences compared to preceding discussion content

Macro-level assessment scheme: Interpersonal and socio-cognitive properties.
Each dyadic interaction was characterized on a number of socio-cognitive and interpersonal features:
    1.   Argumentative  structure     of the  dialogue:  Two different   types of  argumentation  were distinguished
         (Asterhan & Schwarz, 2007b): (a) Dialectical argumentation: The dialogue contains more than one
         solution which Ss feel obliged to choose from, or the dialogue contains a single proposed solution that
         is both contested as well as defended; (b) One-sided argumentation: Ss only provide justifications and
         explanations in favor of a certain solution.

1 This is somewhat similar to what Hogan, Nastasi & Pressley (2000) termed a 'statement unit'.

                                                                                                                          1-
           2.   Key issues of change: Whether students discussed the key issue of how the ducks' feet could have
                changed from "feet like those of pigeons" to "webbed feet". It should be noted that giving a Darwinian-
                type solution is not required on this dimension; it only relates to whether they gave the issue some
                explicit consideration, or not.
           3.   Interpersonal distribution  of   solutions: Whether                  the     dialogue  moves    that testified of   different
                explanatory schemas were contributed by different interlocutors, or not (Baker, 2003). Note that a dyad
                might conduct a dialectical argumentative discussion without interpersonal distribution of views.
           4.   Closure: Whether the dyad agreed upon a certain solution at the end of the dialogue or not.
           5.   Symmetry: The extent to which the dyadic partners contributed evenly to the discussion, or not (Baker,
                2002b).  Operationally, symmetry    was defined                 as  the number     of  significant contributions  that were
                proposed by the most contributive partner in the dyad, divided by the total number of such statement
                units in the dialogue.  Significant  contributions               are  those     dialog units  that contain newly    asserted
                information,  i.e., any of the   contributions   categorized                  as claims,   supports, challenges,    rebuttals,
                information and elaborations.

      Results
                Since the nature of the dyadic interaction and the dialogue is the mutual product of both interlocutors,
       the unit for statistical analyses in this design is the dyad and conceptual change should therefore also be defined
       on the dyadic level. In nine of the sixteen dyads at least one of the students attained conceptual change. The
       dialogical features of these nine dyads (hereafter referred to as the gaining dyads) were then compared to those
       of the seven   remaining dyads,  in which   none of   the               dyadic   partners   attained  conceptual  change   (hereafter
       referred to as the non-gaining dyads). Analyses on features of the dialogues' microstructure were conducted with
       Mann-Whitney tests for non-parametric independent samples and are presented in Table 2.

       Table 2. Mean number (and SD) of different dialogical moves for gaining and non-gaining dyads.

                                                                                     Type of dyad
        Dialogical moves                                Gaining dyads                             Non-gaining dyads        p value
                                                               n=9                                         n=7
        Claim                                           2.00   (               .87)                1.43  (1.33)                ns
        Request claim                                   2.22   (1.71)                               .71  ( .76)                ns
        Agreement                                       5.89   (3.89)                              5.57  (3.78)                ns
        Support                                         4.11   (3.51)                              3.86  (2.85)                ns
        Challenge                                       5.33   (1.33)                              1.43  (2.51)                .013
        Rebuttal                                        3.56   (1.33)                              2.85  (3.86)                ns
        Opposition                                      1.00   (1.12)                               .57  ( .98)                ns
        Concession                                      1.00   (1.32)                               .29  ( .49)                ns
        Elaboration                                     7.33   (3.84)                              8.43  (5.47)                ns
        Request information                             1.11   (1.27)                               .86  (1.07)                ns
        Information                                     1.33   (1.87)                               .29  ( .49)                ns
        Total moves of dialectical argumentation a    10.89    (5.84)                              4.86  (3.44)                .024
        Total moves of   consensual constructionof explanation b17.33(8.87)                       17.86 (8.63)                 ns
        Total number of dialogue units                  2.44   (2.96)                              1.14  (1.46)                ns
         a Total number of oppositions, challenges, rebuttals and concessions in a dialogue.
         b Total number of supports, agreements and elaborations in a dialogue

       The results presented in Table 2 show that the dialogues of dyads in which at least one dyadic partner attained
       conceptual change were characterized by a larger number of claims, requests for claims, challenges, rebuttals,
       oppositions and concessions. More importantly, they did not differ in the number of supports and agreements
       that were found in the dialogue. As for the dialogical moves in the non-argumentative category, non-gaining
       dyads were found to have made more elaborations, an about equal number of requests for information and less
       informative moves. However, the within-group variance was relatively large on most measures and only the
       number of challenges reached significance.
                This shortcoming aside, the pattern that emerges from these finding is that gaining dyads made a larger
       number   of argumentative    moves  that  are of a   dialectical               nature     (challenges, rebuttals, concessions    and
       oppositions). Agreements and supports, on the other hand, are argumentative moves that by themselves are not
       of a dialectical nature (even though they may appear in a dialectical constellation alongside dialectical moves),
       whereas propositions of and request for claims could be interpreted as either. Elaborations have in common with

1-
agreements   and  supports   that  they  are involved  in  processes   of consensual   explanation  construction.   Even
though  an  elaboration  is an  act of  explanation  development    and   a support or agreement    acts  of   explanation
validation, they are all of a consensual nature in relation to the explanation or claim that was proposed.        Based
on  these perceptions,   two   aggregate  measures   were   compiled,  each  considered   to capture   certain  dialogical
moves that are typical of two different socio-cognitive processes: (1) Total number of the dialogical moves that
are typical of dialectical argumentation (consisting of challenges, oppositions, rebuttals and concessions); (2)
Total number     of  the  dialogical  moves    that  are  typical  of  consensual,    non-dialectical  construction    and
solidification of an explanation (consisting of supports, agreements and elaborations). Whereas the non-gaining
and  gaining  dyads  equally   engaged   in  consensual   construction,   gaining dyads   were   found   to have  used  a
substantively larger number of dialogical moves that testify of dialectical or critical reasoning.
          The gaining and non-gaining dyads were then compared on each of the macro-dimensions (see Table
3). The data in Table 3 show that the interactions of gaining dyads were more likely to be characterized by
interpersonal distribution of explanatory schemas among discussants and be of a dialectical nature. However,
the dialogues  of gaining   and   non-gaining  dyads   did  not  significantly differ in whether   the partners   reached
closure at the end the discussion and whether they discussed the critical issue of how the duck's feet could have
changed.

Table 3.  Macro-level dialogue properties of gaining and non-gaining dyads.

                                                                             Type of dyad
Dialogue characteristic                                        Gaining dyads        Non-gaining dyads          2 (N=16)
                                                                    (n=9)                  (n=7)
Interpersonal distribution of        Not distributed                   0schemasDistributed9    61              12.34***
Key issue of change                  Not discussedDiscussed            09                      34                4.75
Closure at end of discussion         No closureClosure                 18                      16                 .04
Argumentative macrostructure         One-sidedDialectical              09                      52               9.35**

          As for symmetry in the collaborating partners' contributions to the discussion, a Mann-Whitney test for
nonparametric independent samples yielded the following: In dialogues of dyads in which at least one attained
conceptual  change,   the  highest  contributing   partner  accounted   for  54%  of  the total  number     of significant
contributions on    average   (SD  =  5%),   compared    to 67%    for dyads   who  did  not   change  their   conceptual
understanding  (SD   =   13%).  In  other words,     significant contributions were   more   evenly   distributed among
interlocutors in dialogues of gaining dyads, than in non-gaining dyads. However, this difference failed to reach
significance.
          Since in spite of the task design, five dyads did not engage in dialectical argumentation, the possibility
was tested that this may have been the result of random pairing: It is possible that a larger number of the one-sided
dyads held similar pre-conceptions on evolution than the dialectical dyads did. However, an examination of the
students' pretest levels of conceptual understanding revealed that the one-sided dyads were not more likely to have
similar pre-conceptions (60%) than the dyads that managed to conduct a dialectical discussion (64%).

Discussion
          The goal of this paper was to increase our understanding of processes of conceptual change through
peer interaction. The focus was on student dialogue and the condition investigated was argumentation within a
cognitive conflict-inspired task design. Dialogue and interaction features of dyads of which at least one of the
students attained conceptual change were compared to those of dyads in which none of them did. The results of
these quantitative dialogue analyses clearly identified processes of dialectical argumentation as a crucial factor
for achieving    conceptual    change   through   peer dialogue.   Consensual     co-construction   and   elaboration   of
explanations, on the other hand, could by itself not predict consequent substantive changes. In addition, the
different perspectives   that  are  discussed  in  dialectical   argumentation  should   preferably   be  represented  by
different dialog partners.
          In many ways it is surprising that processes of consensual co-construction of explanations, by elaborating,
justifying and supporting explanations, were not found to contribute to radical conceptual change. The acts of
explanation  and  of arguing   in  favor of  that explanation  are both   epistemic activities (Ohlsson,  1995)   that are
thought  to lead students   to externalize,  clarify and  organize  their knowledge   (de Vries,   et al, 2002).  Indeed,
empirical research has provided extensive evidence that explanatory and elaboration-based activities promote both
declarative learning and problem solving (e.g., van Boxtel, et al, 2000; Chi et al, 1994; Coleman, 1998; King &

                                                                                                                             1-
       Rosenshine, 1993; Okada & Simon, 1997; Webb, 1989). However, these studies did not study its role in radical
       conceptual  change.   In  a sense,  the findings   presented  in  this paper  confirm  the expectations  articulated   by  de
       Leeuw and Chi (2003) that (self-) explanation may not be sufficient to bring about radical conceptual change.
       Without the critical examination of naïve theories and consideration of different perspectives, students may merely
       elaborate  and  strengthen   their  initial misconceptions,     even within   an environment    that is  designed   to elicit
       cognitive conflict. By asking students to engage in acts of explanation, elaboration and justification, they may
       become aware of flaws in their naïve theories, which in turn may trigger dialectical argumentation. However, in the
       majority of cases this will not occur naturally (Asterhan & Schwarz, 2007b) and is probably contingent on explicit
       instructions, particular task designs, individual capabilities and practice.
                 Subsequent qualitative analyses of the sixteen dialogues that were analyzed in this paper confirmed the
       necessity   of engagement      in  reasoned   argumentation      on  the  strengths  and   weaknesses    of   one  or  more
       explanations   (Asterhan,   2007).   However,   it also revealed    that it  was not a sufficient   condition  by  itself. In
       particular, without   episodes    of consensual    co-construction     students  did not  seem   to  be  able  to make     the
       cognitive leap. To some extent, this corroborates with findings by Chan, et al (1997) who reported that only
       when conflict was followed by knowledge construction did students obtain learning gains. Moreover, not just
       any form of engagement in dialectical argumentation was found to promote conceptual change: Students will
       have to juxtapose   the   different  explanations  that   are proposed    and  engage  in  co-constructive  criticism:  The
       episodes of dialectical argumentation in most of the gaining dyads' dialogues were characterized by a pleasant
       and constructive atmosphere, not by interpersonal conflict or antagonism. In some of the dialogues students
       employed sophisticated techniques, such as spontaneous role-playing and posing "what if..." questions, in order
       to critically  challenge  different  ideas   without   explicitly  attacking  the other   or his/her    views  (Asterhan   &
       Schwarz, in press). This presumably allowed them to critically explore different perspectives, but preserve a
       productive   and constructive     atmosphere   of  collaborative    problem-solving   and  reach  a  better   understanding
       therefore.
                 Research into conceptual change is rooted in two quite different research traditions: In developmental
       psychology, research aims at meticulously describing recurring and stable differences in knowledge structures
       of different age cohorts, whereas in instructional psychology and science education the focus is on the effects of
       instructional designs on students' conceptual knowledge. Neither of these research traditions, however, directly
       investigates conceptual change as it happens. Even though this deficit was already observed by diSessa and
       Sherin (1998) almost a decade ago, the field of conceptual change still lacks research that directly observes
       these processes. Detailed analyses of think-aloud and dialogue protocols can provide valuable insights into the
       process and    nature  of conceptual    change,    as the present    article and deLeeuw     &  Chi  (2004)    have shown.
       Alternatively, one may consider the application of micro-genetic designs to the field of conceptual knowledge.
       Micro-genetic methods of investigation were originally developed within the field of procedural and strategy
       learning (e.g., Siegler, 1996). However, a recent study by Opfer & Siegler (2004) has convincingly shown its
       applicability and relevance for the study of concept learning. In any case, independently of the particular method
       that is adopted, such direct investigations into the processes of conceptual change may provide new insights into
       the processes of conceptual change.

      References
       Asterhan, C. S. C. (2007). The role of argumentation in concept learning within the socio-cognitive paradigm:
                 The case of evolutionary theory. Unpublished doctoral dissertation. Hebrew University of Jerusalem.
       Asterhan, C. S. C., & Schwarz, B. B. (in press). Peer argumentation that fosters concept learning: Maintaining
                 the  balance  between    critical dialogue  and  interpersonal     harmony. To   appear   in: B. B.  Schwarz,    T.
                 Dreyfuss,   &  R. Hershkowitz     (Eds), Guided     construction   of knowledge    in the  classroom.   Advanced
                 Series in Learning and Instruction. Amsterdam: Elsevier Press.
       Asterhan, C. S. C., & Schwarz, B. B. (2007a). Conceptual change in evolutionary theory: The effects of scripted
                 argumentative     monologue   in   peer  settings.  In: S.   Vosniadou,  D.  Kayser   &   A.  Protopapas    (Eds),
                 Proceedings of EuroCogSci07, The European Cognitive Science Conference (143-148). East Sussex:
                 Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
       Asterhan, C. S. C., & Schwarz, B. B. (2007b). The effects of monological and dialogical argumentation on
                 concept learning in evolutionary theory. Journal of Educational Psychology, 99, 626-639.
       Baker, M. (2003). Computer-mediated interactions for the co-elaboration of scientific notions. In: J. Andriessen,
                 M.   Baker, &     D. Suthers  (Eds.),   Arguing    to learn:  Confronting   cognitions  in computer-supported
                 collaborative learning environments. Utrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
       Baker, M.J. (2002a). Argumentative interactions, discursive operations and learning to model in science. In P.
                 Brna,  M. Baker,   K.   Stenning   &  A.  Tiberghien    (Eds.), The   Role  of Communication      in Learning    to
                 Model, 303-324.    Mahwah N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
       Baker, M.J. (2002b). Forms of cooperation in dyadic problem-solving. Revue d'Intelligence Artificielle, 16(4-5),
                 587-620.

1-
van  Boxtel,  C.,  van  der  Linden, J., &  Kanselaar,  G.    (2000). Collaborative learning   and   the elaboration   of
         conceptual knowledge. Learning & Instruction, 10, 311-330.
Chan, C., Burtis, J., & Bereiter, C. (1997). Knowledge building as a mediator of conflict in conceptual change.
         Cognition & Instruction, 15, 1-40.
Chi, M. T. H. (2005). Commonsense conceptions of emergent processes: Why some misconceptions are robust.
         Journal of the Learning Sciences, 14, 161-199.
Chi, M. T. H. (1997). Quantifying qualitative analyses of verbal data: A practical guide. Journal of the Learning
         Sciences, 6, 271 - 315.
Chi,  M.   T. H.,   DeLeeuw,    N.,  Chiu, M.,    &  Lavancher,   C.   (1994). Eliciting   self-explanations   improves
         understanding. Cognitive Science, 18, 439-477.
Coleman,   E.   B.  (1998).  Using  explanatory   knowledge    during  problem  solving    in science.   Journal   of the
         Learning Sciences, 7 (3&4), 387-427.
DiSessa,  A.  A.   &  Sherin, B. L.  ().  What    changes  in conceptual   change?  International  Journal     of Science
         Education, 20, 1155-1191.
Doyle, J.  A.,  &   Sinatra, G.  M.  (1998). Reconceptualizing     change  in  cognitive construction    of  knowledge.
         Educational Psychologist, 33(2/3), 109-128.
Gentner, D., Brem, S., Ferguson, R. W., Markman, A. B., Levidow, B. B., Wolff, P. and Forbus, K. D. (1997).
         Analogical reasoning and conceptual change: a case study of Johannes Kepler. Journal of the Learning
         Sciences, 6, 3-40.
Keil, F. C. (2006). Explanation and understanding. Annual Review of Psychology, 57, 227-254.
King,  A.  &    Rosenshine,   B. (1993).   Effects  of  guided  cooperative    questioning  on  children's   knowledge
         construction. Journal of Experimental Education, 61(2), 127-148.
deLeeuw, N. & Chi, M.T.H. (2003). Self-explanation: Enriching a situation model or repairing a domain model?
         In: G. Sinatra & P. Pintrich. Intentional conceptual change. Hillsdale, NY: Erlbaum (p. 55-78).
Limon,  M.    (2001).  On the   cognitive  conflict as an  instructional strategy  for conceptual  change:     A  critical
         appraisal. Learning & Instruction, 11, 357-380.
Ohlsson, S. (1996). Learning to do and learning to understand: A lesson and a challenge for cognitive modeling.
         In: P. Reimann & H. Spada (Eds), Learning in humans and machines: Towards an interdisciplinary
         learning science (37-62). Oxford: Elsevier Science Ltd.
Ohlsson,  S.  (2002).  Generating   and  understanding    qualitative explanations. In: J. Otero,  J.A.  Leon,    & A.C.
         Graesser (Eds), The psychology of science text comprehension (91-128). Mahwah, NJ, US: Lawrence
         Erlbaum.
Ohlsson, S. & Bee, N. V. (1992). The effect of expository text on students' explanations of biological evolution.
         OERI Report. Learning Research and Development Center, University of Pittsburgh.
Okada, T. & Simon, H.A. (1997). Collaborative discovery in a scientific domain. Cognitive Science, 21, 109-146.
Opfer, J. E. & Siegler, R. S. (2004). Revisiting preschoolers' living things concept: A microgenetic analysis of
         conceptual change in basic biology. Cognitive Psychology, 49, 301-332.
Piaget, J. (1985). The equilibiration of cognitive structures. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Rogoff, B. (1998). Cognition as a collaborative process. In: W. Damon (Series Ed) and D. Kuhn (Vol Ed),
         Handbook of child psychology, vol. 4, 5th Ed (679-744). NewYork: Wiley.
Schwarz,   B.   B., &   Linchevski,  L.   (2007).   The role   of task  design  and  of  argumentation      in cognitive
         development during peer interaction. The case of proportional reasoning. To appear in Learning and
         Instruction.
Schwarz, B. B., Neuman, Y., & Biezuner, S. (2000). Two wrongs may make a right...if they argue together!
         Cognition & Instruction, 18, 461-494.
Siegler, R.S. (1996). Emerging Minds: The process of change in children's thinking. Oxford: Oxford University
         Press.
Vosniadou, S. & Brewer, W. F. (1994). Mental models of the day / night cycle. Cognitive Science, 18, 123-183.
de  Vries,  E., Lund,   K.,   &  Baker,   M. (2002).    Computer-mediated      epistemic   dialogue: Explanation      and
         argumentation as vehicles for understanding scientific notions. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 11,
         63-103.
Walton,  D.  (2006).  Fundamentals   of  critical argumentation:  Critical reasoning   and argumentation.    New   York,
         NY: Cambridge University Press.
Webb,  N.M.     (1989). Peer   interaction and    learning in small   groups.  International  Journal    of Educational
         Research, 13, 21-39.

Acknowledgements
This research was supported in part by Israel Foundations Trustee grant 27.35. The author would like to express
her gratitude to Oded Armoni for assistance in coding procedures.

                                                                                                                             1-
