        The Effects of Expertise and an Eye Movement Cue on Self-
                             Generated Self-Assessment Criteria

               Danny Kostons, Tamara van Gog, & Fred Paas, Open University of the Netherlands
                    Email: Danny.Kostons@ou.nl, Tamara.vangog@ou.nl, Fred.Paas@ou.nl

         Abstract: This study investigates whether replays of records of eye movements made during
         the task performance process, can be a useful cue for self-assessment, and it aims to uncover
         which aspects of their performance participants at different levels of expertise consider when
         they are asked to engage in self-assessment while thinking aloud.The present study suggests
         that  at least for  somewhat    advanced individuals,   performance  process cues could stimulate
         self-assessment, but that this does not apply to novices.

         This  study    investigated  whether    replays of  records  of  eye  movements   made   during    the  task
performance process could be a useful cue for self-assessment. Self-assessment is very difficult for learners,
especially novice learners, due to their lack of expertise. On the one hand, they experience a high cognitive load
imposed by the learning tasks (Sweller, Van Merriënboer, & Paas, 1998; Van Merriënboer & Sweller, 2005),
which may make it difficult to monitor their performance. On the other hand, even if they would be able to
monitor  their performance,    they  might  fall prey to the "Double    Curse of Incompetence",  that  is, "... skills
necessary to recognize competence are extremely close if not identical to those needed to produce competent
responses" (Dunning, Heath, & Suls, 2003, p. 73).
         This study, in the domain of biology, aimed to uncover which aspects of their performance participants
at different levels of expertise considered when they were asked to engage in self-assessment while thinking
aloud, either with or without a cue of the performance process. The cue used here, was a replay of a record of
eye movements and mouse and keyboard operations made during task performance (cf. the cue used by Van
Gog, Paas, Van Merriënboer, & Witte, 2005; see Figure 1.). Participants were given no lists of criteria, because
we intended    to investigate  what  they   spontaneously   considered  when  engaging  in self-assessment.  It  was
hypothesized that: a) the cue is helpful for novice participants to report about the performance process, whereas
advanced participants (higher expertise) do not need a cue to be able to report on the process, and b) the cue
may or may not help novices evaluate their performance process, but will indeed help advanced participants
(with higher   expertise)   evaluate their  performance,  which    will show  not only  in enhanced    frequency  of
evaluations, but also in the criteria used.
         Forty adults volunteered to participate in this study. A 2 x 2 factorial design was used with `Expertise'
(Lower vs. Higher) and `Self-assessment' (Cued vs. Non-cued). After each of the four tasks, participants were
required to give a self-assessment of their performance, while thinking aloud (Ericsson & Simon, 1993), either
with or without the cue depending on their assigned condition. The cue was recorded and replayed with a Tobii
1750 Eye Tracker running at 50Hz, using the screen capture mode in the Clearview 2.7.1 software. Participants'
verbalizations were recorded using Audacity 1.2.6 software.
         After the experiment, the verbal protocols were transcribed and segmented based on meaningful units
(i.e., partial, whole, or multiple sentences). The segments were coded using a coding scheme with three main
categories: a) Survey,   b)  Action, and    c) Monitoring/Assessment.    The  category Monitoring/Assessment     was
further divided   into  four "criteria": 1) Adequacy:    further divided into being either positive or negative;  2)
Efficiency; 3) Affect, also divided into being either positive or negative, and 4) Difficulty.
         In accordance with the hypotheses, the results seem to suggest that lower expertise participants indeed
have difficulty remembering the details of the performance process due to higher cognitive load, and that the
cue allows them to review and remark on those task processes. However, these findings also provide support for
the assumption that some expertise is required in order to be able to evaluate ones own performance and that the
cue can be a helpful support tool under those conditions. In general, though, not many of the possible self-
assessment criteria were used, especially by the lower expertise participants. The present study suggests that at
least for somewhat advanced individuals, performance process cues could stimulate self-assessment, but that
this does not apply to novices.

                                                                                                                          3-
          Figure 1. Example of a Cue. Participants saw a red dot indicating their fixations moving across the screen,
                      followed by a 1000 ms gaze trail indicating the movement during the last second.

      References
       Dunning, D., Heath, C., & Suls, J. M. (2003). Flawed self-assessment: implications for health, education, and
                the workplace. Psychological Science in the Public Interest, 5(3), 69-106.
       Ericsson, K. A., & Simon, H. A. (1993). Protocol Analysis: Verbal reports as data (2nd ed.). Cambridge, MA:
                MIT.
       Sweller, J., Van Merriënboer, J. J. G., &  Paas, F.  (1998). Cognitive architecture   and instructional design.
                Educational Psychology Review, 10, 251-295.
       Van Gog, T., Paas, F., Van Merriënboer, J. J. G., & Witte, P. (2005). Uncovering the problem-solving process:
                cued retrospective reporting versus concurrent and retrospective reporting. Journal of Experimental
                Psychology: Applied, 11, 237-244.
       Van  Merriënboer,  J. J. G., &   Sweller, J. (2005). Cognitive  load theory and      complex learning:  Recent
                developments and future directions. Educational Psychology Review, 17, 147-177.

3-
