                                             Acquiring Mastery
              B. Krisler, R. Alterman, Brandeis University, Computer Science, Waltham, MA 02454
                            Email: bkrisler@cs.brandeis.edu, alterman@cs.brandeis.edu

          Abstract:   Many    opportunities  for   attaining mastery  exist  within a typical   workflow.   By
          leveraging   focus-shifts   and providing    the user with   complete   control  over   the learning
          process,   both  critical elements   of  any  "as-you-go"   learning  method,    the  HotKeyCoach
          learning   model  demonstrates   that the  production  paradox  can  be  overcome    by experienced
          computer users.

Training For Mastery
          After formal   training,  a professional's  education  continues   during on-the-job  activities. Expertise is
achieved   by learning   case-by-case   how  to  apply  a  professional framework     to a problem.    Learning  to  use
efficiently the appropriate technologies requires mastery.
          Mastery, a state of "knowing" how to productively work through the technology, is a problem of skill
acquisition.  To achieve it requires an understanding of the conceptual model that underlies an application, i.e.
learning the operations and methods that best apply to different kinds of situations.       As the user becomes more
efficient and knowledgeable about the articulation work it takes to use the application, she can remain within the
flow   of the activity  for longer  periods  of interrupted   time. By  developing  a  deep  conceptual  model   of  the
system, the amount of work required to accomplish goals diminishes, resulting in a more efficient utilization of
the system.
          Learning   to master  work-mediated      technology, however,   is complicated   by  the production    paradox
(Carroll & Rosson, 1987): learning more effective and efficient methods for using technology results in mastery
in the long-term; however, spending time to acquire mastery in the short-term interferes with productivity. To
preserve the flow of activity, the user must be able to concentrate on her activity with minimal interruption
(Bederson, 2004).
          The tool we present, HotKeyCoach (HKC) develops a model for the incremental attainment of mastery
that is   integrated into the work    activity  of the user  and minimizes    task  interruption.  HKC      provides the
individual with an opportunity to gradually acquire mastery of technology during the course of her normal work
activity, while ensuring she maintains complete control of the learning process. In support of the attainment of
mastery, the HKC model turns user interface actions into learning events (VanLehn, 1996), leveraging the many
learning  opportunities   for attaining   mastery  of  the work-mediated    technology.    The  learning  events  either
introduce new material or provide the learner with the capability to practice previously introduced material.

Minimal Task Interruption & Control
                     Bødker, (Bødker, 1995), defines two types of interruptions that redirect the user's attention:
breakdowns and focus-shifts.    The key difference between a breakdown and a focus-shift is the affect upon the
flow of the central activity.  A breakdown occurs when something unexpected happens and redirects the focus
of attention towards a newly created activity, whereas a focus-shift, a less severe interruption, usually occurs
when a subconscious operation becomes a conscious activity, such as the articulation of a point or procedure.
The HKC model of learning introduces learning events during focus-shifts. Upon the introduction of a learning
event, the user has the option to ignore the introduced event, or she can selectively learn a new concept at its
moment of relevancy, preserving the flow of the activity.
          For example, in attempting to change the indentation for a paragraph, the user must perform multiple
steps.  To satisfy the formatting goal, she selects via the mouse the menu operation for formatting a paragraph,
causing a focus-shift.    The focus-shift creates an opportunity for a learning event by introducing the keyboard
shortcut  for the  executed   activity.   There  are  numerous   learning events   of this sort available   in a typical
workflow.     If every time the user selects an operation from a menu, she had the option to learn an alternate,
more efficient method for achieving the same goal, over time she will develop mastery at using the application.
Leveraging these learning opportunities has multiple benefits.        The more the user performs an operation, the
more opportunity she has to achieve mastery of that operation leading to a reduction of future work.           And, her
learning is highly contextualized: learning is directly associated with the current activity.
          To preserve the occurrence of learning events as focus-shifts and not as breakdowns, the user should
have   complete control   over  the   system at  all times.   There  should  be no  surprising  actions or  unexpected
behaviors.   The HKC model does not usurp the user as the locus of control.         Once the user is presented with a
new concept (see Figure 1), she has a choice of either practicing the concept at its moment of introduction or to
ignore it and continue with her work.     When the user chooses to practice the new concept, HKC will validate the

                                                                                                                            3-3
       sequence, dismissing the display if it was executed correctly.      Practice of a skill leads to speedup (Anderson,
       1993) in the acquisition of that skill.  If the user mistyped the sequence, a notification indicating the sequence
       was invalid is displayed.  If the user decides to ignore learning the concept for this instance, she can either click
       anywhere on the screen or tap the return key to dismiss the display.    In an effort to provide complete control, she
       also has the option of ignoring all future occurrences of the concept by selecting a checkbox in the display
       window.

                                      Figure 1.   Example of an introduced learning event.

      Evaluation
                 To test our model of learning, we developed HKC and made it available to the Brandeis University
       population.  Nine anonymous participants used the software for an average of 52 days.         To determine the usage
       frequency of HKC, we calculated the percentage of time our software was used as a ratio of the total days
       installed to actual  days  of usage,  and  divided   the results into three usage   levels: used daily  (>90%),    used
       regularly (50-90%), and used intermittently (<50%).        Based   on  this metric, we   determined  that  67%   of our
       subjects were regular users of HKC, evidence that our model did not interfere with the subjects' main work
       tasks.  That more than half of the subjects continued to use and learn on a regular basis throughout the study is
       evidence that the subjects had not exhausted the learning benefits of HKC, demonstrating both its viability as a
       learning model and its effectiveness in overcoming the production paradox.
                 To produce evidence of learning, we computed the ratio of mouse to keyboard usage for all operations
       per subject,  and  divided the data   into quarters.   A  mouse-performed      operation during  the first quarter  that
       resulted in a keyboard-executed operation in the last quarter signifies learning.     If by the fourth quarter of our
       study   the subjects were  using  the shortcut  for  a given interface  operation   more  than  50%  of the  time,  we
       considered that an example of learning.     During our analysis period, the subjects acquired an average of 8 new
       operations;  one  user acquired    21 new   operations.    Across  all subjects    there where   25  operations  at  an
       intermediate stage of learning; the users had some success at using the keyboard shortcut, but their use of the
       keyboard had not reached the 50% threshold.         For a more detailed analysis of our study, refer to (Krisler &
       Alterman, 2007).
                 The production paradox explains why users frequently fail to achieve mastery of the technology that
       mediates their work.   The learning method presented in this paper attempts to circumvent that paradox.             Our
       results  demonstrate  that by  leveraging   focus-shifts and providing     the user with  complete   control over   the
       learning process, incremental attainment of mastery can be achieved. The results of our study show that the
       HKC model of learning facilitates the learner in transitioning from an intermediate skill level to an expert level
       via the acquisition of keyboard shortcuts.  This observation was consistent across all subjects in our study.

      References
       Anderson, J. R. (1993). Rules of the Mind: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
       Bederson, B. B. (2004). Interfaces for staying in the flow (Vol. 5): ACM Press.
       Bødker,   S. (1995). Applying   activity theory to   video analysis:  how   to make  sense  of video  data  in human-
                 computer   interaction. Context   and consciousness:    activity  theory and   human-computer     interaction
                 table of contents, 147-174.
       Carroll, J. M., & Rosson, M. B. (1987). 5 Paradox of the Active User. Interfacing Thought: Cognitive Aspects of
                 Human-Computer Interaction, 31.
       Krisler,     B.,   &      Alterman,      R.     (2007).    Acquiring       Mastery,      TR-CS-07-267       (pp.    8).
                 http://www.cs.brandeis.edu/~alterman/selected.references.html: Brandeis University.
       VanLehn, K. (1996). Cognitive skill acquisition. Annu Rev Psychol, 47, 513-539.

3-
