Student teachers' discursive voices of the meaning of digital case
                          material for their professional learning
                  Kristiina Kumpulainen, University of Helsinki, CICERO Learning, P.O.Box 9,
                          FI-00014, Helsinki, Finland, kristiina.kumpulainen@helsinki.fi
                 Auli Toom, University of Helsinki, Faculty of Behavioural Sciences, P.O.Box 9,
                                 FI-00014 Helsinki, Finland, auli.toom@helsinki.fi
                     Merja Saalasti, University of Oulu, Faculty of Education, P.O.Box 2000,
                                  FI-90014 Oulu, Finland, merja.saalasti@oulu.fi
        Mari Puroila, University of Oulu, Faculty of Education, P.O.Box 2000, FI-90014 Oulu, Finland

        Abstract: This study explores student teachers' discursive voices regarding the meaning of
        digital case material for their professional learning in teacher education. The analysis of the
        students' reflective essays shows that future teachers hold a repertoire of positions via which
        they inscribe their relationship with technology. These positions are important to acknowledge
        since they strongly mediate the potential enabling role of digital case material for teachers'
        professional growth.

Introduction
        The uptake of digital media has provided teacher education with broadened landscapes to support the
professional  development     of teachers. In    particular, the  potential of  digital  video  telling cases  has been
recognized    in their power  to create   social and  discursive  spaces  for  pre-service  and  in-service  teachers to
investigate  and  reflect upon   teaching and  learning  practices  in  local  and distant classrooms   (Brophy,   2004;
Lampert, & Ball, 1998). Moreover, the investigation and reflection upon video telling cases in socially-shared
learning situations has been identified to bring to the surface the tacit knowledge and beliefs student teachers
hold of their professional practices as well as to support the integration of theoretical and practical knowledge
(Dolk, den Hertog, & Gravemeijer, 2003; Kumpulainen, 2004; Toom, 2006).
        Although there has been a strong interest in developing and using cases in teacher education, there is
relatively little empirical research currently available on the impact of digital video telling cases for reflective
practice and teacher learning. Now that digital technology has brought up new opportunities for inquiry-oriented
teacher education, it is even more obvious that research in this field is necessary.
        This     study examines  student  teachers'   positions   towards the  application  of digital  case material in
teacher education. Bahktinian concept of voice has guided the analysis of the students' positions as constructed
into being in their reflective essays (Bahktin 1987; Wertsch, 1991). Theoretically, this study draws on social
learning theories (Wenger, 1998; Wertsch, 1991) as well as on discourse analysis (Bahktin, 1987).

The study
        The    empirical  study  discussed  in   this chapter  is embedded     in two mathematics    pedagogy   courses
organized as a part of a Finnish international teacher education program. Altogether 37 students participated in
the courses. The mean age of the students was 24. The courses purposefully employed digital video telling cases
from a European data corpus on teaching and learning of mathematics. The courses were based over nine weeks.
The instructional methods used during the course included inquiry learning, collaborative investigations and
reflections, as well as the construction of personal reflective essays.
        The study reported in this paper is based on the student teachers' reflective essays written at the end of
the course. In the essays, the students were asked to consider their aims and expectations of the course, the
course as   a whole,   their collaboration and   the  meaning    of the  course   and its technological  tools for their
professional learning.
        In this study, we focus on the analysis of 74 reflective essays, written by 37 student teachers. The data
analysis was conducted via qualitative content analysis and discourse analysis (Bahktin, 1987; Wertsch, 1991).
In the analysis,   attention was  paid  to the   student teachers'     discursive voices  that focused  on   technology,
especially on the role of digital case material in supporting their professional development. The analysis was
supported by NVivo program.

Results
        The analysis of the student teachers' reflective essays revealed three distinct themes describing their
relationship  with  technologies.  These   are:  1)   Technology    as a tool, 2)  technology   as a mediator,  and   3)
technology as an enabler.

                                                                                                                           3-
                The data analysis also reveals four various uses of language, i.e. discursive voices that the students
       used when    describing their   relationships with    digital case    technology:    Practical, Critical, Collective and
       Developmental voice. Figure 1 summarizes these voices and highlights their intersecting nature.

                                                         TECHNOLOGY AS A
                                                        Tool ­ Mediator - Enabler

                                                                   Practical
                                                                     voice

                                                      Critical                  Collective
                                                       voice                      voice

                                                                Developmental
                                                                     voice

                               Figure 1. Student teachers' discursive voices towards technology.

      Discussion
                In this study, the Practical voice was the most dominant voice. The possibility to investigate authentic
       classroom practice was seen as highly important by the students. The importance of collective discussion and
       sharing of viewpoints was emphasised in the student teachers' Collective voice. The Critical voice illuminates
       opposing and argumentative positions that the student teachers had towards digital case technology and its use
       for professional learning. Within this voice, the students criticized the organisation of the course or insufficient
       support. Also the contents of the learning environments were criticized and the meaning of digital technology
       for teachers' professional development     was  questioned.     When    using    the  Developmental  voice,  the student
       teachers considered their professionalism and its growth via the use of digital technology. The students felt that
       they had learned something or that they had realised something that they had not considered before. This voice
       was really positive and honest in relation to the students' developmental needs. The Collective voice appeared
       often together with this voice.

      Conclusions
                The results of this study illuminate the student teachers' multi-voiced positions towards digital case
       material for  their professional learning.    These   personal  and    culturally-bound   voices  highlight  the student
       teachers' attitudes, values and expectations of the use of digital case material for their professional learning.
       These voices are important to acknowledge since they strongly mediate the potential enabling role of digital
       case material for their professional growth.

      References
       Bakhtin, M. (1987). Speech genres and other late essays. Austin: University of Texas Press.
       Brophy, J. (2004). Introduction. In J. Brophy (Ed.), Using video in teacher education. Advances in research on
        teaching, Vol. 10. New York: Elsevier Science.
       Dolk, M., den Hertog, J., & Gravemeijer, K. (2003). Using multimedia cases for educating the primary school
                mathematics teacher educator: a design study. International Journal of Educational Research, 37(2),
                161-178.
       Kumpulainen, K. (2004). Helping teachers to frame constructivism as practice: The possibilities of case-based
       learning with digital media. In N. Hall & D. Springate (Eds.), Occasional Papers of the European Teacher
                Education Network (ETEN) (pp. 71-85). Greenwich: University of Greenwich Press.
       Lampert, M., & Ball, D. L. (1998). Teaching, multimedia, and mathematics. Investigations of real practice.
                New York: Teachers College Press.
       Toom, A. (2006). Tacit pedagogical knowing: At the core of teacher's professionality. Research Reports 276.
                University of Helsinki: Department of Applied Sciences of Education.
       Wertsch, J. (1991). Voices of the mind: A sociocultural approach to mediated action. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
                University Press.
       Wenger, E. (1998). Communities of practice: learning, meaning and identity. Cambridge: Cambridge University
                Press.

3-
