    Promoting the Drawing of Inferences in Collaboration: Insights
                               from Two Experimental Studies
           Anne Meier & Hans Spada, Department of Psychology, University of Freiburg, Germany
           Email: anne.meier@psychologie.uni-freiburg.de, hans.spada@psychologie.uni-freiburg.de

        Abstract:    Collaborative  problem-solving     tasks often require   learners to  co-construct  new
        knowledge by drawing inferences from distributed information. We investigated the impact of
        information distribution and instructional support on university students' collaboration in such
        tasks. Two    experiments  using   specifically designed  tasks  show  a  robust   negative  effect of
        distributed information on inferences. Detailed analyses of collaborators' discussions in Study
        1  highlight  the importance   of  specific inference  patterns.  Study   2 aimed   to  support these
        patterns of collaborative reasoning in a training phase, and tested the effects of support in a
        test phase. Two support measures were realized: written information on task difficulties and
        collaboration strategies, and an inference tutoring tool providing feedback and prompts based
        on  an online  assessment   of students'   collaboration. Results   show  that reflected   experience
        with the training task improved subsequent unsupported collaboration. The best performance
        was achieved when the tutoring tool had been available during the training task.

        In groups, the knowledge relevant for solving a given task is often distributed across group members.
In fact, complementary knowledge is seen as one reason why groups are more effective than individuals: It is
generally assumed that    "two  heads  are  better than one"  in solving  complex   problems,    and thus   that  groups
holding complementary     knowledge    will outperform   individual  problem   solvers  (Kerr   &  Tindale,   2004). In
pedagogical contexts, it is expected that students will learn from collaborating on joint tasks that require them to
exchange and integrate complementary knowledge or viewpoints (Aronson, Balney, Stephan, Sikes, & Snapp,
1987; Kneser   & Ploetzner,  2001).    An  important  group   process  in these   situations is the  collaborative  co-
construction of new ideas or concepts through which students integrate and expand their knowledge (Jeong &
Chi, 2007; Suthers, 2006; Webb & Palincsar, 1996), reaching insights and eventually problem solutions that go
beyond  what each    individual problem    solver  would  have   been  able to achieve   (Rummel     &  Spada,    2005).
However, collaborative knowledge creation is not without problems. A first challenge is the necessity to pool
the unshared   knowledge   held  by    individual  group  members    (Stasser  &    Titus,  1985).  A   large  literature
consistently shows that groups often come up with suboptimal decisions because they fail to take into account
unshared information and instead focus primarily on the shared knowledge all group members knew from the
beginning ("information pooling effect"; for a recent review, see Brodbeck, Kerschreiter, Mojzisch, & Schulz-
Hardt, 2007). However, it has not yet been studied whether similar biases can be found in groups whose task
requires them to collaboratively co-construct new knowledge, which would be more interesting from a learning
sciences perspective. This is the kind of task we study in our experiments. Our interest, specifically, is in the
inferences collaborators draw from both shared and unshared information during collaborative problem-solving.
We use the term "inference" in a broad sense, encompassing instances were at least two pieces of information
are combined and, on the background of general knowledge, transformed into a new piece of information (i.e.
plausible inferences, Collins   &  Michalski,  1989).   The   main  questions   we   ask   are: How    does   the initial
distribution of information in a group influence the inferences drawn in collaborative problem-solving? And:
How can the collaborative drawing of inferences be supported?

Studying Inferences from Distributed Information
Three Types of Inferences
        In the simplest case of only two persons between whom the relevant knowledge is distributed, three
types of inferences can be distinguished (Table 1):
- A collaborative inference results from unshared information that is distributed between collaborators, i.e. an
  individual person holds only an unconnected piece of information, while matching information is known only
  to his or her partner. Thus, this inference type can only be drawn in collaboration.
- An  individual  inference    results from   unshared    information    that  is   located  with   the same      person
  ("undistributed").  An  inference of  this type   can therefore   be drawn   individually  by   that person.    During
  collaboration, partners need to inform each other about their individual inferences.
- A shared inference results from shared information. An inference of this type can, in principle, be drawn
  individually by both partners, and therefore does not require collaboration between them.

Table 1: Visualization of collaborative, individual, and shared inferences (adapted from Härder & Spada, 2004).

                                                                                                                            2-
                Information distribution                                      Inference type
                                                   Person A      Person B
                unshared distributed                                          collaborative

                unshared undistributed                                        individual

                shared                                                        shared

                In analogy to the information pooling effect (e.g. Brodbeck et al., 2007), it can be expected that more
       inferences  will  be  drawn     from  shared    information    (shared inferences)    than    from unshared  information
       (individual and collaborative inferences). In addition, we expect that collaborative inferences should be harder
       to draw than individual inferences: First, the relevance of yet unconnected, unshared distributed information will
       be less  salient, and thus   it will  be less  likely to  be   pooled  during  discussion   than   unshared  undistributed
       information (Fraidin, 2004), in which case the inference cannot be drawn. Second, individual inferences may be
       drawn   individually  at  any   point of   the  problem-solving   process,    even  prior  to  discussion.  Collaborative
       inferences, on the other hand, must be drawn "online" on the basis of information newly learned from one's
       partner and information recalled from memory. In an ongoing discussion, this retrieval process is prone to be
       disrupted (cf. Finlay, Hitch, & Meudell, 2000), and possible inferences may therefore be overlooked.

       Murder Mystery Inference Task
                We   designed    a  Murder   Mystery    Inference     Task specifically    for  studying   inferences   in dyads'
       collaborative problem-solving.     Participants  individually   study  a  set  of "interrogation   protocols"   containing
       information on the murder and four suspects, hand back the information after a certain reading time, and are
       then asked to discuss the case with a partner who received a systematically different set of protocols. Their joint
       task is to find motives, alibis, and incriminating pieces of evidence, and based on these name the guilty suspect.
       In total, the interrogation protocols contain 24 solution-relevant information items that are embedded in a larger
       story. From these information items, 12 solution-relevant inferences (three for each suspect) can be drawn. The
       relevant pieces   of information     are distributed  between   group   members     so  that  each  dyad  can   draw   four
       collaborative, four individual, and four shared inferences. If information items are considered without drawing
       the appropriate inferences, the dyad is led to choose the wrong suspect. However, if all inferences are drawn, a
       second suspect is revealed as the only possible murderer. Three different text versions are realized in order not
       to confound inference type with inference content: Each of the 12 possible inferences is shared in one text
       version, individual in another, and collaborative in again another; data are aggregated over these text versions.

      Study 1: Difficulties Involved in Drawing Collaborative Inferences
                In a first  study  (for details  see  Meier  &   Spada, 2007),   27  dyads   of university   students  solved  the
       Murder Mystery Inference Task over a desktop-videoconferencing system with a shared text editor. There was a
       substantial main   effect of inference    type: as expected,   shared  inferences   were   the  easiest and  collaborative
       inferences the hardest to draw, use, and remember. This effect was found on all levels of the problem-solving
       process  (discussion  content,   written   solution,  and post-test).  For  example,    students   discussed 49%    of  the
       collaborative inferences, 65% of the individual inferences, and 79% of the shared inferences (F(2;48)= 7.56; p=
       .001; partial 2=    .24). This   findings  show  that  collaborative   inferences,  even  though   they hold   the  highest
       potential for creating new shared knowledge at the group level, are also very difficult to achieve. In this first
       study, instructional support (either as guidance from a collaboration script during problem-solving, or as support
       for collaborator's own planning of their problem-solving process) was not effective in overcoming this deficit.
                We   analyzed    collaborators'   discussions   in  more   depth  to  find out  how    inferences,  in  particular
       collaborative ones,   were   actually drawn     during discussion     (inference  patterns)   and  to deduce   from  these
       findings which    strategies might    help collaborators    to make    better use  of   their complementary    knowledge
       resources. Inference patterns were analyzed by tracing the history of each inference in students' dialogs: For
       each  of the  twelve  possible   inferences,    we coded    when  and   by    whom  the  two   interdependent    pieces of
       information as well as the corresponding inference were first mentioned during discussion. The two dominating
       patterns for complete inferences are illustrated in Table 2. The same-person pattern, in which both pieces of
       information and the corresponding inference are entered by the same person, was the most frequent pattern for
       individual and shared inferences. In the example in Table 2, it is A who informs her partner about the two
       interdependent pieces of information, as well as about the inference she has drawn from them. The completion
       pattern, on  the  other hand,   dominated  for  collaborative   inferences,   where information     distribution made   the
       same-person pattern impossible. As in the example in Table 2, with this pattern, one person enters the first piece

2-
of information, and her partner enters the matching piece together with the corresponding inference ­ often in
close temporal proximity. Further, for incomplete inferences, the most frequent pattern across all three inference
types was the missing information pattern, in which collaborators discussed one piece of information, but both
the matching piece and the inference were missing.

Table 2: Examples of inference patterns in collaborators' dialogs. The two pieces of information are printed in
italics; the inference is also underlined.

                                           Example 1: "Same person" pattern
   A: Yeah, hey, I just remembered, Horst said that Doppler (the victim) was left-handed. And the weapon
      was in his right hand, and it was supposed to look like suicide!
   B: That means it wasn't suicide.
   A: Yes.
   B: And that the person didn't know Doppler very well.
   A: Yes. But Horst knew that Doppler was left-handed.
   B: Ah!
   A: So he would have put the weapon in his left hand, to cover up.

                                           Example 2: "Completion" pattern
   A: Do you know about these drugs? That Doppler was given sleeping pills, and that it was done half an
      hour before (the murder at 0:30 am)?
   B: I didn't know it was half an hour, I just know that he got them. That definitely points towards Helga! I
      remember that Helga was chatting with Doppler from half past eleven till twelve.

          Taken   together,   these    analyses of  empirical    inference  patterns  show   that, if a   matching    piece of
information    was   brought   into  discussion   at   all, it was  typically  entered   together  with   the  corresponding
inference. The crucial part of an inference, even a collaborative one, therefore still seems to be an individual's
Eureka-experience that two pieces of information "belong together". As said before, this process is particularly
vulnerable for collaborative inferences that need to be drawn online during discussion, based on information just
heard  and  information     recalled   from   memory.    A   collaboration  strategy   that might   help  to   overcome   this
difficulty is to react to all newly learned information during discussion immediately and attentively, trying to
integrate  that  information     with  prior  knowledge      (similar to   elaboration strategies  in   individual    learning;
Weinstein & Mayer, 1986). The results of Study 1 showed us that structuring the problem-solving process on a
relatively  global level,   e.g. by  a collaboration   script,  was   not  successful in facilitating this process.   For   the
second study, we therefore decided to train students in the application of specific collaboration strategies.

Collaboration Strategies Deduced
          We deduced three main collaboration strategies: First, collaborators should be aware that part of their
information is interdependent, and will allow for new insights when integrated by inferences. As a consequence,
they should search for interconnections between pieces of information constantly, on their own as well as in
collaboration with their partner. Second, collaborators should be aware that some information may be known to
only one of them, and that this information may seem rather irrelevant on its own but might still be important
when   considered    in combination     with  their partner's   knowledge.    Thus,   they  should strive  to  pool   as much
information as possible, and ask their partner for information that matches any information they could not make
sense of themselves. Finally, collaborators should react immediately and attentively to all new information they
learn from their partner during discussion, inform their partner that this information is new to them, and try to
integrate it with matching information. Reacting to a new piece of information promptly and searching one's
own   memory     for a  matching     piece   of information     is particularly important   for   uncovering   collaborative
inferences. In  addition,   giving   one's  partner  the    feedback  that she has  just mentioned    an  unshared    piece of
information will give her the opportunity to elaborate and explain, either by providing a complete individual
inference, or by providing additional information that may facilitate one's own search for matching information
and eventually lead to a collaborative inference.
          Unfortunately, these strategies are somewhat at odds with an intuitive strategy many students followed
in Study    1, which    is to first  pool  as much     information   as one   can remember    and   then   try to search    for
interconnections,    in an  attempt    to proceed   in a systematic   and  orderly   fashion. They    are also at odds    with
recommendations for collaborative tasks that do not require the creation of new knowledge at the group level,
which advice collaborators to separate information pooling from information integration and decision making
(e.g. Brodbeck et al., 2007), a sequencing that had also been part of the collaboration script in Study 1. In
addition, the second strategy requires collaborators to discuss information with uncertain relevance for solving
their joint problem,    which    is at odds  with  the  conversational    maxim   of  relevance (Grice,   1975,   cf. Fraidin,

                                                                                                                                  2-
       2004). Further, students may hesitate to react to new information immediately, because they do not want to be
       impolite and disrupt the flow of communication (cf. Person, Kreuz, Zwaan, & Graesser, 1995). Thus, it seems
       necessary to  support   the  application   of these  collaboration   strategies  in order  to  facilitate the drawing    of
       inferences from distributed information.

      Study 2: Support for Inferences from Distributed Information
               The primary goal in Study 2 was to train collaborators in the use of the three collaboration strategies
       deduced  from   the  results of   Study 1.  We  aimed   to  teach this  procedural  knowledge    based    on  an improved
       conceptual understanding of the typical task structure and difficulties involved in solving collaborative problem-
       solving tasks (cf.  Rittle-Johnson,  Siegler,   &  Alibali, 2001),   specifically the need   to combine    interdependent
       information by drawing inferences, and the need to pool unshared information. To help collaborators learn when
       and how to apply the collaboration strategies (i.e. acquire conditional knowledge; Schraw & Moshman, 1995),
       we adopted a training approach in Study 2. To make sure that the effects of training were really the result of
       improved knowledge, all support was provided only during a training phase, and its effects were tested in a
       subsequent,  unsupported     test phase. We   employed   two    means   of instructional support   during   training:  first,
       expository text in the form of a small information booklet and, second, a computerized inference tutoring tool.

       Support Measures
       Training Task
               The training task had the same structural characteristics as the Murder Mystery Inference Task: twelve
       pairs of interdependent pieces of information were distributed in such a way that collaborators needed to draw
       shared, individual,    and collaborative    inferences. Instead   of finding   a  murderer     among    innocent  suspects,
       however,  collaborators    had  to diagnose   a patient with    one out of  three fictitious   tropical diseases.  To  help
       collaborators transfer the knowledge and skills acquired in the training phase to their subsequent collaboration
       on the test task, a collaborative reflection phase was added at the end of the training task: After finishing their
       collaboration on the    training  task, dyads were   informed   about   the correct solution   and  important    inferences
       leading towards    it. Dyads   were  encouraged     to  reflect on  the solution  collaboratively,    evaluate   their own
       collaboration on   the  training  task, and discuss  how    they  might be  able  "to  collaborate  even   better"  on  the
       following test task.

       Information Booklet
               An expository text, compiled in a small information booklet, described typical features of collaborative
       problem-solving tasks as well as the three collaboration strategies. Participants read the text prior to working on
       the training task. The information booklet described the need to draw inferences due to the interconnectedness
       of information, the need to pool information thoroughly due to the distribution of information across group
       members,  and   the  problem   of  overlooking   new   information   during  discussion.   Each  of these   problems   was
       described in  a short   paragraph,  followed    by a paragraph    applying  it to the upcoming     training  task. Then,  a
       collaboration strategy was formulated. The three collaboration strategies were stated again on the last page of
       the booklet, advising collaborators to 1) constantly search for connections between pieces of information; 2)
       pool all information thoroughly, even if its relevance was unclear when it was considered alone; and 3) pay
       special attention to all new information during discussion and search for matching information immediately.

       Inference Tutoring Tool
               The inference tutoring tool was a computerized tool that provided dyads with feedback and prompts
       during their collaboration on the training task. The tool was, in this study, yet controlled by a human observer
       who followed collaborators' discussion and identified when relevant pieces of text information were mentioned
       and relevant inferences were drawn. The observer filled in a coding sheet that represented all relevant inferences
       in a matrix where each line corresponded to one inference (cf. Table 3). Based on this graphical representation
       of inference patterns, four types of messages were sent to students via the tutoring tool (Table 3).
               First, whenever any of the 24 pieces of relevant information was mentioned for the first time, New
       Information Feedback was given. Collaborators heard a specific sound and saw the following message: "New
       information!  Matching     information   is located    with {Name    A}/    {Name    B}  / both    of   you." Thus,    New
       Information Feedback alerted collaborators to a specific piece of information, and prompted them to search for
       matching information. In doing so, it also modelled the immediate and attentive reaction to new information
       during  discussion,    and highlighted    the structure  of  the   collaboration  task   (i.e. the  interdependence     and
       distribution of information). At the same time, it served as a positive reinforcement for pooling new information.
       Second, when an inference pattern was completed, i.e. whenever one of the twelve relevant inferences was
       drawn, the inference tutoring tool provided Complete Inference Feedback. Collaborators heard a specific sound
       and saw the following message: "Well done! You have just discovered an important connection." This feedback
       served to inform collaborators about the correctness of their inference, and also as a positive reinforcement.

2-0
Table 3: Graphical representation of inference patterns and corresponding tutor messages.

 Dialog Event                             Pattern Representation                                              Tutor Message
                                                                           disease   patient   inference
 Any of the 24 pieces of relevant                                      1                                      New Information Feedback
                                                                       2
 information mentioned for the first                                   3
                                                                       4
 time.                                                                 5
                                                                       6
                                                                       7

                                                                           disease   patient   inference
 Any of the 12 inferences drawn for                                    1                                      Complete Inference Feedback
                                                                       2
 the first time (completed inference                                   3
 pattern).                                                             45
                                                                       6
                                                                       7

                                                                          disease    patient   inference
                                                                     1                                        Incomplete pattern:
 Incomplete or empty patterns at the                                 23                                       Missing Information Reminder
 end of discussion                                                   45
                                                                     6
                                                                     7
                                                                     8                                        Empty pattern:
                                                                     9
                                                                    10                                        Missing Information Hint
                                                                    11
                                                                    12

         During the last five minutes of their discussion, collaborators additionally received reminders and hints
to help them discover information and inferences that were still missing. For each incomplete inference pattern,
collaborators received one Missing Information Reminder. The reminder consisted of a short summary of the
piece of information that had been mentioned but not yet integrated in an inference, for example: "Missing
Information. You have already discussed the following information (located with Abby): The patient has been
vaccinated against    Blue  Fever. Matching                            information    is located  with     Betty." For empty   patterns, or when
collaborators could not supply missing information despite prompting, Missing Information Hints were given.
They consisted of a short summary of a piece of information that collaborators had not discussed so far, and a
hint towards  the   location  of the matching                            piece    of information,    for   example:   "Missing information.    The
following  information   has   not yet been  discussed:                            The   fire  fever is   transmitted  by eating freshwater  fish.
Matching information is located with Abby." The Missing Information messages served to highlight once more
the structure of the collaboration task and remind collaborators of the necessity to pool as much information as
possible and  combine    it by drawing  inferences.                           Further,   they  were  designed   to  make  sure that collaborators
would be able to draw all or nearly all possible inferences and thus get a demonstration of a good solution.
         Manipulation checks confirmed that the tutoring tool did, in fact, increase dyads' performance to a
near-optimal level on the training task: Dyads who were supported by the tutoring tool drew, on average, 100%
of the shared, 97% of the individual, and 98% of the collaborative inferences, while dyads collaborating without
the tool drew significantly less inferences, in particular of the collaborative type (significant interaction, F(4;
48)= 10.76; p< .001; partial 2 = .47).

Method
Design and Procedure
         Conditions differed in the amount of training they received prior to their collaboration on the Murder
Mystery Inference Task that served as the test task (Table 4). Dyads in the No_Training condition collaborated
only on  the  test task, without   receiving any                          kind    of instruction  regarding   their collaboration.  Dyads   in the
Uninstructed_Training condition collaborated on the training task, but without specific instruction regarding
their collaboration. Dyads in the Training+Text condition read the information booklet before collaborating on
the training task. Dyads in the Training+Text+Tutoring condition read the information booklet as well, and
were supported by the inference tutoring tool during their discussion of the training task. During the test phase,
no further instructions regarding collaboration and no feedback were given in any condition. During the whole
experiment, except for the face-to-face introduction phase and a short recreational break between the two tasks,
collaborators sat  in adjacent   rooms. During                            the discussion     phases, they   talked  to each other  over  an audio
connection and had access to a shared text document which both of them could see and edit from their own PC.

Table 4: Procedure of the experiment in the four conditions.

                                                                                                                                                     2-
                    No Training           Uninstructed         Training + Text           Training + Text +
                                             Training                                         Tutoring
                  General & technical introduction
                  --                                           Read information booklet explaining task
                                                               structure and collaboration strategies
                  --                  Training Task (diagnosis): individual reading phase (20 min)
                                      Collaborative discussion (25 min)             Collaborative discussion (25
                                                                                    min) supported by inference
                                                                                    tutoring tool
                                      Written justification (5 min)
                                      Collaborative reflection phase (10 min)
                  Test Task (murder mystery)
                  -   individual reading phase (30 min)
                  -   collaborative discussion (30 min) and written justification (10 min)

       Participants
                Participants were 72 female university students (mean age = 22.4 years; no psychology students and no
       medical students) in 36 dyads. Only students who did not know each other before collaboration were assigned to
       the same dyad. Nine dyads participated per condition. Dyads in the three training conditions were randomly
       assigned to one of these conditions. Dyads in the No_Training condition, who had to be scheduled for shorter
       experimental sessions, were recruited from the same pool of participants and run in parallel to trained dyads, but
       not randomly assigned. Post-hoc analyses confirmed that conditions did not differ in participants' age, subjects
       of study, academic grades, computer use, knowledge about tropical diseases (assessed for trained dyads only), or
       experience with murder mystery stories and films.

       Dependent Measures
                During a dyad's discussion of the murder mystery task, a trained experimenter coded which of the
       twelve solution-relevant inferences were actually drawn. We then counted the number of inferences of a given
       type that had been drawn, and divided this number by the number of possible inferences of this type. In this
       way, we   established  the   relative frequencies  with which    inferences of a  given type  were   drawn  (inference
       drawing frequency). For example, if a dyad mentioned three of the four possible individual inferences during
       their discussion, this was represented as an inference drawing frequency of .75 for that inference type. Solution
       correctness,  i.e. whether   a dyad   agreed  on  the correct suspect, served  as  outcome    measure.  More   detailed
       analyses of  the   collaborative  problem-solving   process,  e.g. concerning  the ways    in which   information   was
       exchanged and integrated into inferences, will be conducted once all discussions have been transcribed.

       Results (Test Task)
                Figure 1 shows the relative frequencies with which dyads drew solution-relevant inferences, depending
       on inference type and the kind of instructional support that had been provided in the training phase. There was a
       main effect of instructional support (F(3;32)= 4.43; p= .01, partial 2= .29), with the lowest average inference
       drawing frequency (.74) in the No_Training condition and the highest average inference drawing frequency
       (.93) in the Training+ Text+ Tutoring condition (linear trend; p < .01). There were no differences in the average
       inference drawing frequency between the two conditions who solved the training task without support from the
       tutoring tool (average    inference   drawing frequency   =  .82 in both conditions).   The   result also replicate the
       findings from  our    first study regarding   the negative  effects of information  distribution:    Inference drawing
       frequency  was    .72 for   collaborative inferences, .83 for individual inferences,   and .93  for  shared inferences
       (F(2;64)=  10.37;   p<  .001;  partial 2=   .25). Planned  comparisons   confirmed   a  highly  significant difference
       (F(1;32)= 21.37; p< .001; partial 2= .40) between shared inferences and inferences from unshared information
       (individual inferences and collaborative inferences), and a marginally significant difference between individual
       and collaborative inferences (F(1;32)= 4.07; p= .05; partial 2= .11). The difference between inference drawing
       frequencies   for  the three   inference  types   was the  most    pronounced  in  the  No_Training    condition;   and
       instructional support had the largest impact on the inference drawing frequency for collaborative inferences.
       However, this interaction was not significant.

2-2
                                   collaborative inferences        individual inferences           shared inferences
                          1
                        0.9
                        0.8
                        0.7
                        0.6
                        0.5
                        0.4
                        0.3
                        0.2
                        0.1
                          0
                                   No_Training     Un ins tru cted _Train ing    Training + Text      Training + Text +
                                                                                                          Tutoring

Figure 1: Inference drawing frequencies in the test phase, depending on inference type and instructional support
                                                 provided during training

           Overall, 2/3 of all dyads solved the Murder Mystery Inference Task correctly. The Training+Text+
Tutoring   condition    showed the   highest   solution   rate (8  of 9       dyads   solved     the case correctly).    Dyads   in  the
Uninstructed_Training (7 correct) and the No_Training (6 correct) conditions were also quite successful. The
Training+Text condition showed the lowest solution rate (3 correct; differences n.s.).

Discussion
           Collaborative inferences from interdependent information that is distributed between group members
are an important means of creating genuinely new knowledge at the group level, i.e. knowledge that could not
have been constructed by any individual alone. Thus, they offer a high potential for improving collaborative
problem-solving,     as  well  as  for fostering     group  members'           learning    from    their  collaborative     experience.
However, we have demonstrated in two experimental studies that this type of inference is also the most difficult
one   to   achieve.  It therefore  seems    that, even      in a   situation       in   which     group   members'       resources   are
interdependent and would result in substantial process gains when integrated, successful collaboration and better
problem    solutions  are not guaranteed.      While  support   is necessary,        it is not   easy  to achieve,      as Study   1 has
shown.     In Study  2, we    have demonstrated      that training    collaborators        in    the use  of specific      collaboration
strategies    may be  a promising    way  of   improving    collaborative         knowledge      construction  through      inferences.
Reflected training on a collaborative problem-solving task with interdependent and distributed information led
to more    inferences   being drawn   in  a test task.  This   training       was  most    successful    when  supported     by  online
tutoring   of  inferences designed   to   facilitate  the application         of three  collaboration     strategies:    searching   for
interconnections    between    pieces  of   information,    pooling   as        much    information      as  possible,     and reacting
immediately     and  attentively  to newly     learned  information           during  discussion.     These  positive      results were
obtained during subsequent, unsupported collaboration, indicating that collaborators had learned important skills
as well as the ability to apply them in a goal-directed way. It is also important to note that merely informing
collaborators   about   task difficulties and   helpful   collaboration        strategies  without    tutoring them      was   not more
effective than uninstructed training. In fact, the lower solution rates in the Training+Text condition show that
receiving     information about   task difficulties   and   helpful   collaboration        strategies    may   even     have   confused
collaborators and hindered collaborative problem-solving.
           We have obtained these results in a laboratory setting with a set of carefully designed tasks. Therefore,
their applicability  in  more  authentic    settings, like  classrooms         or work     teams,    and with  more     authentic    task
materials will have to be tested by further research. Nevertheless, our tasks are structurally equivalent to many
collaborative tasks in the real world, where groups are often formed because their members hold complementary
knowledge resources (e.g. expertise, experience, ideas) needed to solve the problem (e.g. Kerr & Tindale, 2004),
and   where    complex    problems   confront    the   group   with   interdependent             information   (e.g.    Fraidin,   2004;
Pennington & Hastie, 1993) and the necessity to construct new knowledge beyond the given facts (e.g. Dunbar,
2000). Thus, members of authentic groups, as well, need to co-construct new knowledge by drawing inferences,
individually as well as collaboratively. For example, when studying groups of scientists doing high-end research
in molecular biology Dunbar (2000) found that successful scientific teams engaged in a form of "distributed
reasoning" that included the collaborative drawing of inferences, where "one scientist may provide one premise
to the induction, another a second premise, and a third the conclusion" (p. 55). Our findings show that in less
experienced groups this genuine co-construction of knowledge through collaborative inferences may be rare. As
a  result, group  members     may  miss   opportunities   to   generate        new knowledge         and may   agree    on  suboptimal

                                                                                                                                            2-
       solutions. However, our findings also point towards helpful strategies for overcoming this deficit. Specifically,
       collaborators working with distributed, interdependent information should aim to integrate the extensive pooling
       of information    with the prompt      elaboration of   newly  learned  information during  discussion. Reflected
       experience   with structurally similar  tasks, in  particular when guided  by some    kind of tutoring, may  help
       collaborators to acquire these skills.

      References
       Aronson, E., Balney, N., Stephan, C., Sikes, J., & Snapp, M. (1978). The jigsaw classroom. Beverley Hills, CA:
                Sage.
       Brodbeck, F. C., Kerschreiter, R., Mojzisch, A., & Schulz-Hardt, S. (2007). Improving group decision making
                under conditions of distributed knowledge. Academy of Management Review, 32, 459-479.
       Collins, A., & Michalski, R. (1989). The logic of plausible reasoning: a core theory. Cognitive Science, 13, 1-49.
       Dunbar, K. (2000). How scientists think in the real world: implications for science education. Journal of Applied
                Developmental Psychology, 21(1), 49-58.
       Finlay, F., Hitch, G. J., & Meudell, P. R. (2000) Mutual inhibition in collective recall: evidence for a retrieval
                based account. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, memory & Cognition, 26, 1556-1567.
       Fraidin, S. N. (2004). When is one head better than two? Interdependent information in group decision making.
                Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 93, 102-113.
       Grice, H.P. (1975). Logic and conversation. In P. Cole & J.L. Morgan (Eds.), Syntax and semantics 3: Speech
                acts. New York: Seminar Press.
       Härder,  J., &  Spada,  H. (2004).     Exchange   of unshared  information  and their utilization in collaborative
                inferences in work via a desktop video-conferencing system. Paper presented at the conference of the
                German Society of Psychology (DGPs) 2004.
       Jeong, H., & Chi, M. (2007). Knowledge convergence and collaborative learning. Instructional Science, 35 (4),
                287-315.
       Kerr, N. L. & Tindale, R. S. (2004). Group performance and decision making. Annual Review of Psychology,
                55, 623-655.
       Kneser, C., & Ploetzner, R. (2001). Collaboration on the basis of complementary domain knowledge: observed
                dialogue structures and their relation to learning success. Learning and Instruction, 11, 53-83.
       Kollar, I., Fischer, F., & Hesse, F. (2006). Collaboration scripts ­ a conceptual analysis. Educational Psychology
                Review, 18, 159-185.
       Meier, A., & Spada, H. (2007). Information pooling and processing in group problem-solving: analysis and
                promotion of collaborative inferences from distributed information. In D. S. McNamara & J. G. Trafton
                (Eds.), Proceedings of the 29th Annual Cognitive Science Society (pp. 473-479). Austin, TX: CSS
       Pennington, N., & Hastie, R. (1993). Reasoning in explanation-based decision making. Cognition, 49, 123-163.
       Person, N., Kreuz, R., Zwaan, R., & Graesser, A. (1995). Pragmatics and pedagogy: conversational rules and
                politeness strategies may inhibit effective tutoring. Cognition and Instruction, 13(2), 161-188.
       Rummel, N., & Spada, H. (2005). Learning to collaborate: An instructional approach to promoting problem-
                solving in computer-mediated settings. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 14, 201-241.
       Rittle-Johnson, B., Siegler, R.S., & Alibali, M.W. (2001). Developing conceptual understanding and procedural
                skill in mathematics: an iterative process. Journal of Educational Psychology, 93, 346-362.
       Schraw, G., & Moshman, D. (1995). Metacognitive theories. Educational Psychology Review, 7, 351-371.
       Stasser, G. & Titus, W. (1985). Pooling of unshared information in group decision making: Biased information
                sampling during discussion. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 48, 1467-1478.
       Suthers,  D.   (2006).  A  qualitative   analysis    of  collaborative  knowledge   construction  through  shared
                representations. Research and Practice in Technology Enhanced Learning, 1, 1-28.
       Webb, N.M., & Palincsar, A.S. (1996). Group processes in the classroom. In D. Berliner & R. Calfee (Eds.),
                Handbook of educational psychology (pp. 841-873). New York: Macmillan.
       Weinstein, C. E. & Mayer, R. E. (1986) The teaching of learning strategies. In M. C. Wittrock Ed.), Handbook
                on Research in Teaching (3rd Edition. pp. 315-327). New York: Macmillan.

      Acknowledgments
       The first author  is being funded  by   the Virtual   Graduate  School  "Knowledge   Acquisition  and Knowledge
       Exchange with New Media" (www.vgk.de) of the German Science Foundation. The authors would like to thank
       Kurt VanLehn for inspiring discussions about the design of the inference tutoring tool.

2-
