     Investigating the Influence of Transitory Information and Motivation
                                       during Instructional Animations
                      Paul Ayres and Amina Youssef, University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia
                                      Email: p.ayres@unsw.edu.au, a.youssef@unsw.edu.au

                 Abstract: This study investigated the cognitive load theory prediction that the inconsistent
                 findings concerning   the   effectiveness of  instructional animations   are  exacerbated    by their
                 transitory nature. Three groups were compared who received different but equivalent forms of
                 instruction in learning a topic in economics. One group received an animation presentation
                 with integrated text and diagrams, a second group received a static diagram presentation with
                 integrated text and diagrams, and the third group received a static diagram presentation with
                 non-integrated text and diagrams in a classical split-attention design. Results indicated that the
                 animated design was superior to the static integrated design only on test questions that closely
                 resembled the presented information. No other significant group differences were identified.
                 Furthermore   a  battery of   self-rating measures    of  cognitive load   and  motivational    items
                 indicated that test performance was predicted by motivation and concentration levels, rather
                 than by mental effort or task difficulty.

                 This study had two main aims. The first aim was to advance the research on instructional animations,
       and secondly, to explore the use of multiple self-rating measures of cognitive load. The paper begins by briefly
       describing some of the main principles of cognitive load theory as it used as the theoretical framework for the
       study.
                 In the last  decade  cognitive  load theory   has   developed  into a  well-known    theory  of learning    and
       instruction. From its early development in the 1980s, where it focused on explaining why problem solving was
       an ineffective method of learning, it has more recently become a theory, which considers cognition as a natural
       information processing system similar to evolution by natural selection (Sweller, 2003, 2004). At the centre of
       CLT is the interaction between long-term memory (LTM) and working memory (WM). Whereas WM is very
       limited in both capacity and duration (see Miller, 1956; Peterson & Peterson, 1959), the capacity of LTM is
       extremely   large, and  stored  information can  last   a lifetime.  Furthermore  it is argued  by  CLT   theorists   that
       information   is stored in LTM     in the form of   schemas    (Chi, Glaser &    Rees,  1982). By  recalling schematic
       knowledge from LTM into WM, multiple bits of connected information can be treated as single elements, thus
       relatively increasing the capacity of WM. Hence humans are able to learn complex material and solve difficult
       problems in spite of the limitations of WM. However, when learning novel information, where schemas are not
       available, the limited capacity of WM can be a severe impediment to learning. Much of the research into CLT
       has investigated   the  various conditions  under    which    WM    resources become    overstretched   and  how  these
       conditions can be alleviated by instructional designs that take into account the human cognitive architecture
       (van Merriënboer & Sweller, 2005).
                 CLT identifies three categories of cognitive load: intrinsic, extraneous and germane (see Sweller, van
       Merriënboer   &   Paas, 1998).  Intrinsic load is   the load  caused  by  the complexity    (element   interactivity, see
       Sweller   &  Chandler,  1991,   1994)  of the  materials  to  be learnt, extraneous    load is the load   caused by   the
       instructional procedures, and germane load is the load directly invested in schema acquisition. Whereas intrinsic
       load is considered fixed, dependent upon only the prior knowledge of the learner (se Kalyuga, Ayres, Chandler
       & Sweller, 2003), extraneous load is under the control of the instructional designer. An effective design lowers
       extraneous   load  and  induces  germane   load.    Over  two  decades   CLT     research has  identified a  number    of
       strategies, such as worked examples and the modality effect, to optimize learning environments (see Sweller,
       1999; van Merriënboer & Ayres, 2005). In the last few years, researchers have extended the research on CLT to
       outline   a theory  to  explain the   conditions under    which    instructional animations    may  be  designed  more
       effectively.
                 The  results of  studies that have   used  dynamic    representations  (animations)   as a   learning tool  are
       somewhat inconclusive. A review by Tversky, Morrison and Betrancourt (2002) found that animation was no
       more   effective than  static representations, although    it was  postulated that   animation  might  be  best  used  in
       environments that "convey real time changes and reorientations in time and space". (p. 257). Mayer, Hegarty,
       Mayer and Campbell (2005) found static diagrams to be more effective than animations when learning about
       mechanical systems. In contrast, a meta-analysis by Höffler and Leutner (2007) found evidence that a number of
       studies showed animation to be more effective than static pictures, particularly when the animation was highly
       realistic and/or   procedural  motor  knowledge     was   involved.  As  well as  research   that  has compared   static
       diagrams with animations, a number of studies have looked to improve the animated designs themselves. For

1-
example, researchers have shown that animations can be improved by more directed extraction of information
(Lowe, 1999, 2003, 2004) user interactivity (Hasler, Kersten & Sweller, 2007), segmenting the presentation into
smaller chunks (Mayer & Chandler, 2001; Moreno, 2007), and by signaling information (De Koning, Tabbers,
Rikers & Paas, 2007; Lusk & Atkinson, 2007; Moreno, 2007). Whereas a number of these compensatory tactics
have   been   successfully employed    and   a number     of   explanations tendered,   the research  field   has lacked   a
comprehensive theory to explain why animations are sometime effective and other times not. However, CLT
has provided some further insights. CLT theorists argue that animations can be highly transitory in nature (see
Ayres, Kalyuga, Marcus & Sweller, 2005; Ayres & Paas, 2007a, 2007b). Animations that involve information
disappearing from the screen as the animation progresses, forces learners to process current information while
trying  to remember     previous   information,    leading   to heavy   demands     on working   memory     load.  In  such
situations, animation creates an extraneous cognitive load. This argument gives a plausible explanation as to
why stopping an animation (user-interactivity) or segmenting it into smaller parts is beneficial- both strategies
lower working memory load by negating the effects of transitory information. The study reported here continues
the research into the transitory effect. We argue that another way to overcome transitory information it to ensure
that no information disappears from the screen. To test this prediction the following study was completed.

Main hypotheses of the study
         The study consisted of three treatment groups and participants were required to learn some economics
content, a domain rarely used in CLT research. One group (Animated) was required to learn from an animated
presentation.  To  overcome    the  transitory    effect the   computer-based     presentation was  designed   so  that  no
information   disappeared  from    the screen.    To eliminate  other   potential sources  of  extraneous  cognitive   load,
namely the split-attention effect (see Ayes & Sweller, 2005; Chandler & Sweller, 1992), all text and diagrams
were   integrated  together.  A   second   group     (Static integrated)   received  an equivalent   presentation     to the
Animated group except that a set of static diagrams replaced the animation. Again all text and diagrams were
integrated to avoid a split-attention scenario. The third group (Static non-integrated) was identical to the Static
integrated group, except that the text and diagrams were deliberately kept separate in order to induce a split-
attention effect. By inducing such an effect it was expected that the least learning would occur and therefore this
group served as a control condition. The following two hypotheses were tested:
     x   Hypothesis 1: Learners will benefit more from an animated instructional format than a static format
     x   Hypothesis 2: Learners will benefit more from an integrated format than a non-integrated format.

Cognitive load measures
         In much of cognitive load theory research a global self-rating measure of cognitive load has been used
based on the original Paas (1992) 9-point scale. This scale was worded as follows for the lowest mental effort
rating (1): "In solving or studying the preceding problem I invested very, very low mental effort", and was
administered after students had taken the test questions. However, Van Gog and Paas (2008) have pointed out
that   many   researchers  have used    variations   of  the   original scale and    changed   the wording    of  the  scale
considerably.  Often    using difficulty instead   of mental    effort. Further,  most  researchers administer    the  scale
following   instruction rather  than   the   test phase.  Accordingly,    Van  Gog    and  Paas  have   argued   that these
variations may pose a threat to the validity of the instrument. In more recent times researchers have become
interested in measuring intrinsic, extraneous and germane load individually. For example, Ayres (2006) has
measured    changes  in intrinsic  load, while    others have   investigated  methods   to  measure  all three   loads   (see
Cierniak,  Scheiter, &    Gerjets, 2007;   Scheiter,  Gerjets,   & Opfermann,     2007).  An   interesting  finding   in the
Cierniak   et al. study   was  that a  concentration     measure   was   found    to mediate   the split attention    effect.
Furthermore, it has been argued by Moreno (2007) that motivational factors mediate learning and influence
cognitive engagement. Whereas research into motivation is a huge field in its own right, it is rarely used in CLT.
As   a result of  these new   directions   and    findings,  a number   of subjective  cognitive   load  and  motivational
measures were introduced into this study. The broad aim of the subjective measures, which was exploratory in
nature, was to collect information on:
     x   Potential measures of intrinsic, extraneous and germane load
     x   Concentration and motivation measures
     x   Predictors of performance

Method
Participants
         The   participants   used  in   the study   were    45  (18  male  &    25  female,   mean  age   of 20.4    years)
undergraduate students from an Australian university enrolled in first year Education subjects. No student had
formally studied an economics course at high school or university. Each student was randomly assigned to one
of the three groups (each with N=15).

                                                                                                                                 1-
       Materials
       Background knowledge materials
               The economics topic to be learnt in this study was Demand. In order for students to gain some basic
       knowledge of the topic before embarking on the main learning phase some background knowledge materials
       were developed. A two-page (A4) handout provided basic information in the form of definitions and examples
       on the Demand schedule, the Demand curve, and shifts of the Demand curve. It also explained how as the price
       of a Good increases the quantity demanded of that Good also decreases and vice versa. A graph illustrated the
       relationship between price and demand, and showed that a typical Demand curve is sloping downwards from
       left to right. A paper-based knowledge test (pre-test) was constructed, comprising of multiple choice and short-
       answer questions, to determine the students' understanding of the economics concepts taught in the background
       knowledge.

       Learning materials
               A different presentation was constructed for each group, but all depicting the same concepts, diagrams
       and text. Each computer-based presentation consisted of two parts. The first part explained how the demand
       curve moves given an increase in demand, while the second part demonstrated a decrease in demand. The two
       static group presentations were identical apart from the positioning of the text on the slide. For an increase in
       demand two power point slides were presented consecutively. The first slide (static image) showed the position
       of the original demand curve (line), and the second slide showed the final position of the curve following an
       increase in demand. Arrows were used to indicate the motion of the curve on the second slide (see Figure 1). On
       each  slide, text was    used to explain why   the curve was  moving  in such  a fashion. However    for the Static
       integrated group, the text was integrated into the diagram, whereas for the Static non-integrated group, all text
       was positioned at the bottom of the slide. The first slide was visible for 95 seconds to be replaced by the second
       slide also   visible for 95   seconds. For the second  part of the presentation  the format of   the materials was
       identical, the only   difference being  that the two slides showed  a decrease  in demand.  Altogether   the whole
       presentation, including some further qualifying instructions took 420 seconds. For the Animated group, all the
       material was identical to the Static integrated group, except in place of the two slides showing the curve before
       and after a change in demand, one single animated display was presented, showing the demand curve move
       according to the change in conditions. It was predicted that this dynamic representation of the curve moving in
       real time would reinforce the underlying principles of the economic concept of demand. Furthermore the text
       was synchronized to appear at the right time. For each part (increase and decrease of demand) the display lasted
       190 seconds. In this display no information was lost (disappeared from the screen) at anytime, which prevented
       any transitory effects. The whole display lasted 420 seconds, and each component lasted the exact time as the
       static versions.

                                      Figure 1. Second slide presented for the Static integrated group.

1-0
          Testing materials.   Two   assess   the effectiveness   of the different  presentations  two  paper-based    tests
were constructed.   One  (post-test)  tested   basic understanding    of the   material and   consisted of three   types  of
different knowledge:   background       knowledge    (4 questions),  economic     theory  (10 questions),  and    Economic
diagrams  (2 questions).    The  second   (transfer)  tested  whether   the   knowledge   learnt could  be transferred    (9
questions).
          Self-rating measures. To measure cognitive load and other motivational-type factors fourteen separate
subjective items were constructed        (see  Table  1).  Eight  items  were    grouped  and  presented   before  the test
questions (Pre) and six after the test (Post). Each group was presented on a single sheet of A4 paper and students
were asked to rate each item according to a 9-point Likert scale. In order to potentially measure the individual
cognitive loads, items (Pre-1, Pre-2, Pre-3) were constructed that focused on aspects of the presentation and
therefore might be considered extraneous, the content (Intrinsic: Pre-5, Pre-6, Post-3) and the effort made in
learning, including   motivation   and   concentration,    (Germane:  Pre-4,   Pre-7,  Pre-8, Post-1,  Post-2, Post-6).   In
addition, two items were added that evaluated the usefulness of the presentations (Post-4 and Post-5). Measures
of both understanding and learning were used (Pre-2 and Pre-3). A variation of Paas' original measure (Paas,
1992), which grouped both `solving and studying' together, was separated into two measures: one focusing on
mental effort during the presentation (Post-1) and the other on solving the test problem (Post-2). These were
presented  after  the  test even   though   they  referred    to the instructional  phase   consistent  with   the original
instrument (see Van Gog & Paas, 2008). A concentration item was also included and repeated in the pre and
post-testing phases (Pre-8 and Post-6).

Table 1: Cognitive load and motivational measures.

Item No.      Item Description                                                                                 Mean (SD)
Pre-1         How difficult was it for you to follow the demonstration? (Pre-test)                             3.4 (1.79)
Pre-2         How difficult was it for you to learn from the demonstration? (Pre-test)                         3.9 (1.92)
Pre-3         How difficult was it for you to concentrate during the demonstration? (Pre-test)                 5.5 (1.63)
Pre-4         How much were you motivated by the demonstration? (Pre-test)                                     4.0 (1.44)
Pre-5         How difficult was it for you to understand the economics concepts? (Pre-test)                    3.9 (1.54)
Pre-6         How difficult was it for you to learn the economics concepts? (Pre-test)                         4.2 (1.55)
Pre-7         How much effort did you put into learning the economics material? (Pre-test)                     5.5 (1.36)
Pre-8         How     high  was  your    concentration     level when    trying  to learn the  economics       5.1 (1.27)
              material? (Pre-test)
Post-1        In studying the demonstration how much mental effort did you invest? (Post-test)                 5.6 (1.35)
Post-2        In solving the test questions how much mental effort did you invest? (Post-test)                 6.2 (1.19)
Post-3        How difficult was it for you to answer the test questions? (Post-test)                           5.6 (1.39)
Post-4        How helpful was the demonstration in learning the economics material? (Post test)                5.9 (1.46)
Post-5        How helpful was the demonstration in understanding the economics material? (Post                 6.0 (1.50)
              test)
Post-6        How much did you concentrate when trying to learn the economics material? (Post-                 5.6 (1.11)
              test)

Procedure
          Participants were    tested in  groups   of   two,  each with     a separate computer,   and  were   required   to
complete  seven   phases    in the study.   In the   first phase  participants   were   given five minutes     to read and
understand the background information handout. They were given ten minutes to complete the Pre-test. In the
third phase, participants viewed one of the three presentations for seven minutes in total. In the fourth phase,
participants were   then required    to  complete  the  first batch  of  8  cognitive  load measures    (Pre), which   took
approximately    three minutes.    In the  fifth  phase,   participants  were   complete  the  post-test  in   12  minutes.
Following on from the Post-test the Transfer test was administered (Phase six) and five minutes was allocated to
this task. The final component required participants to complete the remaining set of 6 cognitive load measures,
which took approximately three minutes. The total study time was approximately forty-five to fifty minutes.

Results and discussion
Learning tests
          For the pre-test, a 1-way ANOVA revealed no significant group difference (F(2, 42)= 1.13, p > 0.05).
Because no group differences were found on the pre-test it can be assumed that prior knowledge differences did
not influence the   overall  results  of this study.  For  the   post-test, group   means and  standard  deviations  were

                                                                                                                                1-1
       calculated for each of the three different types of questions (see Table 2). A MANOVA using the three types of
       questions as variables produced a significant result under the Roy's largest root test: F (3, 41) = 3.56, p < 0.05.
       The univariate tests were non-significant for background knowledge and economic theory question subgroups,
       but there was a significant group difference for the economic diagram questions (F (2, 42)= 3.482, MSe= 2.156,
       p < 0.05). A Tukey Post-Hoc test found that the animation group performed better that the static integrated
       group (p < 0.05), but all other comparisons were non-significant. Means and SDs for the transfer test questions
       were Animated (M =2.58, SD =1.69), Static integrated (2.54, 1.07), and Static non-integrated (2.62, 1.12). A 1-
       way ANOVA revealed no significant group difference on the transfer test questions (F(2, 42)= 0.01, p > 0.05).
               The   above  results  partially support the    first hypothesis. Evidence    emerged in   the post-test that the
       economic diagrams questions were better answered by the animation group than the static integrated group. It is
       notable that the economic diagrams questions closely imitated the presentation materials, and therefore were
       perhaps an example of the congruence principle (see Tversky et al., 2002). Tversky et al. have argued that one
       condition in which animations may be effective is when they closely resemble the material to be learnt. But,
       overall the results in favour of the animated group are weak. No transfer effects were found, nor were there any
       differences on test items that examined background knowledge or economic theory.             Surprisingly, the second
       hypothesis was not supported. The split-attention group did not perform any worse than the animated or static-
       integrated groups. This latter finding could imply that the study materials to be learnt could be low in element
       interactivity as the split-attention format was expected to have a negative result. Previous research has found
       that many  of the   cognitive load   theory effects  only    occur when    element  interactivity is high  (Sweller  and
       Chandler, 1994).

       Table 2: Mean group scores on the post-test

        Group                                  Background              Economic            Economic           Combined
                                               knowledge               theory              diagrams           scores
        Animated                   Mean        3.40                    5.43                1.67               10.50
                                   SD          0.91                    2.61                0.62               3.34
        Static integrated          Mean        3.47                    4.43                0.93               8.83
                                   SD          1.06                    2.05                0.88               2.50
        Static non-integrated      Mean        3.53                    4.57                1.47               9.57
                                   SD          0.74                    2.03                0.83               2.37

       Cognitive load measures
       Factors.
               The overall means and standard deviations for the cognitive load measures are shown in Table 1. To
       investigate the potential that the fourteen items form specific constructs (factors) an exploratory factor analysis
       was conducted using the Principal Axis Factoring method with Varimax Rotation and Kaiser Normalisation on
       the whole sample. In order to test reliability, a Cronbach alpha coefficient was calculated for each identified
       factor (Eigenvalues  > 1). As a result four factors were identified.
               The   first factor  (Initial Eigenvalue  =   4.5,    variance explained  =   31.8%,  Cronbach   alpha   = 0.84)
       consisted of the five items Pre-6 (How difficult was it for you to learn the economics concepts?), Pre-5 (How
       difficult was it for you to understand the economics concepts?), Pre-1 (How difficult was it for you to follow the
       demonstration?),   Pre-2 (How   difficult was   it for  you   to learn   from the  demonstration?)    and  Post-3 (How
       difficult was it for you to answer the test questions?). The grouping of these items are consistent in that they
       refer to difficulty in learning the content, following the presentation and answering the test questions. It has
       nominally  been  named   Difficulty  in learning   and appears   to   be a construct that includes    both intrinsic and
       extraneous cognitive load.
               The   second   factor (Initial Eigenvalue    = 3.3,  variance  explained   = 23.7%,  Cronbach     alpha = 0.84)
       consisted of five items Post-6 (How much did you concentrate when trying to learn the economics material?),
       Pre-8 (How high was your concentration level when trying to learn the economics material?), Pre-7 (How much
       effort did you put into learning the economics material?), Post-2 (In solving the test questions how much mental
       effort did you invest?) and Post-1 (In studying the demonstration how much mental effort did you invest?). This
       collection of items is concerned with effort in learning and concentrating, and from this perspective may be
       considered a  mental   effort construct. It has been   nominally    named   Effort  and  concentration  in  learning.  It
       cannot be considered Germane load in the classical cognitive load theory sense because it is not known if this
       mental effort was invested totally in schema acquisition.
               The   third  factor (Initial Eigenvalue    = 1.6,    variance explained   =  11.1%,  Cronbach   alpha   = 0.94)
       consisted of two items Post-4 (How helpful was the demonstration in learning the economics material?) and

1-
Post-5 (How helpful was the demonstration in understanding the economics material?) These two items in this
factor are highly correlated (0.89, p < 0.01) and are an appraisal of the presentations viewed, and was named
Demonstration helpfulness. The final factor       (Initial Eigenvalue = 1.2, variance explained = 8.2%, Cronbach
alpha   = 0.63)   consisted   of  the two    remaining  items   Pre-4  (How   much      were  you  motivated     by   the
demonstration?) and Pre-3 (How difficult was it for you to concentrate during the demonstration?). This was the
weakest   factor  identified  and  was   tentatively labeled   Motivation. However,     of   interest here   is that  the
concentration   item focusing    on  the presentation  is linked  to the  motivation    item, but not   with    the other
concentration items that focus on learning the content (Pre-8, Post-6).

Predictors of performance
          A total correlation matrix of all test scores and the cognitive load measures indicated that performance
on the post-test questions was significantly correlated (0.43, p < 0.01) with only one item (Pre-4: How much
were  you  motivated    by   the demonstration?)   and  hence   was  the only    significant  predictor using   a   linear
regression analysis (r2 = 0.19). In addition, it was also found that Pre-4 was significantly correlated with Pre-3 (-
0.46, p < 0.01) and Pre-8 (0.29, p = 0.05), both of which are measures of concentration; and Post-5 (0.39, p <
0.01) and Post 6 (0.30, p < 0.05) both of which are `usefulness' measures. Two of these items Pre-3 (r2 = 0.10;
How difficult was it for you to concentrate during the demonstration?) and Post-4 (r2 = 0.15; How helpful was
the demonstration    in  learning the economics    material?)  were  significant predictors   of the  motivation    item.
Because   the test  was  conducted    after the  presentation, items  connected   to the presentation    are legitimate
predictors of test performance. In summary it can be seen that motivation during the presentation predicted test
performance,    and in  turn concentration   and  perceived  helpfulness of the   presentation   predicted   motivation,
although they did not predict performance directly.
          It was also notable that not one of the subjective measures correlated with the transfer scores, although
Post-6  (How    much   did you   concentrate when    trying to learn the economics    material?)  just  failed  to  reach
significance (r = -0.30, p = 0.06). This is an interesting result, as it means that the less concentration led to an
increase in test performance.
          In this study there were no significance group differences on overall performance measures. However,
on  the subgroup    of  test items   called economic   diagrams   a  significant result was   found.    Consequently   a
correlation matrix was calculated for this test measure with the subjective cognitive load measures. Significant
correlations were found with difficulty in learning from the presentation (Pre-2: r = 0.41, p < 0.01), difficulty in
understanding the content (Pre-5: r = 0.33, p < 0.05), difficulty in learning the content (Pre-6: r = 0.34, p <
0.05), and concentration levels when trying to learn (Pre-8: r = - 0.30, p < 0.05; Post-6: r = -0.35, p < 0.05). The
significant predictors of performance on these particular types of questions were Pre-5 (r2 = 0.12; difficulty in
understanding the content) and Pre-8 (r2 = 0.09; concentrating when trying to learn). However, the particular
direction of the correlations meant that those who found the demonstration more difficult and performed better
in the test results, as did those who concentrated less. These results are somewhat counter-intuitive and may be
attributed to overall motivation of the students in conjunction with the design of the study materials.

Conclusions
          The two main aims of this study were to test the effectiveness of an animated design, free of transitory
information, in learning some economics content, and to explore the use of multiple measures of cognitive load
including motivational items. Regarding the first aim there was weak support that the animation presentation
was effective. It was hypothesized, based on the argument of Ayres & Paas (2007a, 2007b) that by eliminating
transitory information, extraneous load would be reduced, and consequently animations would become a more
effective learning tool. The evidence does not confirm this hypothesis, nor does it refute it. The most notable
results were found with test questions that most resembled the presentations, the animation group was more
effective than  a static integrated  group,  and  secondly  there was  no  disadvantage    to a  group  that received  a
presentation in a split attention format. The latter result can be plausibly explained by element interactivity, as it
argued by cognitive load theorists that most cognitive load effects are only found with high element interactivity
materials. In contrast, the former result may be explained by the congruence principle due to the similarity of the
test question subset and the presentation (Tversky et al., 2002).
          For the  second  aim   the use of  multiple cognitive   load measures   produced    a number   of  interesting
findings. The finding that the motivation item (How much were you motivated by the demonstration) was the
only predictor of the overall post-test results is significant as it suggests that motivation is a factor, which should
be utilized more frequently in CLT research. A point argued by Moreno (2007) and acknowledged by Paas,
Tuovinen, Van Gervan & Darabi (2005). The exploratory factor analysis indicated four factors, two of which
each explained over 20% of the variance. The first factor, named Difficulty in learning, seemed to contain both
intrinsic and extraneous cognitive load measures. If this is a real construct, then attempts to measure intrinsic
and extraneous loads separately may be complicated by a closer relationship between them than most cognitive
load  theorists assume.    The second    factor, named Effort  and   concentration   in learning, is   notable  because

                                                                                                                              1-
       concentration levels are correlated with mental effort. Concentration items were also found to be predictors of
       the motivation item and test performance on the economic diagram questions. The significant role played by
       concentration is also consistent with the research by Cierniak et al. (2007) who found concentration to be a
       mediator of the split-attention effect, and again links to the importance of motivation. Finally the finding that
       two distinct factors emerged which correspond to content difficulty and mental effort in learning, suggest that
       they are different constructs, therefore supporting the concern of van Gog and Paas (2008) that researchers are
       using different measures in CLT research.
                The study had some limitations. Firstly the materials may have been so low in element interactivity that
       the likelihood of testing the overall hypotheses was reduced. However, future research could incorporate more
       complex material. If an animated group can be found to be more effective than a static group on material less
       similar to the  presentation then  the transitory argument   is  strengthened.    Also a direct  comparison   with a
       animated   group where   information   disappeared from   the  computer   screen   could have    tested the transient
       hypothesis more directly. The sample size was too small to provide great confidence in the factor analysis,
       which must be considered entirely exploratory. Again future research could include a much larger sample to
       investigate the identified factors further. The motivational scale used was somewhat unsophisticated, and future
       experiments   could  include more   traditional measures   of  motivation   found   in  the motivational    literature.
       Nevertheless the study did show that an animated design is effective in an economics domain when it depicts
       graphical information. The study also suggests that motivational issues are highly important when designing
       instructional materials.  Finally, the results  have also  identified   some   potential new    directions  for CLT
       researchers in measuring cognitive load. That is, a battery of items may provide some robust factors that may
       enable more sensitive measures of cognitive load to be identified.

      References
       Ayres, P. (2006). Using subjective measures to detect variations of intrinsic cognitive load within problems.
                Learning and Instruction, 10, 1-12.
       Ayres, P., Kalyuga, S., Marcus, N., and Sweller, J. (September, 2005). The conditions under which instructional
                animation may be effective. Paper presented at an International Workshop and Mini-conference, Open
                University of the Netherlands: Heerlen, The Netherlands.
       Ayres,  P. &  Paas,  F. (2007a). Making  instructional animations     more  effective: A  cognitive load    approach.
                Applied Cognitive Psychology, 21, 695-700.
       Ayres,  P. &   Paas, F.  (2007b).  Can  the Cognitive  Load     Approach   Make    Instructional Animations     More
                Effective? Applied Cognitive Psychology, 21, 811-820.
       Ayres, P., & Sweller, P. (2005). The Split-Attention Principle in Multimedia Learning. In R.E. Mayer (ED.),
                The Cambridge Handbook of Multimedia Learning (pp. 135-146). Cambridge: Cambridge University
                Press.
       Cierniak, G., Scheiter, K., & Gerjets, P. (2007). Subjective and objective load measures: Subjective load ratings
                vs.  Dual-task  methodology.   Paper   presented at   the Cognitive   Load    Theory Conference,   UNSW,
                Sydney, 24-26 March.
       Chandler,  P. &  Sweller, J. (1992). The  split-attention effect   as a factor in the  design of instruction. British
                Journal of Educational Psychology, 62, 233-246.
       Chi, M., Glaser, R., & Rees, E. (1982). Expertise in problem solving. In R. Sternberg (Ed.), Advances in the
                psychology of human intelligence (pp. 7-75) Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
       De Koning, B. B., Tabbers, H.K., Rikers, R.M.J.P., & Paas, F. (2007). Attention cueing as a means to enhance
                learning from an animation. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 21,7731-746
       Hasler, B. S., Kersten, B., & Sweller, J. (2007). Learner control, cognitive load and instructional animation.
                Applied Cognitive Psychology, 21, 713-729.
       Höffler, T. N., & Leutner, D. (2007). Instructional animation versus static pictures: A meta-analysis. Learning
                and Instruction, doi: 10.1016/j.learninstruc.2007.09.013
       Lowe,   R. K.  (1999).  Extracting infromation  from  an  animation     during complex   visual  learning. European
                Journal of Psychology of Education, 14, 225-244.
       Lowe,   R. K.   (2003). Animation   and  Learning:   selective processing   of  information   in dynamic    graphics.
                Learning and Instruction, 13, 157-176.
       Lowe, R. (2004). Interrogation of a dynamic visualization during learning. Learning and Instruction, 14, 257-
                274.
       Lusk, M. M., & Atkinson, R.K. (2007). Animated pedagogical agents: Does their degree of embodiment impact
                learning from static or animated worked examples? Applied Cognitive Psychology, 21,7747-764.
       Mayer, R. E., & Chandler, P. (2001). When learning is just a click away: Does simple user interaction foster
                deeper understanding of multimedia messages? Journal of Educational Psychology, 93, 390-397.

1-
Mayer, R. E., Hegarty, M., Mayer, S., & Campbell, J. (2005). When Static Media Promote Active Learning:
          Annotated     Illustrations  Versus      Narrated    Animations    in   Multimedia   Instruction.  Journal  of
          Experimental Psychology: Applied 11, 256-265.
Miller, G.   A.  (1956). The   Magical   Number       Seven,   Plus or Minus  Two:    Some Limits  on our   Capacity for
          Processing Information. Psychological Review, 63, 81-97.
Moreno, R. (2007). Optimizing learning from animations by minimizing cognitive load: Cognitive and affective
          consequences of signaling and segmentation methods. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 21,765-781.
Paas, F. (1992). Training strategies for attaining transfer of problem-solving skill in statistics: A cognitive-load
          approach. Journal of Educational Psychology, 84, 429-434.
Paas, F., Tuovinen,    J.,  Van Merriënboer,       J. J. G., &  Darabi, A. (2005).  A  motivational  perspective  on the
          relation between     mental    effort and      performance:  optimizing  learner involvement   in  instruction.
          Educational Technology Research and Development, 53(3), 25-34.
Peterson, L., & Peterson, M. (1959). Short-term retention of individual verbal items. Journal of Experimental
          Psychology, 58, 193-198.
Scheiter, K., Gerjets, P., & Opfermann, M. (2007). Online measurement of different types of cognitive load with
          an  adjusted  version  of   NASA-TLX.          Paper presented  at the  Cognitive  Load  Theory   Conference,
          UNSW, Sydney, 24-26 March.
Sweller, J. (1999). Instructional Design. Camberwell, Victoria, ACER Press.
Sweller, J. (1994). Cognitive load theory, learning difficulty and instructional design. Learning and Instruction,
          4, 295-312.
Sweller, J. (2003). Evolution of human cognitive architecture. In B. Ross (Ed.), The Psychology of Learning and
          Motivation, Vol. 43 (pp.215-266). San Diego: Academic Press.
Sweller, J. (2004). Instructional design consequences of an analogy between evolution by natural selection and
          human cognitive architecture. Instructional Science, 32, 9-31.
Sweller, J., & Chandler, P. (1994). Why Some Material Is Difficult to Learn. Cognition & Instruction, 12, 185.
Sweller, J., & Chandler, P. (1991). Evidence for Cognitive Load Theory. Cognition & Instruction, 8, 351.
Sweller,  J., van  Merriënboer,   J.  J. G., &     Paas,  F. (1998).  Cognitive Architecture   and Instructional Design.
          Educational Psychology Review, 10, 251-296.
Tversky, B., Morrison, J. B., & Betrancourt, M. (2002). Animation: Can it facilitate? International Journal of
          Human-Computer Studies, 57, 247-262.
Van   Gog,   T., &  Paas,   F.  (2008).  Instructional    efficiency:  Revisiting the original construct in  educational
          research. Educational Psychologist, 43, 16-26.
Van Merriënboer, J. J. G., & Ayres, P. (2005). Research on cognitive load theory and its design implications for
          E-learning. Educational Technology, Research and Development, 53, 5-13.
Van   Merriënboer,   J.  J. G., & Sweller,      J. (2005).   Cognitive  Load  Theory   and  Complex   Learning:  Recent
          Developments and Future Directions. Educational Psychology Review, 17, 147-177.

Acknowledgements
The research was funded by a grant from the UNSW Faculty of Arts and Social Sciences awarded to the first
author.

                                                                                                                            1-
