                   Do Higher Levels of Arousal Predict Better Learning?
              An Investigation of Learning and Physiological Responses

              Tiffany R. Lee, Joan M.     Davis, Nancy Vye, John D. Bransford, University of Washington, Seattle,
                 Email: tlee13@u.washington.edu, nancyvye@u.washington.edu, bransj@u.washington.edu

                 Abstract: The ability to connect new information to relevant, previously acquired knowledge
                 can  facilitate comprehension    and  memory.    This  study  shows   that the addition  of  person
                 knowledge,   or   knowledge    organized   around  familiar   people, in   the design  of  learning
                 materials has   the potential to improve    learning while  decreasing  the  amount   of effort and
                 attention exerted   by   the learner; this is measured    through  skin  conductance   levels   as a
                 physiological correlate of attention. Findings provide explanatory evidence for why people-
                 focused methodologies, such as video cases or written case studies, contribute to longer-term
                 benefits and improved learning.

      Introduction and Purpose of Study
                 It is well known that the ability to connect new information to relevant, previously acquired knowledge
       can facilitate comprehension and memory (e.g. Bransford & Johnson, 1972; Dooling & Lachman, 1971). Much of
       this work has involved connections of new knowledge to previously acquired scripts or schemas such as "washing
       clothes" (e.g. Bransford & Johnson, 1972). The ability to elaborate and generate self-explanations has also been
       shown to improve learning and understanding of new information (e.g., Chi, de Leeuw, Chiu, & LaVancher, 1994).
       In other words, knowledge organized around people may have a special status, much like spatial organization and
       script-based organization have special mnemonic effects. We use the term "person knowledge" to refer to this
       phenomenon. The ubiquity of person knowledge may have a unique neural basis; alternatively, it may be a type of
       knowledge where many forces conspire to make it special (e.g., people are one of the primary sources of early
       learning, people are motivating, etc). The basis of person knowledge and whether it can be dissociated from other
       forms of learning are important questions to explore (Lin & Bransford, 2005).
                 We   have  research  findings  that show    that there are advantages   to  organizing   information  around
       people. In a prior study (Davis, Lee, Vye, Bransford, & Schwartz, 2006), we found that a conversation was more
       interesting and   easier  to  imagine  when   was  about   familiar  people  than when   the  same   passage   involved
       unfamiliar people. Learners also remembered more of the main ideas from the familiar people conversation.
                 This study is a replication of the Davis et al (2006) study with an added physiological measure of
       participants' skin conductance levels (SCL) to investigate why information organized around familiar people is
       better remembered.    Skin    conductance  measures   are  widely   accepted as a  measure   of physiological   arousal
       (Dawson, Schell, & Filion, 2000). Prior research indicates that skin conductance levels tend to decrease over
       time as a participant engages in an activity. However, engaging stimuli can increase participants' arousal or
       attention and  is associated   with a  sustained  level of  skin conductance    during the  activity or task  (Mutz &
       Reeves, 2005). We predict that participants who learn information organized around familiar people will show a
       more sustained level of skin conductance than those who learn information organized around unfamiliar people,
       indicating a greater level of arousal or interest in the material.

      Methods
                 Participants. Twenty-five (25) students from the teacher education program at a northwest university
       volunteered to participate in the study. This group of participants was selected because they had previously
       participated in a classroom activity that would be part of this study, although unknown to them at the time. The
       participants' average age was 28.0 years; 21 participants were female and 4 participants were male.
                 Procedure. Participants were randomly assigned to one of two groups (1) General Person Knowledge
       group  (GPK)    and  (2)  Personal  Person  Knowledge      group   (PPK). Participants   in both   groups individually
       completed four tasks: (1) reading of materials while skin conductance levels were recorded, (2) second reading
       of materials   while skin    conductance   levels were  recorded,   (3) comprehension     and interest  ratings of  the
       previously read conversation, and (4) recall of information from the previously read conversation. The reading
       materials were  presented     on a computer   screen, and  the  participants were  given  three minutes   to read each
       conversation. Participants' skin conductance levels (SCL) were recorded as a correlate of attention and arousal
       using a BioGraph Infiniti 3.1 from Thought Technology Ltd.
                 For the first reading, both groups read a written conversation between five unknown persons who have
       just successfully worked together to solve a problem and are discussing whether to work together in the future
       (see appendix 1). In this conversation, each person was marked only by his or her names (e.g., Len, James,
3-     Helen,  etc.). Participants   were  given  three  minutes   to  read the  conversation.   During   the reading  of the
conversation, measures of participants' skin conductance were collected.
         For the second reading, participants in the GPK group were asked to read the exact same conversation
with the same five unfamiliar people. Alternately, the PPK group was reminded of five people whom they all
"knew" (characters from a short movie they had seen a few weeks prior as part of an unrelated course activity).
After this reminder, the PPK participants were asked to read the same conversation a second time, but with one
difference: the initial names of unfamiliar people had been replaced with names of the familiar people (i.e., Len
became   Larry, James    became     Jasper, etc). Again,    measures   of   participants' skin conductance      were   collected
during this task.
         At the completion of the two readings, the physiological equipment was removed from the participant's
hand.  Participants then    rated  the two    conversations    in  terms of relative  interest   and comprehensibility.     For
interest, participants rated the conversation on a 5-point scale: much less interesting, somewhat less interesting,
equally  interesting, somewhat      more    interesting,  or   much   more    interesting.   The same     scale was    used for
comprehensibility.
         The last task required participants to recall information from the previously read conversation. They
were reminded of the three themes from the conversation: (1) celebration and thanks, (2) ideas for improvement,
and (3) reasons for adding outreach through an internship program and were asked to provide as much detail
about the conversation as possible, including who was involved in particular ideas or activities.

Results and Discussion
         The results from this study confirm the value of person knowledge in the design of learning materials,
as shown in previous studies on person knowledge. The written conversation organized around familiar people
received significantly higher ratings for interest and comprehension by the Personal Person Knowledge group in
comparison to the General Person Knowledge group, F (1, 18) = 3.879, p < 0.05; F (1, 18) = 22.224, p < 0.001.
In addition, the  PPK    group   recalled   significantly   more   overall  details and   correctly  paired details    from the
previously read conversations, F (1, 18) = 4.588, p < 0.05; F (1, 18) = 3.758, p < 0.05.
         The physiological component of this study, measures of participants' skin conductance levels, provides
novel  insights about    why    participants' in  the PPK    group  perform   better  on   the recall  than the  GPK    group.
Contrary to our initial hypothesis, analyses of the skin conductance measure reveal that participants in the PPK
group showed a decrease in skin conductance levels while the levels of the GPK group increased. We expected
the PPK group remain higher, indicating more sustained attention and interest, and thus explaining why this
group  might    perform     better on  the    recall  task. Interestingly,   this group    had   decreasing     levels of   skin
conductance, yet performed better on the recall task.
         One interpretation is that the PPK group found the material less interesting than the GPK group during
the second reading. However, this does not align the interest ratings data which indicate that participants in the
PPK group generally rate the information as more interesting.
         A more plausible possibility is that the PPK group had an easier time reading the second conversation
because they had some familiarity with the persons involved. Therefore, they did not need to exert as much
effort to comprehend the text and remember information. This implies that participants in the PPK group who
read the text about familiar people were able to attend to the information less while reading and still achieve
better results compared      to the GPK     group,   despite   the extra effort exerted    by  that group.  The   finding   that
participants in the PPK      group  rated the    second  conversation    as more    comprehensible     is consistent   with the
imagery data.
         If the second interpretation of the findings is correct -- that people in the PPK group exerted less effort
but  performed    better because    of the    familiarity   of persons   in the text  --  these  unexpected     findings  have
interesting implications for education. It appears that information is better remembered when organized around
familiar people,  and    it also requires   less cognitive   effort for  this learning    to occur.  These  findings   provide
support for the benefits of designing instruction that takes advantage of person knowledge.

References
Bransford, J.D., & Johnson, M.K. (1972). Contextual prerequisites for understanding: Some investigations of
         comprehension and recall. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 11, 717-726.
Chi,   M.T.H.,  de  Leeuw,      N., Chiu,     M.,  &   LaVancher,     C.   (1994).  Eliciting    self-explanations   improves
         understanding. Cognitive Science, 18, 439-477.
Dooling, D.J., & Lachman, R. (1971). Effects of comprehension on retention of prose. Journal of Experimental
         Psychology, 88(2), 216-222.
Davis, J., Lee, T. R., Vye, N., Bransford, J.D., & Schwartz, D.L. (2006). The role of people knowledge in
         learning narrative and domain content. In S. Barab, K. Hay & D. Hickey (Eds.), Proceedings of the
         Seventh International Conference of the Learning Sciences (ICLS). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
         Associates.
Dawson,   M.E.,   Schell,    A.M.,  &   Filion,   D.L.  (2000).    The   electrodermal    system.   In J.T.  Cacioppo,    L.G.     3-3
              Tassinary, & G.G. Berntson (Eds.), Handbook of psychophysiology, 2nd ed (pp. 200-223). New York:
              Cambridge University Press.
      Lin, X., & Bransford, J. (2005). People knowledge: A useful ingredient for bridging cultural differences between
              teachers and students. Paper   presented at the   meeting   of the American  Educational   Research
              Association, Montreal, Canada.
      Mutz, D.C., & Reeves,  B. (2005). The   new videomalaise:   Effects of televised incivility on political trust.
              American Political Science Review, 99(1), 1-15.

3-
