      Considering semiotic ideologies in the design of literacy learning
           software for multilingual youth and adults in rural South Africa

       Andrew Babson , University of Michigan, School of Education, Prechter Laboratory for Interactive Technology
             610 E. University Ave. Ann Arbor, MI 48109, Tel: +1-734-647-2119, Email: ababson@umich.edu

                Abstract: Recently, interest has grown in understanding how sociocultural processes inform
                the design and use of learning technologies. In 2006, I managed the design and piloting of a
                multilingual literacy learning software for youth and adults in rural South Africa. Drawing
                from   observations  of   and informal   interviews  with twenty-six    learners    who  piloted the
                software, I propose that the software provided the learners with opportunities to reassess not
                only important   self-understandings   as learners  of basic  literacy  skills, but also speakers   of
                certain languages and in general, certain kinds of people. The findings, analyzed within the
                framework of semiotic ideology, support a broader proposition that literacy programs, and the
                technologies used in them, can serve as forcible mediators of people's understandings of what
                languages, signs and sociocultural identifications are.

      Introduction
                This paper presents a case study and theorization of the potential of a multilingual literacy learning
       software to mediate people's understandings of languages, signs, and social identifications.
                First, I provide an overview of my research in Limpopo province, South Africa on the usage of the
       software mentioned above, developed as part of a project called the Bridges to the Future Initiative (BFI). The
       BFI software  was  designed    for low-literate adult  basic education  and training     (ABET)   program    learners in
       Limpopo. I then describe my approach to the study and my methods of analysis, followed by a brief historical
       overview of the South African language in education policy. I include this overview to contextualize attitudes
       about and practices of language and education among black South Africans (especially in rural areas). I will
       later argue that these culturally shared ideas about language and signs are highly relevant to designing and using
       literacy learning technologies (cf. Snyder and Prinsloo 2007, Young 2008).
                Subsequently, I discuss the potential of literacy learning software to mediate people's understandings of
       languages, signs, and social identifications. Referring to the work of Irvine, Keane and Lemke, I argue that
       semiotic (including language) ideologies in turn mediate the usage of the software in important ways, and I
       support my claims with excerpts from field notes and informal interviews taken during the piloting.

      Study Overview and Methodology
                In this study, I  provide   a historical and ethnographic    analysis  of interview   and observational     data
       gathered from the usability testing of a prototype of the BFI software. The theoretical framework of my analysis
       is language and semiotic ideology, with a focus on the latter. The research took place in two villages in central
       Limpopo   province  in  August    of 2006.  I  informally  interviewed   twenty-six      Sepedi-speaking  users  of   the
       software, during  and   after the  observation  of the software   usage  itself. Two     research assistants facilitated
       interactions with the users, only one of which spoke English. I also made notes during all of the usage sessions,
       and videotaped portions of the testing. As analysis of these project data is currently in progress, the data sources
       I have used for this paper are limited to my field notes and informal interviews. Dissertation field work, to be
       conducted in May of this year, will incorporate language attitude surveys and structured interview protocols to
       obtain further data on the phenomena in discussion.

      South African language in education, past and present
                A central premise of this paper is that research into the design and usage of learning technologies is
       incomplete  without a   substantial  understanding  of the  historical and  cultural processes    that precede   it. The
       following is a brief descriptive analysis of key themes and facts about language in education issues, particularly
       for rural blacks South Africans, including the policies that favored the development of the BFI software.
                From the mid-seventeenth century until 1994, those of European descent have held power in the region
       referred to today as the Republic of South Africa. From Dutch colonization (1652-1795), to English dominance
       (1806-1948)   and most  recently,   Afrikaner  apartheid  government    (1948-1994),     the black South  African    has
       lived, in the words of Sol Plaatje, "as a pariah in the land of his birth" (In Willan 1996 [1914]:186). Formal,
       secular, public  education in  South   Africa was  not offered  until  1839 by   the British   colonial administration

1-
         (Malherbe 1900, Kallaway 1984). Even then, two basic systems for education had settled into place:
one for  the    mostly   white  elite,  and  one   for  the mostly    non-white  underclass     ­  as  a form   of  "peaceful
subjugation" according to Cape Colony governor Sir George Grey (Jansen 1990: 198). The situation, although
improved, persists in South Africa to this day.
         Language in education has been just one factor in this persistent and stark inequity, but I focus on it
here in order to highlight a few points for my research in rural South Africa. First, the English language has
maintained a preeminent place in the regional linguistic market and popular imagination since colonial times
(Kamwangamalu 2007). Second, the history of education for black South Africans comprises two stories: one of
learning   and  sociocultural   change,     and one   of colonial   conquest    and   missionary    imposition.   Even   when
education was available for blacks, it was mostly by Christian missionaries as evangelization, and of a standard
far below what was available to children of European descent (Shanafelt 2003). As Prinsloo notes, "the political
and economic circumstances under which groups of people first encounter literacy directly impact how they take
hold of literacy... and have bearing on the facts of literacy today" (1999:418).
         And today, almost all South African parents want their children to learn English in order to increase
opportunities   for  social  advancement     (Heugh    2000).  Yet,   the most  blacks   still have little access   to English
education,  and  live   in serious  poverty    (Nelson   Mandela    Foundation   [NMF]     2005).   Although   Harvey    Graff
(1989) was right to point out that high literacy skill alone ­ in this case, English literacy -- does not alone
redress social  inequalities,   it is  hard to  convince   South   African   parents, especially  in   rural areas, otherwise
(NMF 2005).
         Many early leaders of the resistance to white hegemony in South Africa were educated at English-
medium mission schools (most mission schools were local-medium), which received funding from the British
administration   (Prinsloo   1999,    Jansen  1990).   For  example,    ANC   co-founders      Plaatje and   John Dube   were
educated at mission schools, as well as subsequent ANC leaders such as Albert Luthuli and Nelson Mandela (De
Klerk  2002:44).    In a nod   to  Graff, however,    many     of these leaders already    came   from  relatively  privileged
backgrounds. Yet, English "has sometimes been seen in the popular imagination as evidence for the success of
English-medium education" (ibid.). Attitudes toward African languages have tended to suffer by comparison.
         The Bantu Education Act of 1953 mandated the end of missionary education. The legacy of missionary
and apartheid    policies   of mother   tongue  education   ­   to use   the mother   tongue   as language   of learning   and
teaching (LoLT) -- has left the impression among some black South Africans, especially in rural areas, that
either learning  the   local language    as a   subject or  using  it as  the LoLT    is a waste  of   time, even   a  form  of
oppression (NMF 2005, Vesely 1998). Heugh (2000:19), however, cites research saying that most South African
parents want their children to learn their mother tongues in school along with English (ibid.). Nonetheless, to the
majority of black South Africans who have no access to high-quality English language education, the English
language remains "unassailable but unattainable" (Alexander 2000, Brock-Utne and Holmarsdottir, 2004:67).
         Addressing such language concerns, the South African Constitution of 1996 not only enshrines nine
African languages as official (along with Afrikaans and English) -- it has also enshrined the individual's right to
an  education   in   an  official  language     of  choice,  "where     that  education   is   reasonably  practicable"    (SA
Constitution 1996: Section 29 Part 2). The strategy behind this legislation has been to raise the status of African
languages while promoting multilingualism and empowering local decisions about language in education. The
language in education policy (LiEP) of 1997 suggests additive multilingualism in schools, meaning that the
mother tongue should be used as the (LoLT)as long as possible (Republic of South Africa, 1997). The LiEP also
suggests   that "the   underlying   principle   is to maintain    home    language(s) while    providing   access  to  and  the
effective acquisition of additional language(s)" (ibid.; cf. Heugh 2000, 2008). The problem with the LiEP is that
it suggests additive multilingualism, but does not enforce it (Brock-Utne and Holmarsdottir 2004: 72).
         The South African Schools Act of 1996 mandated that parents, as the heads of school governing boards
(SGBs)   have   final  say  over   the school's    LiEP (RSA,     1996).  But parental   choice   has  been  very  difficult to
enforce at the local level in rural areas for numerous reasons, including: traditional rural governance, parental
illiteracy, gender inequality, lack of English teachers, and constraints on the time and energy of poor people
struggling to make a living (Biseth 2005, De Klerk 2002, NMF 2005, Ntsebeza 2006).
         The current policies, in historical context, are revolutionary. Yet decentralization and the flexible LiEP,
although meaning well, have conspired against the enforceability of additive multilingualism. On the ground,
there  are not  only   practical   challenges   to  implementation      but  ideological ambivalence     among    locals  and,
importantly,    lack  of political  will  among     the  elite (Bambgose      2000).  Additive    multilingualism   has  been
advocated forcefully by a plurality of the scholarly community (Alexander 2000, Heugh 2000, Skutnabb-Kangas
2004), although there are well-argued critiques of note (Gupta 1997, Makoni 2003, Pennycook 2002).
         I believe that this complex situation must be understood in consideration of all scholarly debates, but
should also be well grounded in historical understanding and ethnographic field research. In the next section, I
provide an overview of the field testing process for the BFI software. This overview will set up my analysis of
the ideological dimensions of using the software, informed by the above historical and policy context.

                                                                                                                                   1-
      BFI Software Overview
                In 2005 and 2006, I was the South Africa research manager for the Bridges to the Future Initiative
       (BFI), a project  of the International Literacy  Institute (ILI), based   at the   University of   Pennsylvania.   The
       premise of this field research was to understand the conditions under which youth and adult ABET learners
       might use the BFI software, and to note design and usability issues.
                The BFI began as an effort to address literacy acquisition in multilingual, rural environments, the spirit
       of additive multilingualism. The rationale was to exploit the potential of interactive software to provide flexible,
       user-directed and engaging  literacy learning opportunities.  A   further   intent was to create   locally  developed,
       relevant  and  useful  educational  content,  thereby  going    beyond    issues   of  access  to    information   and
       communication technologies (ICTs) in developing countries to issues of content.
                The first version of the BFI software was created in 2001 for mother tongue literacy learning in rural
       India. BFI South Africa, launched in early 2005, intended to build on best practices from BFI India, as has been
       co-sponsored   by  the South  African   Department    of   Education    for  the   ABET   program    to facilitate its
       incorporation of additive multilingualism into the curriculum. The BFI-SA prototyping process began in 2005,
       but it was not until spring of 2006 that a workable, testable FlashTM-based prototype was designed. This design
       process  and  subsequent  testing involved   myself as   client-side project  manager   as    well as designers    and
       consultants in Johannesburg and Pretoria.
                The software was designed with a familiar but aspirational aesthetic in mind. Thus, language (including
       features thereof, such as  style, accent, etc.), clothing, as well   as the  personal  and    social qualities of  the
       characters such as age, gender, role, etc. all contributed to the process of the learner making meaning of the
       software usage experience as a whole. Each character is meant to represent a part of the demographic spectrum;
       the clothing  and appearance is   meant to be    congruent with   local appearance,   yet slightly   better to add an
       aspirational value to the software experience. The program features exercises guided by an avatar through a
       narrative sequence (see Figure 1 below). The principal investigator of the project suggested including the avatar
       guide because, as in India, virtually no learners had ever used a computer. I suggested a mobile phone, because
       it is one of the few ICTs that has penetrated even the poorest and most remote rural areas of South Africa. I
       considered it a semiotic link to the software, a way for users to make sense of a new technology in relation to a
       relatively similar local one. The latest prototype revolves around a scenario of seven characters traveling in a
       combi minibus from the village to town (see Figure 2 below). The narrative sequence requires the learner to
       complete exercises on basic literacy subskills (e.g., letter recognition, grapheme-phoneme correspondence) in
       order to advance through the narrative. Users are encouraged by the avatar to click on the characters and follow
       prompts to drag and drop blocks of sound units in the correct order, forming words. There is also a numeracy
       section involving counting change for the combi fare. The avatar prompts the users to make navigation choices
       when they get stuck or during delays, and point to a help section if needed. The software requires no basic
       literacy skills and is guided entirely by auditory and visual cues (see Figure 1 above) for the user to follow. Each
       waypoint in the software's interactive sequence constitutes some corresponding benchmark of the South African
       National Qualification (NQF) standard for literacy in the language concerned. The software was also expected
       to interest youth and adult learners and to save the latter potential embarrassment- even foster pride- by learning
       independently on the computer (Wagner 1993:7; Eisenlohr 2004).

            Figure 1. BFI screen shot, "Palesa". In Sepedi, the bubble text reads, "Click here to learn in Sepedi".

1-
Findings from usability testing and observation
         In August 2006, I talked with ABET learners about the BFI software, and observed their usage of it.
Three important facts about the users are that they 1) can read neither Sepedi nor English, but speak up to five
languages 2) are only using a mouse for navigation and 3) have barely if ever used a computer. Of the twenty-
six piloters, twenty   four were   women, with    an average age   of forty-three. All were  at ABET     Level  1 or 2,
meaning that they were still learning basic literacy skills in Sepedi and English.

Figure 2. BFI screen shot, "combi". In Sepedi, the bubble text reads, "Hi, my name is Thabo and I will be your
                                                     taxi driver"

         For testing, each user was asked to open the program and follow the guidance of the avatar. From my
observations, the usability issues here became obvious. User difficulties exacerbated the well-known sensitivity
of  some   adult  learners  to being  perceived   as unintelligent (Wagner     1993).  There  was   also considerable
performance anxiety and a lack of feeling in control of the software's process. After initial testing, I advised the
design team on creating a more robust and captivating "help" function in order to promote independent usage.
Multiple iterations  of the   help  function improved   the learning  experience   for users -- though   at the end  of
development,   it was   clear  that more basic    computer  usage  tutoring  (e.g. mouse)  was   necessary.  Both   the
scenario and the characters were meant to feel familiar yet aspirational. I suggested this scenario based on my
field experience in one of the two testing locations, Ga-Mothiba. Such local knowledge informed the entire the
two month long design process.
         Informal interviews I conducted with each user increased my impressions that not only were many of
them enthusiastic about the opportunity to use a computer, but also to learn English and Sepedi literacy. Further,
they were generally receptive to the design, the characters and the scenario. Learners were content to learn
literacy skills in their home language. As one learner said, "the part I liked most about the software was the
beginning,  when   Palesa   started speaking   to me in my   mother   tongue".  When   learning  in this environment,
learners identified with the characters (one learner was teased for looking like the character Sarah, another said
Pula looked like her husband) -- especially when testing in the village area of Nobody and Ga-Mothiba, the
setting of the software scenario. A strong finding was that almost all learners were happy to hear Sepedi in the
software, to hear music from the area in the software -- in general, to experience the culturally familiar in the
software: "The computer can teach us all languages, even Pedi" "white people usually use computers, I did not
expect to learn Pedi or Tsonga or African languages on a computer". This fairly new association of local culture
with computer usage resulted in a strong, fairly unified response from all of the learners: namely, that they
began to see Sepedi (and themselves, Sepedi speakers) as less bound to the ideology of "tribal" and "purely
rural" of the apartheid era.
         In the next section, I describe my theoretical framework for explaining this process of ideological shift.

Language as semiotic, and ideologies thereof
         Ideologies deserve attention in this discussion of education and specifically literacy programs because,
I argue, they mediate how people think about languages, signs and sociocultural identifications. In this section, I
start with a brief explanation of how I use ideology in this paper, and then discuss language and more broadly
semiotic ideologies in the context of my field research.
         I use   Terry Eagleton's   definition of  ideology, which  is, "a  body   of meanings  and  values  encoding
certain interests" (2007:   45). To   be clear,   my use of  ideology   here is not   in the spirit of Engels'    "false

                                                                                                                           1-
       consciousness", (cf. Woolard 1998:16) but more akin to the fairly neutral concept of "shared set of ideas". Why
       ideology? After all, similar concepts exist to describe organized and shared sociocultural knowledge. Examples
       include the schemata of Anderson (1977) and predecessors, the cultural models of Holland and Quinn (1987), or
       in a Chomskian    and   evolutionary   vein, the   mental  modules   of Dan  Sperber     (1986),  to name  a  few. Using
       ideology has to do with disciplinary background and perspective, but I also find ideology's wide applicability
       across many domains very useful. The term links ideas to cultural and semiotic processes, political economy and
       power relations in a way the aforementioned cognitivist construals tend not to.
                Further, how do we determine the existence of an ideology? Eagleton notes, "nobody has ever clapped
       eyes on an ideological formation" (2007: 195). Ideologies emerge in group research, and through cross-cutting
       historical and comparative analysis, as "attitudes" or "beliefs". Scholars must reflect on their own ideologies as
       they locate and construct the objects of their research in the field (Philips 2000, Wee 2006). When we claim to
       have grasped  an  ideology   in the  field,  it is in some  ways  a   reflection  of our  own.  Yet,  as Eagleton  notes,
       ideologies don't emerge from the ether, nor purely in the analyst's mind: "deeply persistent beliefs have to be
       supported to some extent, however meagerly, by the world our practical activity discloses to us" (2007: 12).
                Culturally shared ideas and their associated practices also have a durability and resistance independent
       of the interloping analyst ­ which makes them available as objects of research (cf. Keane 2003). A further
       question for another paper, in the words of Thompson, is "why do ideologies `stick', and what makes them
       susceptible to change?" (Thompson 1984:132, quoted in Eagleton 2007:195).
                Based on my data on the usage of the BFI software, I argue that language policies and the programs
       they engender  serve    as forcible mediators      of how  people   think about   languages,   signs  and themselves  as
       speakers of certain languages (Irvine 2007; 1989: 256). In other words, literacy programs mediate ideologies of
       language -- themselves mediators of self-understandings about languages and their speakers. An ideology of
       language ­ or "cultural system of ideas about social and linguistic relationships, together with their loading of
       moral and   political interests"   (Irvine  1989:255)   -- informs   people  how     to  construe linguistic  phenomena
       (languages per se, utterances, speakers, etc.) in their sociocultural context.
                Relevant to the ABET learners with whom I interacted, Irvine has notably described how ideology
       "links the nature of linguistic differentiation" in a multilingual environment "to social differentiation", such that
       a shift in either system would affect the other (ibid.). In a multilingual environment such as rural Limpopo, a
       change outside of the language situation itself could effect a change in how people thought of the language, and
       thereby  how  people    would   actually   use  the   language. Irvine's  example    of  Senegalese   multilingualism  is
       particularly appropriate here:

                The  political and   economic     connection   with  (former   colonist) France   eventually    affected
                villagers' ideas about French, now the official language of the Senegalese state. (M)any people
                who used to consider French unlearnable and unspeakable had changed their minds (Irvine
                1989:255).

                This example highlights how an outside intervention can change how people think about language. I
       propose  that the BFI   software,   by offering    software-based   instruction  in  both  English   and Sepedi   literacy,
       subverts the value relation between English and African languages, opening the way for the kind of shift Irvine
       describes.

      Semiotic Ideology and the Use of the BFI Software
                Keane (2007) widens the discussion from languages however to all types of semiotic -- arguing that
       "the very distinction between what counts as language and what does not is itself constructed ideologically, and
       it differs across social and historical contexts" (2007:18). Lemke (1998) has argued that language is just one
       "semiotic  resource   system"   of many    ­that   "we never   make   meaning    with language    alone"  (Lemke   1998).
       Further, Lemke    asserts  that "semiotic    approaches    can  say back   that  the  role of  language   in constituting
       meaningful  cultural  phenomena     is problematic     because  such  phenomena      are always   multimodal  and   trans-
       linguistic and meanings are never constituted by linguistic signs alone" (2008). This leads to the suggestion that
       communities   share   general,  customary    meta-views    of   about language,   but    also how    language and   other
       semiotics relate (Lemke 1995, 1998). In this spirit, Keane has called for a broadening of language ideology to a
       semiotic ideology, or set of "basic assumptions about what signs are and how they function in the world" (2003:
       419). Keane and Lemke point to the value of considering all semiotic resources, not just language, to understand
       the shift Irvine describes above. This move opens up further analytical possibilities for researching multimodal
       resources like interactive learning software such as the BFI. Just as a language ideology is a resource for users to
       make sense of the language-related issues in the software, semiotic ideology is a resource for people to make
       sense of "different modes of signification at play" (e.g. text, music, etc.) and the "dynamic interconnections
       between them (e.g. lyrics of the music in Sepedi) ... within a particular historical and social formation (usage of

1-0
the software    as  part  of BFI     pilot testing)"   (Keane    2007:   18). Keane     calls a   set  of   such  of dynamic
interconnections a representational economy (ibid.; Keane 2003:410; cf. network in Latour 2005).
          Applying    these  concepts   to   the   BFI   situation, the  software   usage  experience     happens    within  a
representational   economy   that  is fairly    new  for the ABET     learners: that arising   in  the  usage  of interactive,
multilingual learning software. I suggest that their experiences and reactions to the software are organized by
two   competing    semiotic  ideologies    that shape   the representational  economies    of   a) using    and  manipulating
printed texts and text objects, and b) using the BFI software.
          Another concept from Keane's work, bundling (which I find to be relevant to schemata and cultural
models)   is useful  for  describing  how    representational    economies    cohere   through  the   mediation   of   semiotic
ideologies (Keane 2003: 414). Basically, certain characteristics can apply to multiple entities ­ e.g. "newness"
can apply to a new car, a new attitude, etc. Such a characteristic "cannot be manifest without some embodiment
that inescapably binds it to some other qualities (in that embodiment) as well". Thus "newness" in all situations
involves   connections    to other   qualities,    which   may   include    freshness,  youth,  shock,    etc.   Again,  these
connections happen as a result of a necessary embodiment, and in a contextually contingent way. A new car is
different  than a  new    ailment ­  "newness"      thus  shifts with   the context. Within   representational    economies,
certain signs cohere based on such contingent qualities, and the coherence is mediated by the semiotic ideology.
Referring to Irvine's example, "unlearnability" was once a quality of the French language in rural Senegal ­
until  a shift  in the political  economy    of    the region shifted   the  relationship between      French   language   and
"learnability". Irvine describes this shift as mediated by language ideology. I will discuss further below how
qualities such as "Pedi-ness" or "whiteness" or "modernity" ­ all at play in the representational economy of the
ABET learners using the BFI software ­ are, basically, redefined for users through a shift in semiotic ideology.
          Since missionary education, unschooled people in many parts of rural South Africa have been referred
to  as "red"   people  -- versus  those    who  took   up  literacy education   readily (Harries   2001,    NMF,     2005: 37;
Ntsebeza 2006; Prinsloo 1999: 420). Redness necessarily exists with other qualities, though these co-presences
vary across representational economies. For rural South Africans, redness is co-present with tradition, and with
lack of education. Education in general allows rural people to move, to work outside of the village, to interact
with speakers of other languages. Thus, literacy is associated with social mobility, modernity and migration
from the village to the city. In one informal interview, a woman who spoke some English told me that she only
spoke English with "educated white people" in town. This is connected to the legacy of apartheid, whereby
black people were literally trapped in local economies of joblessness and under-education (Kallaway 1994).
Further, due to the lack of development of African language printed material, and social and economic priorities,
most rural areas in South Africa lack a culture of literacy ­ of integrating reading and writing practices into their
daily lives (cf. Maake 2000:137). Today, people in rural areas have limited use for literacy -- local businesses
are scarce and jobs are few. Thus education is seen as a way out, but also as a threat to rural cultural continuity
          Many of the older ABET students I spoke with (all of whom were educated under apartheid)considered
knowledge technologies such as education, English literacy and computers to be basically "white" ­ "white
people use computers, at the bank", "computers are made by white people", etc. Many of them are pensioners,
and go to town only for their checks, or health reasons, and equate computers with banking machines. I saw
however    a  parallel between    the   semiotic    ideology  of    computer  technology   and     that  of  English   literacy
technology: fourteen of the twenty six ABET learners I spoke with were interested in learning to speak English
in order to communicate with white people. This connects with other work (e.g. McKinney 2007; Banda 2000;
Snyder and Prinsloo 2007) that discusses how, to many black South Africans, participation in the "white" world
is a precondition for material success.
          This  brings   me  to  reassert  that  the   BFI  software    usage de-bundled   key    qualities  ("Pedi-ness"   or
"whiteness" or "modernity") which allowed for new semiotic relations in the local representational economy of
using  the   software. This  shake-up     of the   representational  economy    subsequently    led   to  a shift in   semiotic
ideology   about   those  relations: in short,   problematizing     the associations between    whiteness    and  modernity,
.being educated, digitized, etc. One example: the set of ideas about signs indicating whiteness (e.g., modernity,
urbanization English literacy) shifted as a result of a new object in the system of words and things hanging
together  as  a representational  economy       of software   usage.  Another   set  of ideas  about    literacy  also shifted:
literacy  is no  longer   limited to  books,    and    the  modal   affordances of   them  (text   for   reading,  a   physical
embodiment      of paper   material   for  tactile  manipulation,    etc.). Computer    software   that   is interactive   and
multimodal (music, voice, vocal-text symmetry, drag and drop capability, etc.) changes this ideology of book
use for literacy learning ­ in effect changing the semiotic ideology of literacy learning and practice. Referring to
Lemke (2008), the multimodal potentials of the software enlarge the potentials of the representational economy,
and in effect, to change the semiotic ideology. For example, in addition to the ability to create interactivity with
these characters, the designers could include music: in this case, from a CD I bought outside in Cape Town
featuring two producers from the Ga-Mothiba village, the setting of the software scenario and one of the pilot
testing locations.

                                                                                                                                   1-1
               Rephrasing the key point of this section: I suggest that associations ranging far beyond the linguistic
       were rearranged in the ABET learners' usage of the BFI software. This is especially relevant given the history of
       language  issues  in  rural South    Africa, especially   in Limpopo      province,  and  the  current promotion    of
       multilingualism in both the Constitution and the LiEP.

      Conclusion
               Additive  multilingualism,     through a  re-valorization of African   languages   and multilingualism,  is a
       policy which is meant to encourage a shift in these ideologies of language (Irvine), but as Keane and Lemke
       have pointed out, also of other semiotics. The BFI incorporates this policy into the software experience; in fact,
       the minister of education, Naledi Pandor, endorsed the BFI software as an innovation that may facilitate additive
       multilingualism. Within the theoretical framework I propose in this paper, I suggest that using the software
       introduced a  novel  representational  economy    for the ABET    learners, which   was  mediated  by  their semiotic
       ideologies about literacy. But further, the new connections between language, signs and social identification
       made possible within this representational economy resulted in a subsequent shift of their semiotic ideology of
       literacy, and thus meanings of who is literate, in what languages and how those meanings are construed.
               A key motif of education is social and economic transformation. In South Africa, English language
       skill is perceived by most key to this transformation. But if we are to recall Prinsloo's words (1999), the original
       conditions of the introduction of literacy practices shaped the development of those practices through history.
       Missionaries  treated indigenous    Africans as   heathens   in need of   enlightenment;  the  apartheid  government
       developed policy based on the idea of black Africans as inherently and immutably inferior. If Prinsloo is right,
       then ideas about who is literate, in what language, and what this means for self-understanding, have a long
       history which I argue must stay in the purview of any contemporary analysis (cf. Bartlett 2005 on development
       discourses; Cook 2006 on multilingualism in South Africa; Snyder and Prinsloo 2005 on ICTs in South African
       education). In light of this, a Latourian approach (2005) may be appropriate to further analyze the concept of
       representational economies as networks comprising ideologies, technologies and signs. This approach would re-
       address issues of sociocultural continuity and change, the role of ideology in those processes, and the materiality
       of signs and their political economy.
               Finally,  as  this  research   progresses to  the  dissertation   stage, I  will be building   on  this more
       theoretically-oriented work to focus on more systematically analyzing intergenerational differences in semiotic
       ideology, with particular   attention  to broadened   media   ecologies   and thus  resources  for self-identification
       among youth in Limpopo, considering major policy changes post-1994.

      Bibliography
       Alexander, N. (2000) English Unassailable But Unattainable: The Dilemmas of South African Language Policy
               in Education. PRAESA Occasional Papers, No. 3. Cape Town: PRAESA.
       Anderson,  R. C., Spiro,    R. J., &  Monatague,   W.  E.  (1977).   Schooling   and the  Acquisition  of Knowledge
               Hillsdale, N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum.
       Bamgbose 2000 Language and Exclusion: The Consequences of Language Policies in Africa
       Banda, F.  (2000) The   Dilemma     of the Mother  Tongue:      Prospects for Bilingual  Education  in South  Africa.
               Language, Culture and Curriculum. Vol. 13, No. 1, pp. 51-66.
       Bartlett, T. (2005) Amerindian development in Guyana: legal documents as background to discourse practice.
               Discourse & Society, Vol. 16, No. 3, pp. 341-364.
       Brock-Utne, B. and H. Holmarsdottir (2004) Language policies and practices in Tanzania and South Africa:
               problems and challenges. International Journal of Educational Development, Vol. 24, No.1, pp 67-83.
       Chatterjee, P. (1998) Beyond the nation? Or within? Social Text, 56/16.3: 57-69
       Cook, S. (2006). Language Policies and the Erasure of Multilingualism in South Africa. In M. Achino-Loeb
               (ed.) Silence: The Currency of Power, pp. 52-69. Oxford: Berghan Books.
       De Klerk, G. (2002) Mother-tongue education in South Africa: The weight of history. International Journal of
               the Sociology of Language, Vol. 154, pp. 29-46.
       Eagleton, T. (2007) Ideology: An introduction. London:Verso.
       Eisenlohr, P. (2004) Language Revitalization and New Technologies: Cultures of Electronic Mediation and the
               Refiguring of Communities. Annual Review of Anthropology 33:21-45.
       Evans, N. & M. Seeber (2000). The politics of publishing in South Africa. London Scottsville: Holger Ehling
               Publishing; University of Natal Press.
       Fabian, J. (1991) "Missions and the colonization of African languages," in Time and the Work of Anthropology.
               Chur (Switzerland): Harwood Academic Publishers. pp. 131-54.
       Harries, P. (2001). Missionaries, Marxists and Magic: Power and the Politics of Literacy in South-East Africa.
               Journal of Southern African Studies 23 (3): 405-427.
       Heugh, K. (2000) The Case against Bilingual and Multilingual Education in South. Africa. PRAESA Occasional
               Papers No. 6. Cape Town: PRAESA.

1-
Heugh,  K.  (2008)  Language    policy and  education in Southern   Africa.   In  Encyclopedia    of language    and
         education: volume 1. 2nd ed. May, S. & Hornberger, N.H. (eds). New York: Springer. 355-367.
Holland, D. and N. Quinn (eds.) (1987) Cultural Models in Language and Thought. Cambridge: Cambridge
         University Press.
Irvine, J.T. (1989) When talk isn't cheap: Language and political economy. American Ethnologist Vol. 16, pp
         248-67.
Irvine, J.T. (2007) Personal communication.
Jewitt, C. (2008) Multimodality and Literacy in School Classrooms. Review of Research in Education, Vol. 32,
         No. 1, pp. 241-267.
Kallaway,  P., ed. (1984). Apartheid   and Education: The   Education    of Black  South  Africans.  Johannesburg:
         Ravan Press.
Kamwangamalu,      N. (2007) One  language,  multi-layered  identities: English   in a society in transition, South
         Africa. World Englishes,Vol. 26, No.3, pp.263-275.
Keane, W. (2003) Semiotics and the social analysis of material things. In Language and Communication vol. 23,
         nos. 2-3, pp. 409-425.
Keane, W. (2007). Christian Moderns: Freedom and Fetish in the Mission Encounter. Berkeley: University of
         California Press.
Latour, B. (2005) Reassembling the social. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Lee, C.D. (2003) Toward a framework for culturally responsive design in multimedia computer environments:
         Cultural modeling as a case. Mind, Culture, and Activity, Vol.10, No. 1, pp. 42-61.
Lemke, J.L. (1995) Textual Politics: Discourse and Social Dynamics. London: Taylor & Francis.
Lemke, J.L. (1998) Multiplying Meaning: Visual and Verbal Semiotics in Scientific Text. In J.R. Martin & R.
         Veel, Eds., Reading Science. pp. 87-113. London: Routledge.).
Lemke, J.L. (2008) Personal communication.
Maake, N. (2000). Publishing and perishing: Books, people and reading in African languages in South Africa.
         In: Evans, N., & M. Seeber (eds.) pp. 127-159.
Makoni,  S. (2003)    From misinvention  to disinvention of  language:   multilingualism  and   the  South   African
         Constitution. In S. Makoni et al (eds.) Black Linguistics. Language, society, and politics in Africa and
         the Americas: 132-151. London & New York: Routledge.
Malherbe, E. G. (1900). Education in South Africa, 1652-1922. Cape Town: Juta.
McKinney, C. (2007) `If I speak English, does it make me less black anyway?'`Race' and English in South
         African desegregated schools. English Academy Review, Vol. 24, No. 2, pp. 1013-1752.
Nelson Mandela Foundation (NMF) (2005). Emerging Voices: A Report on Education in South African Rural
         Communities. Cape Town: HSRC Press.
Ntsebeza, L. (2006). Democracy compromised: chiefs and the politics of land in South Africa. Cape Town:
         HSRC Press.
Olender, M.  (1992)   The  cycle of the chosen peoples:  J. G. Herder.    In The   Languages   of  Paradise:  Race,
         Religion, and  Philology in the Nineteenth   Century. pp. 37-50,    tr. Arthur Goldhammer.    Cambridge,
         MA: Harvard University. Press.
Pennycook,  A.   (2002)  Mother   tongues,  governmentality, and   protectionism.    International   Journal  of the
         Sociology of Language 154: 11­28.
Philips, S.U. (2000) Constructing a Tongan nation-state through language ideology in the courtroom. In Paul
         Kroskrity (ed.) Regimes of Language pp. 229-258. Santa Fe, NM: School of American Research Press.
Pinkard, N. (2001) Rappin' Reader and Say Say Oh Playmate: Using children's childhood songs as literacy
         scaffolds in computer-based learning environments. Journal of Educational Computing Research, Vol.
         25, No. 1, pp. 17-34.
Prinsloo, M. (1999) Literacy in South Africa. In D.A. Wagner, R. Venezky, and B.V. Street, (eds.) Literacy: An
         International Handbook, pp. 418-423. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
Republic of South Africa (RSA) (1996) Constitution. Accessed from www.acts.co.za.
Republic of South Africa (RSA) (1996) South African Schools Act (SASA). Accessed from www.acts.co.za
Republic of South Africa (RSA) (1997) Language in Education Policy (LiEP). Accessed from www.info.gov.za.
Shanafelt, R. (2003). How Charles Darwin got emotional expression out of South Africa (and the people who
         helped him). Comparative Studies in Society and History 45:815-42.
Skutnabb-Kangas, T. (2004). "Do not cut my tongue, let me live and die with my language". A Comment on
         English and Other Languages in Relation to Linguistic Human Rights. In Journal of Language, Identity
         and Education, Vol. 3, No. 2, pp. 127-134.
Snyder, I. and M. Prinsloo (2007) Young People's Engagement with Digital Literacies in Marginal Contexts in a
         Globalised World. Language and Education, Vol. 21, No. 3, pp. 171-179.
Sperber, D. (1996) Explaining Culture: A naturalistic approach. Oxford: Blackwell.
Thompson, J.B. (1984) Studies in the theory of ideology. Cambridge: Polity.

                                                                                                                        1-
       Vesely, R. (1998) Multilingual environments for survival: The impact of English on Xhosa-speaking students
       in Cape Town. PRAESA Occasional Papers, No. 5. PRAESA: Cape Town.
       Vygotsky, L.S. (1978) Mind in Society he development of higher mental processes. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
               University Press.
       Wagner, D.A. (1993)  Myths   and misconceptions in adult literacy: A research   and development      perspective
               (Policy Brief 93­1). Philadelphia: National Center on Adult Literacy.
       Wee, L. (2006) The semiotics of language ideologies in Singapore. Journal of Sociolinguistics Vol.10, No. 3,
               pp. 344-361.
       Willan, B. (ed.) (1996) Sol Plaatje: Selected Writings. Johannesburg: Witwatersrand University Press.
       Woolard, K. (1998) "Language ideology as a field of inquiry," in Bambi Schieffelin, K. Woolard, and P.
       Kroskrity, eds., Language Ideologies: Practice and Theory. New York: Oxford U. Press. Pp. 3-47.
       Young, P.A. (2008) Integrating Culture in the Design of ICTs British Journal of Educational Technology, Vol.
               39, No. 1, pp. 6­17.

      Acknowledgements
       Many thanks to my advisor Jay Lemke, as well as Judy Irvine and Webb Keane, for theoretical inspiration.
       Special thanks to Dan Wagner of the ILI for the field research opportunity with BFI in South Africa.

1-
