           A Comparative Discourse Analysis of Online and Offline
                               Knowledge Building Activities

       Hans Lossman, Hyo-Jeong So, National Institute of Education, Nanyang Technological University,
                                        1 Nanyang Walk, Singapore 637616
                            Email: lossman.hans@nie.edu.sg, hyojeong.so@nie.edu.sg

        Abstract: This paper suggests that online collaborative environments like Knowledge Forum
        provide an important arena for students to exercise their ability to formulate reflective ideas. A
        discourse analysis of three primary 4 classes' verbal and written activities during a two-week
        science  unit  showed   that,   during  online  activities there  was   a significant   increase in  the
        number   of   words   students  used to  answer  questions  and   a higher  diversity   in the types   of
        questions and answers online as compared to those in the classroom discourse.

Introduction
        Knowledge Building as a research discipline has aimed to transform educational settings to move away
from  didactic teacher-centered     to learner-centered  constructive   pedagogies..  Most    of   the previous   studies,
however, have focused solely on analyzing online activities in Knowledge Forum even though areas such as
pervasive  knowledge      building, progressive   discourse,  and   the   democratization    of knowledge      have  been
identified as  important   principles  of  Knowledge    Building.  According    to Scardamaili     and  Bereiter  (2006),
Knowledge    Building  Discourse    is  characterized   by progressing    mutual   understanding     rather than   simply
producing  descriptive information     for others to agree or  disagree   with. Our   belief is that to  create a  culture
where a community of learner works together toward Knowledge Building, it is important to understand both
the classroom  and  online  discourse.    Hence,  this paper  illustrates the contrasting discourse    patterns   between
classroom and online knowledge building activities by revealing the discrepancies between these two settings
from qualitative and quantitative views. It should be noted that the purpose of this analysis is not to decide
which  discourse type  is  inherently  more  meaningful    or better, but  rather to  describe  the  nature of  discourse
exchanges in different contexts.

Methodology
        The data presented in this paper comes from the analysis of ten transcribed lessons taken from three
primary four classes doing a science unit on the digestive system. To make a comparison between the offline
and online activities, we coded the online postings with a set of codes used for the classroom discourse analysis.
We then compared the two sets of data to see if there were any significant similarities or differences concerning;
(1) the number of words students use to answer and ask questions online as compared to the classroom, (2) the
diversity of students' verbal interaction online and in the classroom, and (3) the quality and structure of the
verbal and  written interactions.   On  top of the broader    qualitative discourse   analysis, we   chose  to conduct a
lexical analysis (Lee & Fielding, 2004) of text segments coded as (1) teachers' content-related question, (b)
students' content-related answer, (c) students' clarification answer, and (d) students' clarification question.

Results
Comparative Lexical Analysis of Online and Offline Discourses
        As shown in Table 1 there were significant differences between the classroom and online discourses.
The most important finding was the low average number of words that the students used to answer content-
related questions in the classroom. It ranges from an average of 2.5 words for classes A and B to 2.25 words for
class C. In Knowledge Forum there was a significant increase in the numbers of words that students used for the
same  verbal  activities. The  average  numbers    of  words  students  used  to  answer  the   teachers content-related
question online were, 22.4 words for the 25 answers posted by Class A. The student in Class B used an average
of 18.0 words for 3 answers to the teachers' question (and 11.2 words to 54 student questions). Class C used an
average of  36.7 words    for their 25  answers   posted online.   Additionally,  the average   numbers    of  words that
students used to answer other students' content-related questions were 6.0 words, 11.2 words, and 10.7 words
for Classes A, B, and C respectively. There was also a clear tendency to a higher diversity of verbal interactions
online as compared to the more didactic teacher-centered discourse used in the classroom. The most obvious
difference is the demand from classmates to clarify answers and ideas, something that rarely occurred during
classroom activities.

                                                                                                                             3-
       Table 1: Lexical Data: Occurrences and word counts for questions and answers.

                                            Class A                          Class B                        Class C
                                Offline         Online             Offline       Online          Offline          Online
       Total number of          106             3                  123           1               42               1
       content question
       asked by teacher
       Total number of          10 (to t)       0 (to t)           3 (to t)      0 (to t)        7 (to t)         0 (to t)
       content questions        0 (to s)        11 (to s)          5 (to s)      69 (to s)       2 (to s)         25 (to s)
       asked by students
        Total number of         153 (to tq)     25 (to tq)         130 (to tq)   3 (to tq)       42 (to tq)       25 (to tq)
       answers   to content     0 (to sq)       4 (to sq)          6 (to sq)     54 (to sq)      0 (t 0 sq)       18 (to sq)
       questions
       Average number of        2.5 (to tq)     22.4 (to tq)       2.5(to tq)    18.0 (to tq)    2.25 (to tq)     36.7 (to tq)
       words student used       0.0 (to sq)     6.0  (to sq)       2.0(to sq)    11.2 (to sq)    0.0 (to 2 sq)    10.7 (to sq)
       per content answer
       Total number of          0               5 (to s)           0             50 (to s)       0                27 (to s)
       clarification questions
       asked by students
       Total number of          0               1 (to s)           0             16 (to s)       0                9 (to s)
       clarification answer
       from students
       Note: s=student, t=teacher, sq=student question, tq=teachers question

       Comparative Discourse Analysis of Online and Offline Activities
               The most common pattern in the classroom were the teacher `content-related question' followed by
       student `content-related answer', commonly known as IRE (Initiation, Response, Evaluation), one of the most
       common discourse patterns in the classroom (Mehan, 1979). The discourse analysis of the classroom lessons
       showed  clear signs  of IRE  patterns with "quick   and short    answers".   The   dominance   of  this practice is  also
       reflected in the low average number of words students used for answering questions. At only two occasions
       were  the students   allowed to clarify their answers  and    ideas   in the classroom   setting. The   major structural
       difference between the online and offline discourse can probably be described in terms of `time'. While working
       online in Knowledge Forum, the students were given enough time to formulate and think over their answers and
       questions, there was rarely observed in the classroom discourse. This factor may also contribute to the higher
       diversity of questions and answers online.

      Conclusion
               Education is not only about learning a specific content. It is equally important for students to acquire
       the skills to evaluate information and provide ideas in a critical and reflective manner. These skills naturally
       improve   as  the students   progress   through   different   stages  of  development,    but ought    to be  exercised
       intentionally through all levels of education. The present study indicates that there might be reasons to argue
       that online  collaborative environments    like Knowledge       Forum    allow students   to  exercise  their ability to
       construct more complex answers, questions, and ideas. The analysis shows that both the quantity and quality of
       ideas increased   significantly during  online    activities  as compared     to   those in  the  classroom   activities.
       Knowledge Forum and similar online Knowledge Building environments may provide students with an equal
       opportunity to express their ideas.

      References
       Lee, R. M., & Fielding, N. G. (2004). Tools for qualitative data analysis. In M. Hardy & A. Bryman (Eds.),
               Handbook of data analysis. London: Sage.
       Mehan, H. (1979). Learning lessons. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
       Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (2006). Knowledge building: Theory, pedagogy, and technology. In K. Sawyer
               (Ed.), Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences (pp. 97-118). New York: Cambridge University
               Press.

      Acknowledgements
       This research was generously funded by the grant LSL 01/06 SHJ from the Learning Sciences Lab at the
       National Institute of Education in Singapore to the second author.

3-
