 Challenges of and Resources for Reform-based Science Teacher
          Learning: A Case Study of a Preservice Science Teacher

              April Luehmann, Liz Tinelli, University of Rochester, Box 270425 Rochester, NY
                              Email: april.luehmann@rochester.edu, liztinelli@gmail.com

          Abstract:  This     case study  examines    the  challenges faced  and   resources  employed   by   a
          preservice science teacher throughout his teacher preparation program. Challenges included an
          absence of supported space in field experiences, intense emotions associated with learning,
          and establishing "effective" relationships with students. Supports included affordances offered
          by program sequence, program coherence, and a personal, professional blog.

Introduction
          Research has identified strong learning benefits of using reform-based practices, defined as "inquiry into
authentic questions generated from student experiences" (NRC, 1996, pp.32-33). However, there is little evidence of
reform-based practices occurring in secondary science classrooms (Anderson, 2002) with potential factors including
the lack of coherent teacher preparation programs committed to reform (Darling-Hammond & Hammerness, 2006),
the conceptual,  pedagogical,   cultural, and  political  challenges presented specifically to reform-minded    teachers
(Windschitl, 2002), and challenges specific to novice teachers (Feiman-Nemser, 2001). Research clearly suggests a
need for effective supports to adequately prepare science teacher learners for the significant challenges they will face.
This article contributes to the field of learning sciences by 1) offering evidence for the types of challenges encountered
by a pre-service science teacher-learner and 2) implications for future preparation programs.

Literature Review and Theoretical Framework
          Recent   literature has  identified the complexity  involved   in  adequately preparing   novice   teachers to
reconcile a reform-based image of instruction with personal, prior beliefs (Kagan, 1992), position themselves
within  a larger   community    of   practice (Windschitl,  2002),   develop   confidence and  manage    the  emotional
dimensions of personal development (Alsup, 2006), and integrate theory and practice (Feiman-Nemser, 1990).
Program   elements  identified    as successful  include  coherence   between   theory and  practice, developmentally
appropriate curriculum, and teacher learning situated in supportive, authentic contexts (Darling-Hammond &
Bransford (Eds.), 2005) While these findings represent a significant foundation for supporting reform ­based
teacher education   practices,  we   have much    to learn about the  unique   challenges faced  by beginning   science
teachers who are not only preparing to be expert practitioners but also agents of change.
          Identity theory,    and  more   specifically, professional  identity theory  addresses the  unique    learning
challenges involved in becoming a reform-minded science teacher (Luehmann, 2007) and considers experiences
in light of how they impact one's professional practices, values, and commitments (Flores & Day, 2006). We
have argued elsewhere (Luehmann, 2007) that this framework offers the field of science teacher preparation
four primary insights: 1) People approach learning situations with core identities that need to align with the new
identity; 2) Not all forms of participation and engagement are equal with respect to learning potential; 3) Trying
on a new identity within a community of practice involves assuming risks;            and 4) Learning as identity work
occurs in the interpretation, narration, and thus recognition of that participation (by self and others).        In this
study, these four insights serve as a lens for understanding how one preservice teacher experienced his initiation
to reform-based pedagogy as he tried on and developed his identity as a reform-minded science teacher.

Research Design
          An exploratory      case-study  approach    was  used  to  address   two questions:  What   are the   primary
challenges faced by a pre-service science teacher as he progressed through a preparation program committed to
reform-based  pedagogy?       What   features of  his   preparation  program contributed  positively  to  his ability to
successfully face   and work    through   these  challenges? Core    program   field components  for  Orlando   were   a
Saturday Science Club, three separate and unique student teaching placements, and leading an inquiry camp.
All field experiences occurred in conjunction with university coursework which required maintaining a personal
professional web log (blog). The primary data source for this study was one academic school year of Orlando's
blog posts (August 2005 ­ June 2006) consisting of 45 posts (1951 lines) and 32 corresponding comments (http:
www.getrealscience.com/teacherorlando). Two interviews and course artifacts were used as secondary sources
for the purposes of triangulation. Grounded theory (Strauss & Corbin, 1998) was the method of data analysis.
Orlando's blog posts were coded independently by two researchers with respect to: 1) the focus of the post; 2)
the "type of work" engaged in (such as documenting events); 3) evidence of connection making (between theory
and practice); 4) type of comments; and 5) specific blog features employed (such as images and hyperlinks).

                                                                                                                             3-
      Results
                 Our analyses revealed three core challenges that Orlando faced during his pre-service learning. The
       first challenge centered on characteristics of student teaching placements; specifically, Orlando struggled and
       benefited  differently in  placements   that varied dramatically    with  respect   to the combination     of support    for
       reform-based   teaching  and  space  to individualize   instruction  that were  offered    by  his mentor  teachers.   The
       second  significant  challenge was   the  intensity  and   range  of emotional     processing   that emerged     as  a core
       ingredient of  Orlando's   wrestling with  an   idealistic commitment     to inquiry   practices with typical    classroom
       constraints. Lastly, Orlando struggled with defining and establishing "effective" relationships with students that
       both respected  them   and  "managed"    classroom     dynamics.  Three   distinct  support systems   emerged     as being
       particularly effective in addressing these challenges and, thus, nurturing Orlando's identity as a reform-minded
       science teacher.   First, the scaffolded engagement with reform-based practices offered across the preparation
       program sequence gave Orlando developmental access to safety in and ownership over his learning.              Second, the
       coherence of the preparation program allowed Orlando multiple opportunities to make connections between
       theory and practice. Finally, blogging provided Orlando space to engage in interpretation work, work through
       emotions, and engage with like-minded professionals.

      Discussion and Implications
                 Using  identity  development    as  a lens   to  Orlando's  learning   experiences,    we   are  better   able to
       understand the challenges and supports that may be unique to being a preservice reform-minded science teacher;
       informed by these findings we can identify implications for future program design. A programmatic sequence in
       which   appreciation   for reform-based   practices    is  fostered  concomitantly     with   numerous,    developmental
       experiences to try-on reform in various settings nurtures a confidence in and understanding of reform. Providing
       authentic learning-to-teach activities, both within and out of school, provides multiple opportunities for pre-
       service teachers  to  connect  theory  to practice.  Unlike   any   other reflective   practice, public   blogging   offers
       professional learners access to a unique package of powerful learning opportunities such as the ability to be self-
       directed,  the opportunity  to receive  support   and   recognition  from    others, and   the  opportunity   to  serve  as
       "knowledge broker" by advocating for a certain position or vision (Luehmann, in press). Giving pre-service
       teachers access to a variety of supports for interpretation and recognition is essential to supporting professional
       learning with reform-based teaching.

      References
       Alsup,  J. (2006).  Teacher   identity discourses:  Negotiating   personal    and   professional   spaces. Mahway,      NJ,
                 Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
       Anderson, R. D. (2002). "Reforming science teaching: What research says about inquiry." Journal of Science
                 Teacher Education 13(1): 1-12.
       Darling-Hammond,      L.  and  K. Hammerness     (2005).    The  design   of  teacher  education   programs.     Preparing
                 teachers for a changing world: What teachers should learn and be able to do. L. Darling-Hammond and
                 J. Bransford. San Francisco, Jossey-Bass.
       Feiman-Nemser, S. (1990). Teacher preparation: Structural and conceptual analysis. Handbook of research on
                 teacher education. W. R. Houson, M. Haberman and J. P. Sikula. New York, Macmillan: 212-233.
       Feiman-Nemser,    S.  (2001).  From  preparation    to practice: Designing    a continuum     to strengthen   and   sustain
                 teaching. Teachers College Record 103(6): 1013-1055.
       Flores, M.  A.,  &   Day,  C.  (2006).  "Contexts   which   shape   and   reshape   new  teachers'   identities: A   multi-
                 perspective study." Teaching and Teacher Education 22: 219-232.
       Hammerness, K., L. Darling-Hammond, et al. (2005). How teachers learn and develop. Preparing teachers for a
                 changing world. L. Darling-Hammond and J. Bransford. San Francisco, Jossey-Bass: 358-389.
       Kagan,  D.  (1992).  "Professional  growth   among     preservice and  beginning     teachers."  Review    of Educational
                 Research 62(2): 129-169.
       Luehmann, A.L. (2007). Identity Development as a Lens to Science Teacher Preparation. Science Education, 91
                 (5), 822-839.
       Luehmann (in press). Blogging as Support for Teacher Learning and Development: A Case-Study. The Journal
                 of the Learning Sciences.
       National Research Council (1996). National science education standards. Washington D.C., National Academy Press.
       Strauss, A. L. and J. Corbin (1998). Basics of Qualitative Research: Techniques and Procedures for Developing
                 Grounded Theory. London, Sage Publication.
       Windschitl, M. (2002). "Framing constructivism in practice as the negotiation of dilemmas: An analysis of the
                 conceptual,  pedagogical,  cultural   and political challenges     facing teachers."   Review   of  Educational
                 Research 72(2): 131-175.

3-0
