          Representing history: On structuring history lessons as design
          Flávio S. Azevedo, Heather Batchelor, School of Education, 105 Furcolo Hall, 813 North Pleasant Street
                                      University of Massachusetts, Amherst, MA            01003
                                     Email: flavio@educ.umass.edu, hbatchelor@gmrsd.org

                Abstract: We report on a design experiment in which history lessons are structured in terms
                of the design and refinement of visual forms that can afford powerful reasoning about the
                nature of history as an ongoing, contested socio-cultural construction.

     Introduction
                Although distinct in kind, representational practices of technical disciplines and the humanities share
      commonalties. For instance, narrative and description are practices that cut across science and history, and some
      researchers are attempting to seize on the pedagogical potential of these commonalties (Stevens et al, 2005). We
      contribute   to these efforts and report  on  an   attempt   to structure   history lessons in  terms   of  representational
      practices  of   science. Specifically, we  frame    historical   narrative  construction    in terms    of  the design and
      refinement of visual forms (diSessa et al, 1991) that can afford powerful reasoning about the nature of history as
      an ongoing, contested socio-cultural construction. This framing follows from the interplay between our target
      learning goals and hypothesized means through which these goals might be best achieved, as follows:
                1. Meta-history knowledge: Rather than targeting any particular historical period or event, we seek to
      facilitate learning of three key structural features of historical accounts: (i) there are multiple and competing
      narratives   of any historical event   (Zinn, 1994);    (ii) each such  narrative    reflects  the  views  and  interests of
      particular groups in society, though their precise identification may be complex; and (iii) over time, a certain
      narrative  "wins  over"  competing   ones, though    it may     also shift. Because   these   refer to  general features  of
      historical accounts, rather than specific historical events, we call them meta-historical knowledge.
                2. Affordances   of  design  activities: Any   representational    form,   regardless    of type, constrains and
      affords inferences about its referent (Norman, 1993). In line with this idea, we believe that particular kinds of
      student-created visual forms (e.g., multiple, parallel timelines) might better support their efforts in grappling
      with meta-historical issues. Additionally, the process and cycles of representational design might more easily
      lead students to articulate the construction of historical narratives as a matter of constant refinement.
                In this poster, we describe the activity dynamics of meta-history lessons, framed as representational
      design, and the products that students created in these activities. Additionally, we explain these dynamics with
      regard to pedagogically related themes that emerged and recurred in classroom interactions.

     Research context
                Our initial trial of meta-history activities was held at a rural high school--dubbed Rural High--in an
      impoverished school district in Western Massachusetts. The activities spanned a total of five sessions, all of
      which were held during regular school hours, but at a period in which 10th grade students volunteering for the
      experiment were excused from their regular duties. Sessions lasted about 90 minutes each, with the exception of
      the second day, which lasted about 45 minutes.
                Ms B--the second author and also a history teacher at Rural High--taught all sessions and recruited
      students from both her classes and the school at large. Following a first-come, first-serve recruitment policy we
      ended up with six Caucasian female students (all names are pseudonyms): Laura, Connie, Kara, Gloria, Alba,
      and Allison.    Laura dropped   out after  the first session,   and   Alba  after   the third  session. All  sessions  were
      videotaped and participant-generated artifacts were collected.
                Activities were structured as open-ended discussions so that knowledge construction could organically
      grow from students' ideas and interests. That said, Ms B sometimes intervened to help students clarify points,
      synthesize views, or simply to request additional contributions. The following is Ms B's introduction to the task:
      (7:20) "We're really going to be talking about the Iraq war... a:nd what you know about the Iraq war, then we'll
      go to what you want to know about the Iraq war, and then we're gonna go into... let's find out more... and the
      ultimate goal is going to be to think about how the Iraq war will be written in textbooks say: fifty years from
      now... and    how   that gets  created ((2 seconds))    And     we're gonna   create    a visual   diagram  of... how  our
      conversations go... we're gonna create a... some kind of representation of what that looks like."

     Analysis and results
                Our analysis highlights a number of themes that emerged during the sessions. Such themes refer to both
      activity content (i.e., what students say and do) and form (i.e., the dynamics of activities, as defined by students'

3-
stated and inferred goals). Because of their relative frequency of occurrence, these themes were most influential
in determining the flow, direction, and outcomes of the activities.
         1. Factual knowledge: "Facts" constitute the raw material from which historical narratives are built. In
line with this idea, we sought to ground the discussions in a context about which students are presumably very
knowledgeable: the current Iraq war. Confirming our hypothesis, by the end of the first session students and
teacher had summarized on the whiteboard 53 "facts" regarding the war (see Figure 1a). These ranged from
"hard facts," key dates, processes, economic consequences of the war, and so on.
         We     note  that, as much  as  generating  facts contributed  to the overall conduct   of  the lessons, fact
generation was an activity in which students recurrently engaged throughout the sessions. Put differently, fact
generation exerted a strong pull on students' activities. With each new fact raised, students tended to feel that
their narratives   (in whichever   form   represented, visually or not) were   incomplete.  This brought   a sense of
frustration  to   the group  and  often stalled activity progress. Importantly,   however,  considerations  about  the
completeness of historical narratives offer us the opportunity to address meta-historical learning goals, specially
the selectivity of historical accounts. We hope to seize on these opportunities in future implementations of our
activities.

Figure 1. (a) Snapshot of whiteboard showing participant-generated facts about the Iraq war (Day 1); (b) Partial
   node-and-link representation of such facts, created by the research team and shown to students on Day 5.

         2. Constructing accurate historical accounts: Closely related to the issues above, students often raised
questions that they judged fundamental for a truthful account of history. Prototypically, students would revisit
facts in their lists and question their veracity, which would then spark a whole new activity aimed at further
investigating these facts. While these events sometimes prevented a deeper consideration of our meta-historical
learning goals--e.g.,    by  leading into a spiral of  ever-deepening  questions  of veracity--they   also offer entry
points into such goals. For example, when exploring the results of the search for weapons of mass destruction in
Iraq, students bumped into three competing versions of the issue. In future implementations of our activities, we
hope to engage students in creating representational forms that can more easily afford inferences regarding the
multiple and competing varieties of historical narratives.
         3. A wealth or representational forms: In grappling with proposed and self-initiated activities, students
created a variety of representational forms to depict their narratives. These forms included time lines, bulleted
Powerpoint lists, and even a film of sorts. To further seed the discussions, we showed students two adaptations
of commonly       available forms  for  representing  arguments  and  narratives. Figure 1b    shows  one  such  form,
namely a modified node-and-link representation we made based on facts students had previously generated. We
found that students had no trouble understanding these forms, as well as proposing changes and additions for
better showing features of historical narratives. Our future implementations of meta-history activities will draw
on these specific student abilities to foster more explicit consideration of meta-historical issues.

Conclusions
         We are at the beginning stages of a long-term research project, so our analysis and results are tentative.
With  this  in  mind,  we   think we  have  made   some  progress  towards  some  very high    level goals for history
instruction.   In particular,  we have  some evidence    that students can  engage   issues of meta-historical  nature
within a framing of representational design cycles. Further research on these issues seems warranted.

References
diSessa,    A.  A.,   Hammer,    D., Sherin,  B.   L., &   Kolpakowsky,    T.  (1991).  Inventing    graphing:   Meta-
         representational expertise in children. Journal of Mathematical Behavior, 10(2), 117­160.
Norman, D. (1993). Things that make us smart: Defending human attributes in the age of the machine. Reading,
         MA: Addison Wesley Publishing Co.
Stevens, R., Wineburg, S., Herrenkohl, L., & Bell, P. (2005). The comparative understanding of school subjects:
         Past, present, and future. Review of Educational Research, 75(2), 125-157.
Zinn, H. (1994). You can't be neutral on a moving train: A personal history of our time. Boston, MA: Beacon
         Press.

                                                                                                                          3-
