                                Learning and participation in a persistent
                                whole-classroom seismology simulation
                   Tom Moher, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL 60607 USA, moher@uic.edu

                 Abstract: This paper presents the results of a six-week unit on seismology conducted in a
                 fifth-grade classroom. The unique feature of the unit involved the use of classroom technology
                 designed    to  support   students'   participation  in   an  authentic    seismological     practice:    the
                 interpretation of seismograms to determine the epicenter and magnitude of earthquakes. The
                 goals of the empirical study were (1) to gain insight into the impact of the intervention with
                 respect  to  student   mastery     of seismological     practice   skills, development      of  conceptual
                 understanding    of   earthquake   distributions,  and  changes    in  self-conception    as  investigative
                 agents, and (2) to investigate student participation in an emerging community of practice over
                 an extended time course.

      Introduction
                 Collaborative learning activities involving multiple heterogeneous roles almost necessarily result in an
       uneven    distribution of  learning   and  participation among      individuals, particularly   when    those  activities allow
       learners some "freedom of choice" in the level of participation and the adoption of working roles. While such
       designs   have the advantage     of   appealing   to individual   interests, they    run the  risk  of failing   to ensure   that
       students participate in such a way that experience advances learning. This danger is especially cogent when the
       duration of the learning unit is too short to allow time for students to adopt multiple distinct roles within the
       broader activity structure.
                 The  use of    personal   computational     technologies    affords    opportunities    for  monitoring    individual
       participation, and     the  instrumentation     of   learning applications    has    provided     insight  into  participation,
       particularly within networked learning communities (e.g., Barab, et al., 2002). However, with the emergence of
       "ambient" technologies as a complement to personal computational devices, assigning interaction to individuals
       becomes more challenging. Moreover, in many learning designs, activity is distributed between technology-
       based  interaction and    non-technology-based       work;  since   the computer     is no   longer the  sole locus  of  action,
       instrumentation of that channel alone fails to provide an adequate picture of participation.
                 In this paper, we present a study of learning and participation in an episodic fifth-grade classroom
       activity, RoomQuake,      in which    all of the  computational     and display  devices     were  "community    affordances"
       shared  among     the  entire   class offering    a  mixture  of  activity   distributed     among  technological    and   non-
       technological  artifacts.   We   developed   instruments    design   to assess   learning    along  two  dimensions:    skill in
       authentic seismological practice and conceptual understandings related to the temporal, spatial, and intensity
       distributions of earthquakes. Using video data collected from an array of ceiling-mounted cameras, we were also
       able to obtain a relatively complete account of individual student participation among roles and across time. Our
       goal was to find out how learning and participation were distributed among learners, and how participation
       evolved over time.

      Background
                 RoomQuake      is  an  exemplar    of a  broader  technology   paradigm       that uses  the physical  space    of the
       classroom   as the locus     of  imaginary,  persistent  Embedded       Phenomena       (Moher, 2006)    that unfold    over  an
       extended period of time, and that are investigated (collectively, rather than individually) by using fixed-position
       computers   as "probes"     into those    phenomena.  The   design   space   of  the embedded      phenomena     framework    is
       characterized by four common elements:
           x     Simulated dynamic scientific phenomena are "mapped onto," and asserted to occur within, the physical
                 space of the classroom.
           x     The phenomena are represented through distributed media (conventional classroom computers) located
                 around the classroom representing "portals" into that phenomenon, depicting local state information
                 and  control   affordances   corresponding     to   the   mapping  between     the   room    and the   phenomenon.
                 (Embedded      phenomena    are  "delivered"   using    a "Phenomenon       Server,"  a   web   portal that   supports
                 configuration and scheduling of the simulation for delivery to any Internet-connected computer running
                 a conventional web browser with a Flash plug-in.)
           x     The simulations are persistent, running and being presented continuously over extended time periods,
                 concurrently but asynchronously with respect to the regular instructional flow.
           x     As individuals, in small groups, and as whole classes, students monitor and manipulate the state of the
                 simulation through those media, gathering evidence to solve a problem or answer a question.

2-2
          The pedagogical     basis   for embedded   phenomena     derives  broadly    from  theories of    situated learning
(Brown, et al., 1989; Rogoff, 1990). The embedded phenomena framework situates communities of practice
(Wenger,   1998)   (in  our  case,    intact self-contained   classes)  within   authentic  activity  structures  (scientific
investigations) for the purpose of socially constructing knowledge of both science concepts and the processes of
science as a technical and human endeavor (Duschl, 2000). The extended duration characteristic of embedded
phenomena learning units seeks to afford time for movement from the periphery of practice to more central roles
(Lave  &  Wenger,     1991)  within   an  apprenticeship   context   of emerging    expertise among   peers     and  teachers
(Bandura, 1977; Brown, et al., 1989). The strategy of situating learners not only within communities, but also
within the physical and temporal bounds of the phenomena themselves, further extends the situated learning
framework by reinforcing the inseparability of learner from environment and body from mind (Barab & Plucker,
2002).
          The  activity  goal in   embedded    phenomena      learning  units is authentic,  disciplinary   science   inquiry
(Chinn  &    Malhotra,    2002).   While   "inquiry"   continues  to   defy  canonical   definition,  we    co-design   (with
practitioners) learning activities that extend beyond the rote methods and products of scientific investigations,
and  that invoke   problematizations      in the processes  of   science, such   as  the use  of evidence    in  explanation
(Sandoval, 2001), argumentation (Duschl & Osborne, 2002), and treatment of anomalous data (Chinn & Brewer,
1983).
          A wealth of prior empirical work involving in-depth investigations of technology-supported inquiry
learning in science with authentic evidence collection and reasoning tasks has shown that engaging in authentic
science practice activities facilitate understanding in science as well as motivation and interest (e.g., CTG, 1993;
Edelson,  1998;    Krajcik,  et.  al, 1998;    Smith &   Reiser,  2005).  The    proposed   instructional   interventions--
characteristic of a pedagogical strategy involving the use of "immersion units" (Schunn, et al., 2004), group
inquiry   projects (such   as    the  Northwestern/Michigan      LETUS      project, the    Georgia  Tech    LBD     projects,
Wisconsin's MUSE project, etc.) that focus on rich investigations of complex phenomena or design challenges
extending over multi-week periods with an emphasis on model elaboration and argument construction--builds
on existing research by investigating novel methods of embedding inquiry activities within classroom space and
time.
          By  engaging    students    in authentic science  practices,  we    hope  to particularly  increase   the  intrinsic
motivation   of students  to  learn   science.   Research  in  educational  contexts   suggests  that students    are highly
motivated by engaging in authentic scientific practice, and that opportunities for both autonomy and challenge
are the critical aspects of a learning environment that determine whether it will be highly engaging for students
(Dede, et al., 2005). The present activities are designed with this literature in mind, to require both activity and
autonomy on the part of each learner, as well as a significant and non-trivial authentic problem to be solved.
Further we hope to increase students' sense of self-efficacy, agency and empowerment to see themselves as
legitimate scientific investigators (e.g., Bandura, 1997, Pintrich, 2003).
          Within   the  domain    of  learning   technologies,   embedded     phenomena     draws from   the    traditions  of
constructivism    and   inquiry, especially  as  manifested   in the  use of  technologies   which   put data   capture    and
manipulation capabilities directly in the hands of learners. Early efforts with stationary "microcomputer-based
laboratories" (e.g., Linn, et al., 1987; Tinker & Papert, 1989; Krajcik & Layman, 1993) was extended by the
mobility of handheld computers through "probeware" (Soloway, et al., 1999) that allows students to capture and
share data arising from real phenomena. A variety of learning environments have been built by researchers to
help  students    learn subject   matter   by  exploring   simulated    dynamic  representations     (e.g., DiSessa,    1977;
Horwitz,  Neumann,      & Schwartz,      1996; Roschelle   &   Kaput,  1996).  Virtual   environments    (e.g., Dede,   et al.,
1997; Windschitl & Winn, 2000) provided learners first-person access to data not directly accessible for reasons
of time, space, safety, or scale. Embedded phenomena most directly draw inspiration from pioneering work in
the connections between role-playing and non-desktop technologies (Resnick & Wilensky, 1997), especially the
concept of participatory simulations (Colella, 2000; Wilensky & Stroup, 1999; Colella, 2000; Facer, et al., 2004;
Rogers,   et al., 2002),  which      use  computational    and display  technologies     in support   of physical    activity.
Embedded     phenomena      extend    the    participatory simulation    model   by    providing  continuous,     long-term
representations of phenomena that run asynchronously ("things happen when they happen") with respect to the
regular flow of instruction.

Method
          Activity was situated within a unit on earth science in a diverse Midwestern U.S. self-contained fifth
grade classroom of 23 students. As part of that unit, students experienced a series of 21 simulated earthquakes
("roomquakes"), each presumed to occur within the physical space of the classroom, over a period of six week.
The simulation was effected by affixing four tablet computers to horizontal locations around the classroom; each
computer   served  as   a simulated      seismograph   upon  which   was  depicted   a   continuously running     strip chart
recorder  of ground     vibration. Between     events, the seismographs     displayed  simulated  random     noise;  when   a
roomquake occurred, however, they traced out unique characteristic waveform (seismogram) corresponding to

                                                                                                                                  2-
       the expected   vibration   at their specific  locations  due  to   an event  at a  particular location   in the classroom.
       (Roomquakes were also signaled by a low-frequency rumbling sound generated by a small subwoofer located in
       the corner of the classroom.)
                 With each event, students were responsible for determining the epicenter and (Richter) magnitude of
       the roomquake    and   for  creating a  record   of the  event.  The   locations  of events   were  recorded    by hanging
       Styrofoam balls from the classroom ceiling at their epicenters, color-coded to reflect the event magnitudes. Two
       other emerging    data  representations  were    also maintained    using  colored   sticky  dots  on large   wall posters:
       magnitude frequency distribution (the number of events of each of four magnitudes 4-7) and a timeline of the
       events. By reading the seismogram at each seismographic station, students were able to determine the magnitude
       of the event, and the distance of the event (in meters, rather than kilometers) from that station. (Earthquakes
       generate multiple waves that travel at different rates; the latency between arrival of two of those waves, P and S,
       is proportional to the distance of the event.) Magnitude can be determined by comparing event distance with
       graph amplitude. A reading from a single station, however, is insufficient to locate the epicenter, since it does
       not provide   directional  information.  In   order  to obtain   a solution, students needed    to combine    the  distance
       information from multiple (at least three) stations through the process of trilateration.
                 In professional seismological practice, trilateration is performed through the process of determining the
       common    point  of intersection  among   three   or  more  circles,  requiring  a  level of mathematical    sophistication
       beyond held by the learner group. Alternatively, it would be possible to use compasses and obtain a solution on
       paper, but we felt that this would unnecessarily add a layer of indirection, temporarily moving the activity locus
       from the classroom real estate to another medium. Instead, students used calibrated dry-lines anchored at each of
       the seismographic stations to sweep out arcs reflecting the locus of solutions from the individual stations until
       they found the location in the room where the endpoint of their measures coincided.

                                        Figure 1. Simulated strip-chart seismograph used in
                                      RoomQuake. Bottom buttons scroll through prior events.

                 The learning goals of the earthquake simulation were focused in two areas: (1) the acquisition of skill
       in authentic seismological practice, including the determination of event distance and magnitude and the use of
       trilateration to determine    event  epicenters,  and   (2) an   understanding   of  the  distributional characteristics of
       earthquakes across the dimensions of space, intensity, and time, developed through student observation of the
       patterns  reflected in  the   emerging  historical   record   of events.  Affective  response   to  the  unit centered   on
       students' stances toward active investigation as an alternative to receiving information from teachers.
                 A task analysis of the activity resulted in the identification of 31 distinct roles that a student might
       perform in response to each simulated seismic event. Examples of individual roles included discrete interactions
       with  the  simulated   seismographs    (e.g., "count    time  between    wave   arrivals  to  determine   event  distance,"
       "determine    maximum   amplitude    of waveform"),     physical   actions necessary  to   effect trilateration (e.g., "pull
       calibrated string   to correct  distance,"    "hold  moving    end    of string and  sweep    out  arcs  to  find  point of
       coincidence"),   and data   recording  activities ("place   colored   dot on magnitude     frequency  distribution   chart,"
       "assist teacher in hanging Styrofoam ball from ceiling"). Among the 31 roles, 26 were associated with activity
       emanating  from   an   individual   seismographic    station, while   the  remaining  six  were   associated    with a  data
       recording activity, leading to a total of 109 (4x26+5) actions needed to respond to a single seismic event.

2-
Data sources
          Skill in seismological practice. Following the unit, students were individually interviewed and asked to
demonstrate their ability to read seismograms, determine event magnitude and distance, and show the loci of
potential epicenters   for a  hypothetical  seismogram     that they   had  not previously seen.    Interviews were
videotaped; student mastery was assessed on five discrete tasks (see Table 1) using a group consensus coding
process. No pre-test was indicated; none of the students had any prior experience with the interpretation of
seismograms.
          Understanding of earthquake distribution patterns in space, time, and intensity. Over time, collections
of earthquakes exhibit characteristic patterns in where they occur (along fault lines marking plate boundaries),
when they occur (after-shocks follow large seismic events), and their magnitude (strong earthquakes are less
frequent than mild earthquakes). We probed these understandings through a series of multiple-choice prompts
using a written instrument that was administered prior to, and two weeks following, the instructional unit. The
tests were also administered to another fifth-grade class that did not participate in a science unit on earthquakes.
          Self-conception as investigative agent. Students were administered selected items from the TOSRA
(Test of Science-Related Attitudes) Likert instrument (Fraser, 1981) in tandem with the distribution knowledge
pre- and post-tests. The instrument was also applied to the control class.
          Participation. Six video cameras were mounted on the ceiling of the classroom and oriented to capture
detailed  activity at the  four seismographic   stations  as  well  as (wide-angle)  activity in  the center  of  the
classroom. The cameras were activated for each of the 21 simulated earthquakes, and allowed us to track the
activity of each   individual student in the classroom.   In the analysis   below,  we distinguish  both the rate of
participation and the variety of activities with which children engaged, in the belief that specialized practice in
only some of the activities surrounding resolution of seismic event parameters are less likely to promote skill
development and conceptual learning than an experience based on engagement in a fuller range of activity types.

Outcomes
Skill in seismological practice
          Table 1  shows   student  mastery of  the seismological   practice skills of interpreting seismograms   to
determine   event  magnitude   and  the  potential loci of event   epicenters,  as determined  during  the post-unit
interview. Students were asked to perform the tasks sequentially, and incorrect responses were corrected by the
interviewer after each task to avoid compounding errors. Most students mastered the basic skills associated with
resolving seismic   event  parameters and   determination  of   event loci; common   difficulties centered on  graph
interpretation.

Table 1: Student post-activity demonstration of seismological practice skill,

Seismological skill                                                 Mastery level assessed            Performance
Determine latency in wave arrivals                           Within 3 seconds of actual latency            67%
Pull out dry line to proper length                              Within 10% of actual length                78%
Demonstrate possible event loci                            Draw string taut; sweeps out full circle        89%
Determine maximum graph amplitude                             Within 10% of actual amplitude               72%
Use chart to determine event Richter magnitude                        Correct magnitude                    72%

Conceptual understanding of earthquake distributions
          Table 2  shows   pre-post differences in  treatment   and comparison   groups' performance   on  multiple-
choice items relating to the distribution of earthquakes in space, intensity, and time. Each item asked students to
choose from among six possible responses.

Table 2: Student demonstration of understandings of earthquake distributions,

                          Performance on items relating to conceptual understandings of earthquake distributions
Distribution category                 Treatment group                          Non-treatment (control) group
                           Pre (N=22)      Post (N=24)       Change      Pre (N=22)      Post (N=21)       Change
Location                      41%              88%            +47%           27%              43%           +16%
Magnitude                     23%              63%            +40%           18%              24%            +6%
Time                          41%              67%            +26%           32%              43%           +11%

Stances toward investigation vs. transmission of knowledge

                                                                                                                        2-
                                                                  Number of students
                Table 3 gives pre-post differences for selected items from the modified TOSRA exam. The treatment
       group showed positive trends toward a preference for investigation as on the four relevant items. In contrast, the
       non-treatment group trended away from an attitude as investigative agents and toward an authority model.

       Table 3: Student attitudes toward science investigation

                                                                                                                         Likert score: (1=strongly disagree, 5=strongly agree)
                          TOSRA Item                                                                                           Treatment group                          Non-treatment groupPre(N=22)Post(N=24)ChangePre(N=22)Post(N=21)Change
       I would rather find out why something happens bydoing an experiment than by being told                            3.95               4.17           +0.22        4.27   4.22      -0.05
       I would rather do my own experiments instead offinding something out from a teacher                               3.67               4.13           +0.46        3.91   3.73      -0.18
       It is better to be told scientific                                            facts   than   to     findthem out from experiments2.142.04            -0.10       2.00   2.00        0.00
       Doing  experiments   is not                            as good                   as       finding   outinformation from teachers2.09 1.83            -0.22       1.72   1.91      +0.18

       Participation

                                                                    10
                                                                                     9
                                                                                     8
                                                                                     7
                                                                                     6
                                                                                     5
                                                                                     4
                                                                                     3
                                                                                     2
                                                                                     1
                                                                                     0
                                                                                           0          2        4          6         8         10       12         14
                                                                                                   Average # of actions per student per event

                Figure 2. Distribution of participation: average roles per student per event over RoomQuake

                By analyzing the videotape records of each event, we were able to identify which roles each individual
       student assumed for each event in the RoomQuake series. The histogram in Figure 2 shows the distribution of
       participation over the unit. Altogether, students averaged 5.6 actions per event, ranging from 1.3 (the least active
       student) to 13.6 (the most active student). An analysis of differential participation during the first and second
       halves of the instructional unit (Figure 3) shows that participation rates by individual remained fairly constant,
       although the extended time series did afford opportunities for a few initially hesitant participants to becomes
       substantially involved  (the                           oval                   region      in Figure          3) while    at      the same    time      exhausting   the interest of some
       students who had initially been quite active (the rectangular region in Figure 3).

                                                           16

                                                           14

                                                           12

                                                           10

                                                            8

                                                            6

                                                            4

                                                            2

                                                            0
                                                              0                      2         4        6         8        10        12       14        16
                                                                                          Average # of actions first 10 events

2-
 Figure 3. Participation rate in last 11 events as a function of participation rate in first 10 events. Points in the
   upper triangular area of the graph represent increased participation in second half of unit, with oval areas
 showing largest increases. The points boxed by the rectangle represent significantly decreased participation.

       Beyond     participation               rate,     these  data      also    provide    insight      into   the    diversity of participation  with
respect to adoption of different roles during the intervention. On average, students adopted 25.2 of the 31
possible roles over the course of the unit, ranging from a minimum of 16 to a maximum of 29 distinct roles
adopted. Figure 4 shows the distribution of role adoption across the entire class. Figure 5 shows a graph of
the average cumulative unique roles assumed by students over the course of the 21 simulated seismic events.
A logarithmic curve fitted to the time series of averages shows good agreement with the data; the model
predicts that an additional 20 simulated events would be required to approach exhaustive assumption of every
role by every child in the class.

                                                   14

                                                   12

                                                   10

                                                    8

                                                    6

                                                    4

                                                    2

                                                    0
                                                           2       6       10       14      18       22      26        30
                                                           Unique roles per student over RoomQuake unit

  Figure 4. Distribution of student role adoption over Roomquake unit (number of distinct roles assumed per
                                                                             student).

       The    long    series of              activities        afforded      opportunities        for    students      who   were   initially reluctant
participants to expand  the   variety                 of   activities    in  which      they    engaged.        Figure    5 reveals that, on  average,
students had undertaken about half of the available roles by the fifth event. Figure 6 shows that students who
assumed relatively few unique roles during the early stages of the unit used the additional time to expand
their range of roles.

                                         30

                                         25

                                         20

                                         15
                                                         -- -- -- 15.03 x log (Event number) +
                                         10

                                           5

                                           0
                                               1  2   3  4   5  6   7  8   9  10 11  12 13  14 15 16  17 18  19 20  21
                                                                         Event number

                Figure 5. Average cumulative unique roles assumed as a function of event number.

The role of technology
       How did these technology choices impact student experience? The design of the simulated instruments
played a role; while it would have been easier for the students if we had presented simplified digital reports of
event distance and magnitude, the use of the classical analog strip chart lent authenticity to their work. During
the unit, the class engaged in a videoconference with a seismologist who showed them real-time seismograms
from southern California that she was monitoring. The students were animated in their response, noting the
similarity between the instruments that she and they shared, and asking detailed questions about the relationship
between graph amplitude and event intensity. While the complexity of professional instrumentation runs the risk
of overwhelming learners with tangential detail (Soloway, et al., 1994), attention to design elements that raise
students' perceptions   of   the             realism       of  the    instruments       may       have   significant       impact on  their   view of the

                                                                                                                                                            2-
       authenticity of their roles as investigators.

                                                                                              25

                                                                                              20

                                                                                              15

                                                                                              10

                                                                                               5

                                                                                               0
                                                                                                  0                5               10               15               20               25               30

                                                                                                             Unique roles adopted, first 5 events

              Figure 6. Role adoption during latter part of unit as function of role adoption during first 5 events.

                 The persistent representation of the simulated phenomena helped serve to maintain student interest over
       the long course of the unit and reinforce the real-time conceit of the simulation. In spite of the fact that for the
       vast majority of the time the seismographs showed only near-flatline behavior, students went out of their way to
       watch the displays during classroom breaks, and they established a habit of moving quickly to the seismographs
       when they first entered the classroom each morning to check for events that might have occurred overnight.
       While this approach comes at the cost of using computers dedicated to this single function for long stretches of
       time, we believe the benefit justified the expense.
                 Perhaps  the  most    powerful                                                       feature          of  the           RoomQuake                         technology                     was its  use  in  delivering
       asynchronous events. Classrooms tend to be highly structured in their use of time, and the unpredictability of
       simulated seismic events introduced a tension that raised interest in the activity; students literally jumped out of
       their seats at the onset of roomquakes in their rush to get to the seismographs. Children ordinarily view class
       computers   as passive  devices, in                                                       that they           respond           only            when the            users         initiate         interaction;  unlike adults,
       students do not typically computer event notices. Using the computer as a means to initiate activity, we believe,
       has significant potential as a more general strategy for motivating engagement.
                 Beyond the computers, the other "technologies" used in RoomQuake also played important functions.
       The measuring strings used to enact trilateration added to the sense of physical embodiment; while "messy" (the
       strings had to be strung over chairs and desks with kids having to playing "limbo" to move about), students
       found this aspect of the activity to be both fun and rewarding as they discovered the location of the event. The
       mapping of the virtual earthquake field onto the classroom space, we believe had value both in its promotion of
       a sense of local ownership, and in the sometimes amusing juxtaposition of locations between the two "spaces,"
       as when a roomquake occurred directly over the teacher's desk.
                 The visible records of event histories via the Styrofoam balls hanging from the ceiling and the wall
       charts depicting   accumulating  event                                                        distributions         also          reinforced                     the locality           of         the phenomena,    but    more
       importantly helped to keep the thread of inquiry "visible" over a long time course in spite of students' relatively
       infrequent  direct interactions  with                                                        the  phenomena.                     We             believe          that dangling                     spheres  in  particular  had
       considerably more salience than an information-equivalent version representation on paper or on a screen.
                 RoomQuake     creates an environment                                                                  for instruction                   and            activity,        but   does          not  prescribe a specific
       instructional design. Since the study reported here, RoomQuake has been used in a half dozen elementary and
       middle school classrooms; in each instance, teachers crafted their own instructional variants of the unit. Some
       teachers compressed the time course of the unit, using fewer events. In classrooms with tall tin ceilings, teachers
       used tape-backed colored disks in place of Styrofoam balls. Different grade levels saw variations in learning
       goals, with middle   school  students,                                                        for example,                     focused          much             more strongly                     on  the causal tectonics  of
       earthquakes. While all employed the same technologies, no two instructional designs have been the same.
                 The distributed activity loci and range of actions gave kids choices, and the long time course gave them
       the opportunity to choose to participate on their own schedule. For some students, this was a very effective
       strategy, especially those  children                                                         whose            generalized         reaction           to           engagement            in          classroom    activities was
       focused on social interaction rather than meaning making. For other students, however, the design afforded too
       much freedom; some found it an easy way to avoid responsibility, while others found it difficult to assert their
       place  within  activity structure. Here,                                                         teachers           played         an            especially           important                    role,   with some   teachers
       intervening to ensure   the participation                                                      of  specific                    students         on an            ad  hoc          basis and           other teachers explicitly
       rotating roles within work teams to ensure the distribution of participation.

2-
Conclusion
         Embedded phenomena such as RoomQuake physically situate inquiry physically within the simulated
phenomena under investigation, and temporally within the regular instructional flow. The adaptations required
by practitioners to incorporate such designs are substantial. This report provides tentative evidence that there
may be significant learning benefits, to different kinds of learners, from adopting such a paradigm within, of
course, the context    of appropriate   instructional designs.  An   additional contribution     lies in  the  analysis of
participation, which we believe offers a novel methodological lens for extending empirical descriptions of the
growth of communities of practice (Barab, et al., 2002). In particular,
   x     The analysis of student performance in the areas of seismological practice and the understanding of the
         temporal,  spatial, and    intensity distributions of earthquakes provides     evidence     of learning   in both
         domains,   albeit with   room  for   improvement.    No comparison     is yet offered   relative   to alternative
         instructional designs.
   x     The   results of  the affective (TOSRA)      measures   provide tentative    support    for  the conjecture  that
         practice can enhance students' self-conceptions as legitimized investigators, but that the recognition of
         the effort involved can negatively impact the desire to engage in practice.
   x     Preliminary evidence suggests that the rate of participation is uneven, but that the extended time course
         provided opportunities for at least some initially hesitant participants to move from the periphery to the
         center of the community of practice (Lave and Wenger, 1991). The propensity of students to adopt
         multiple  roles  over   time, rather  than specializing in  a single   role,  arguably   enriches    the learning
         experience.

References
Bandura, A. (1997). Self-Efficacy: The Exercise of Control. New York: W. H. Freeman.
Barab, S. A. & Plucker, J. A. (2002). Smart people or smart contexts? Cognition, ability, and talent development
         in an age of situated approaches to knowing and learning. Educational Psychologist, 37(3), 165­182.
Barab, S. A., Barnett, M., and Squire, K. (2002). Developing an empirical account of a community of practice:
         Characterizing the essential tensions. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 11(4), 489-542.
Brown,  J. S.,  Collins,  A. &   Duguid, P.   (1989). Situated cognition  and   the   culture of  learning.   Educational
         Researcher, 18(1), 32­42.
Chinn, C. A., & Brewer, W. F. (1993). The role of anomalous data in knowledge acquisition: A theoretical
         framework and implications for science instruction. Review of Educational Research, 63, 1­49.
Chinn,  C.  A., &   Malhotra,    B. A. (2002).  Epistemologically    authentic  reasoning     in schools:   A  theoretical
         framework for evaluating inquiry tasks. Science Education, 86, 175-218.
Cognition and Technology Group at Vanderbilt. (1993). Anchored instruction and situated cognition revisited.
         Educational Technology, 33(3), 52-70.
Colella, V. (2000). Participatory Simulations: Building collaborative understanding through immersive dynamic
         modeling. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 9(4), 471-500.
Dede, C., Ketelhut, D. J., Clarke, J., Nelson, B., & Bowman, C. (2005). Students' motivation and learning of
         science in a multi-user virtual environment. Paper presented at the American Educational Research
         Association Conference, Montreal, Canada.
Dede, C., Salzman, M., Loftin, R. B., and Ash, K. (1997). Using virtual reality technology to convey abstract
         scientific concepts. In Jacobson, M. J., Kozma, R. B. (Ed.), Learning the Sciences of the 21st Century,
         Lawrence Erlbaum.
DiSessa, A. A. (1977). On learnable representations of knowledge: A meaning for the computational metaphor.
         MIT, AI Laboratory, LOGO Memo 47.
Duschl, R. (2000). Making the nature of science explicit. In R. Millar, J. Leech & J. Osborne (Eds.), Improving
         Science Education: The contribution of research. Philadelphia: Open University Press, 187-206.
Duschl, R. A., & Osborne, J. (2002). Supporting and promoting argumentation discourse in science education.
         Studies in Science Education, 38, 39-72.
Edelson, D.    C. (2001).  Learning-For-Use:    A   Framework    for the Design    of  Technology-Supported        Inquiry
         Activities. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 38(3), 355-385.
Facer, K., Joiner, D., Stanton, D., Reid, J., Hull, R., and Kirk, D. (2004) Savannah: mobile gaming and learning?
         Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 20, 339-409.
Fraser, B.J. (1981). Test of Science Related Skills. Australian Council for Educational Research. The Australian
         Council for Educational Research Limited: Hawthorn, Victoria.
Horwitz,   P.,  Neumann,     E., &   Schwartz,   J.   (1996).  Teaching  Science    at  multiple      space time   scales.
         Communications of the ACM, 39(8), 100-102.

                                                                                                                             2-
       Krajcik,   J., Blumenfeld,  P.,  Marx, R., Bass,   K. M., Fredericks,   J., & Soloway,   E.  (1998). Middle    School
                 Students' Initial Attempts at Inquiry in Project-Based Science Classroom. The Journal of the Learning
                 Sciences, 7(3 & 4), 313-350.
       Krajcik,   J.S. &   Layman,  J.W.  (1993). Microcomputer-based    laboratories   in the  science  classroom. NARST
                 Research Matters, No. 31.
       Lave,  J., &    Wenger,  E.  (1991). Situated  Learning:  Legitimate    Peripheral  Participation.  Cambridge,    UK:
                 Cambridge University Press.
       Linn,  M.    C., Layman,    J.W.  &  Nachmias,   R.   (1987). Cognitive     Consequences  of  Microcomputer-Based
                 Laboratories: Graphing Skills Development. Contemporary Educational Psychology, 12(3), 244-253.
       Moher,    T.   (2006). Embedded    Phenomena:   Supporting    Science   Learning  with  Classroom-sized   Distributed
                 Simulations. Proceedings ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI `06). April
                 24-27, 2006, Montréal, Canada, 691-700.
       Pintrich,  P.R.  (2003). A  motivational   science perspective on   the role of  student motivation  in  learning and
                 teaching contexts. Journal of Educational Psychology, 95, 667-686.
       Resnick,   M.,   and   Wilensky,  U. (1997).  Diving   into Complexity:     Developing   Probabilistic Decentralized
                 Thinking through Role-Playing Activities. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 7(2), 153-172.
       Rogers, Y., Scaife, M., Harris, E., Phelps, T., Price, S., Smith, H., Muller, H., Randell, C., Moss, A., Taylor, I.,
                 Stanton,  D.,  O'Malley, C., Corke,  G.   & Gabrielli, S. (2002).   'Things aren't what  they  seem  to be':
                 innovation through technology inspiration. Proceedings DIS2002, London, 25-28 June, 2002, 373-377.
       Rogoff,   B.   (1990). Apprenticeship  in thinking: Cognitive  development    in social  context. New  York:  Oxford
                 University Press.
       Roschelle, J., & Kaput, J. J. (1996). SimCalc Mathworlds for the Mathematics of Change. Communications of
                 the ACM, 39(8), 97-99.
       Sandoval, W. A. (2001). Students' uses of data as evidence in scientific explanations. Paper presented at the
                 Annual Meeting of the American Educational Research Association. Seattle, April 10-14, 2001.
       Schunn, C., Millar, T., Lauffer, D. & SCALE Immersion Design Team. (2004). SCALE Goal 2 Concept Paper:
                 Immersing all K-12 students in extended inquiry science and design. Unpublished manuscript available
                 through the SCALE Project, LRDC, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
       Smith, B.    K.  &  Reiser, B. J. (2005).  Explaining behavior   using  video for observational   inquiry and  theory
                 articulation. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 14(3), 315-360.
       Soloway, E., Grant, W., Tinker, R., Roschelle, J., Mills, M., Resnick, M., Berg, R., & Eisenberg, M. (1999).
                 Science in the palm of their hands. Communications of the ACM, 42(8), 21-26.
       Soloway, E., Guzdial, M., & Hay, K. E. (1994). Learner-centered design: The challenge for HCI in the 21st
                 century. interactions, 1(2), 36-48.
       Tinker, R. & Papert, S. (1989). Tools for Science Education, in Ellis, J. (Ed.), Information Technology and
                 Science Education. Columbus, OH: AETS.
       Wenger, E. (1998). Communities of practice. New York: Cambridge University Press.

      Acknowledgments
       This  material   is based   upon  work supported   by the National  Science   Foundation   under   Grant  Nos. DGE-
       0338328 and DRL-0735569. The author wishes to acknowledge the assistance of Syeda Hussain in the analysis
       of the participation data and the valuable comments and suggestions offered by the anonymous referees.

2-0
