     Cross-cultural online collaboration: Challenges and strategies
Larissa V. Malopinsky, Gihan Osman, Indiana University, P.O. Box 5877, Bloomington, IN 47407-5877 USA
                                 Email: lmalopin@indiana.edu, gosman@indiana.edu

          Abstract: In this presentation, we share the experience of a partnership project between two
          teams representing Azerbaijani and American higher education institutions. The researchers
          (a) examine the challenges of collaborative work in the context of cultural differences related
          to  applying   learner-centered   pedagogy,    sustaining  collaboration   and   managing   learning
          process, and (b) introduce the strategies developed for addressing those challenges. This study
          seeks    to  advance    educators'   understanding    of  the  critical  aspects  of  cross-cultural
          collaboration in online learning environments.

Introduction
          Teaching and learning processes are seen as grounded in the unique social practice of the cultures
involved.  Epistemological     dissonance   can  make   it  challenging  for representatives   of different cultures   to
establish effective   communication    and    collaboration (Kanu,  2005).   These  challenges  are often  compounded
when a partnership project takes place online. The three-year partnership project between Indiana University
and the Azerbaijan Research and Education Network Association had two goals: developing online teaching
capabilities  in  Azerbaijani  universities and  implementing    learner-centered  pedagogical    concepts. The project
was focused on offering an online certification program for a group of Azerbaijani faculty and staff who would
lead the distance education (DE) implementation effort in the country. Since gaining independence from the
Soviet Union in 1991, Azerbaijan, has been seeking to reform and westernize its educational system (Bagirov,
2001).   Although in its infancy, DE in Azerbaijan is viewed as the strategy for overcoming a rapid decline of
participation in education and training due to increased societal difficulties (ANHD Report, 2003).

Research Project
          Early project experience revealed the differences in the approaches to learning and collaborative work
between the U.S. and Azerbaijani teams and suggested a systematic study of the challenges experienced by the
partner teams from the cross-cultural perspective. A greater understanding of the role of cultural attributes in
educational contexts can provide guidance for researchers and practitioners involved in international educational
projects  in terms    of the  design and  implementation     of  instructional interventions.  The  following  research
questions guided the study: (a) What are the challenges experienced by the project partners in the process of
collaborative  design    of  learner-centered  instruction  for  online delivery?  (b)  What   cultural differences   are
relevant to understanding those challenges?       (c) What strategies can be used to respond to those challenges to
ensure successful implementation of the project goals?
          The  challenges    were  analyzed   from   epistemological,   social interaction  and   learning  management
perspectives   applying   Hofstede's   (2001)    and Trompenaars    and   Hampden-Turner's      (1997)  frameworks     of
cultural dimensions: high vs. low power distance, individualism vs. collectivism, masculinity vs. femininity,
high vs.  low    uncertainty  avoidance,  achievement    vs. ascription, universalism   vs. particularism,  external  vs.
internal control and specific vs. diffuse orientation. The cross-cultural researchers find that these dimensions
have an impact on learning situations (Chapman et al., 2005; Paulus et al., 2005). Language proficiency and
difficulties using    online technologies   were also considered    in  our analysis as  non-culture  aspects  affecting
collaboration. The study utilized a case study approach (Stake, 1995) and used mixed methods of data collection
and analysis (Creswell, 2003). Study participants were four Azerbaijani faculty members who were students in
the  certification program    and  three U.S.  facilitators (one senior  faculty  member   and two  advanced   graduate
students). The research project was led by the U.S. team. Several types of data were collected: (a) background
survey (epistemological beliefs (Schommer, 1990), demographics, DE implementation strategies); (b) pre- and
post-chat student surveys focused on individual work efforts, challenges, and learning needs;         (c) pre- and post-
chat facilitator   surveys   focused on  assessment   of students'  design   work,  learning  needs   and  strategies for
upcoming     chat  sessions; (d)  transcripts of 1.5 hour   weekly  chats   focused  on pedagogical   and   instructional
design issues; and (e) semi-structured interviews with students focused        on project experience and expectations
for  learning  transfer.  Data  was  collected   during  12  weeks.  Epistemological    questionnaires  were   analyzed
quantitatively. Qualitative data was independently coded by two researchers to identify emergent themes. These
were subsequently modified upon reaching 96% agreement resulting in three categories and six sub-categories
that reflected   major   challenge areas: (a) adopting   a  learner-centered pedagogy   (concept   of learning process,
teacher-student roles); (b) communication and collaboration (teamwork and peer feedback, collaboration with a
foreign partner team); and (c) managing learning process (independent work, time management). Every item
was discussed from the cultural dimensions perspective and alternative causes were explored.

                                                                                                                             3-3
      Findings
                The Azerbaijani team demonstrated strong dependence on the U.S. facilitators as providers of "right"
       information and step-by-step guidance, which was characteristic of the beliefs grounded in high power distance,
       external  control  and high    uncertainty  avoidance.   These     findings   were consistent   with    reluctance    of the
       Azerbaijani  students  to  reflect on  facilitators'  performance     and  their frequent   concerns    with   ill-structured
       learning tasks. The   greatest difficulties in   collaboration for  the  Azerbaijani  students  came     in developing    an
       instructional product as a team and having to critique each other's ideas.         While the students expressed strong
       competitiveness   and  preference  for individual    projects, they   often hesitated    to critique peers'    performance,
       regarding such feedback as a breach of peer-loyalty or disrespect to varying levels of expertise and positions in
       the team. The students' explanations could be linked to a high-context, particularistic and ascriptive cultural
       tradition, where tasks are inseparable from personal relationships and individuals hesitate criticizing a friend, a
       senior person or a higher-ranking colleague. Azerbaijani and U.S. teams had different expectations regarding the
       amount of support required for students for organizing their learning process. The students' comments indicated
       frequent confusion with guidance to set their own learning goals and establish a process for accomplishing them.
       Student  expectations  grounded     largely   in earlier experiences     in didactic  education   were    consistent    with
       uncertainty-avoiding   cultures where   people    feel uncomfortable     in new   learning   situations  and   prefer direct
       guidance. Time    management    was    another   area  where   the teams'   approaches   differed.   An  analysis  of    chat
       sessions revealed that socializing took approximately 30% of a chat session (Osman & Herring, 2007). While
       the U.S. facilitators expressed concerns with overly lengthy socializing periods, the Azerbaijani students felt that
       facilitators were too task-focused. This difference in managing the time planned for the task-related activity
       presents communicational     difficulties between    low-context   (specific) and  high-context  (diffuse)     cultures  that
       can put a strain on cross-cultural collaborative work and lead to interpersonal conflicts.
                In order to help students develop more learner-centered approach to designing instruction, facilitators
       presented materials in multiple ways, modeled the constructivist approach and encouraged self critique. Several
       strategies, such as using real life examples and real-life metaphors, encouraging peer facilitation, peer critique
       and self-reflection were implemented to both provide structured support and challenge the students to develop
       independent learning skills. Both teams continuously worked on implementing strategies for managing learning
       processes more    effectively  while addressing   the  needs   for social   interaction:    providing forums and setting
       specific time for discussing personal matters during online learning sessions and developing structured agendas
       for face-to-face and online meetings. Although the differences between the teams challenged collaborative work
       in a number of ways, they provided useful insights into the importance of considering the values and beliefs of
       people working on cross-cultural educational projects. Awareness of the differences led both teams to discuss
       the feasibility of applying    new   pedagogical   approaches      in the   Azerbaijani  context   and   helped   the    U.S.
       participants consider  the implications    of cultural   differences  in  the design  and   facilitation of  cross-cultural
       instruction.

      References
       ANHD Report, 2003. Available at: http://www.un-az.org/undp/nhdr2003/content_eng.html.
       Bagirov, H. (2001). The birth of Western University. Azerbaijan International, 9(4), 38-78.
       Chapman, D.W., Weidman, J., Cohen, M., & Mercer, M. (2005). The search for quality: A five country study of
                national strategies to improve educational quality in Central Asia. International Journal of Educational
                Development, 25, 514-530.
       Creswell, J.  (2003).  Research    design:  Qualitative,  quantitative,   and   mixed methods    approaches.     Thousand
                Oaks, CA: Sage.
       Hofstede, G.  (2001).  Culture's   consequences:     Comparing     values,  behaviors,   institutions,  and  organizations
                across nations. London: Sage.
       Trompenaars, F. & Hampden-Turner, C. (1997). Riding the waves of culture. Understanding cultural diversity
                in global business. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill.
       Kanu, Y. (2005). Tensions and dilemmas of cross-cultural transfer of knowledge: post-structural/postcolonial
                reflections  on  an  innovative   teacher   education  in    Pakistan.  International  Journal     of Educational
                Development, 25, 493-513.
       Osman, G., & Herring, S.C. (2007). Interaction, facilitation, and deep learning in cross-cultural chat: A case
                study. The Internet and Higher Education, 10, 125-141.
       Paulus, T.M., Bichelmeyer, B., Malopinsky, L., Pereira, M., & Rastogi, P. (2005). Power distance and group
                dynamics of an international project team: A case study. Teaching in Higher Education, 10(1), 43-55.
       Schommer,    M.   (1990).  Effects  of beliefs   about   the nature   of  knowledge      on  comprehension.     Journal   of
                Educational Psychology, 82, 498-504.
       Stake, R. (1995). The art of case research. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.

3-
