   Understanding Student Comics: Using Comic Books as a Data
            Collection Tool to Investigate Learning on Field Trips
                     Sandra Martell, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, smartell@uwm.edu

         Abstract:   This poster    presents   findings  from  analyses  of  student comic     books that
         documented   a field  trip to an art, science,  and technology  museum.   Findings  include that
         comics allowed   students  to demonstrate   via words   and images  more  than  acquired content
         knowledge, including understanding about diverse aspects of the trip like affect and social
         situations (average alpha = .86) and testify to the reliability of the comic as a promising tool
         for researchers interested in learning across contexts.

Theoretical Framework
         How can researchers and educators measure and assess what K-12 students "take away" from a field
trip? Increased attempts  at  measuring   and  assessing student learning on field trips has occurred  in  the past
several decades, particularly among researchers interested in how students learn science in such contexts as
science museums, science centers, zoos, acquaria, arboreta, and other informal science learning sites. This study
builds upon previous work that explores "how alternative learning contexts affect learners' understanding of a
topic" (Zeidler & Surber, 1993,) in particular how learners understand a field trip in its entirety, including affect
and social interactions that occurred during the trip in addition to acquired content knowledge (versus particular
exhibits or aspects of an exhibition).
         Learning is mediated by local cultural practices and perspectives and takes place not only in schools
but in numerous contexts and practices across the life span (Banks et. al, 2007). Field trips to places outside of
school have occurred in conjunction with school-based learning since at least the early 1900s when Benjamin
Ives Gilman (1915) critiqued the role of the museum docent during field trips for visiting school groups. In
general, most researchers interested in field trip learning identify learning as a process, for example one that
involves the application of prior knowledge and experience to new experiences within physical contexts and that
is mediated in the actions of other individuals (Anderson, Lucas & Ginns, 2003). However, as noted by Griffin,
field trip learning  involves more  than  cognitive or  conceptual change,  but also includes  "social interaction,
cultural norms, and a range of tools and methods" (Griffin, 2004, p. 60). This study attempts to understand how
we can use alternative sources of data, namely student-generated comic books, to gain insight into that process.

Methods and Data Sources
         The students in the study attend an urban K-6 public school in the Puget Sound region. The school has
approximately 422 students, of whom 53% are White, 27% are Asian, 13% are Black, 6% are Hispanic, and 1%
are Native American. About 25% receive free or reduced price lunch. The sixth-grade students, comprised of
two sixth-grade classes and a mixed 5th/6th grade class, spend 3 ½ days at "RiverGlen." RiverGlen is promoted
in museum brochures as an outdoor learning center with a mission to "inspire environmental and community
stewardship by providing hands-on learning experiences that link science, technology, and the arts in a natural
setting." At RiverGlen, students work in field groups of eight or nine students with an adult chaperone and a
museum teacher or "field guide instructor."
         The broader study, from which this study about comics comes, incorporates a multi-sited ethnographic
approach (Eisenhart, 2001) to "trace relationships that stretch out across time and space" (Eisenhart, 2001, p.22)
as students  visited an exhibition  hall, pond,  and marsh,   and  other areas. An   extensive data  set, including
videotaped observations and the digitized student artifacts was generated as part of this approach. The comics
were an assignment given by the teachers that the author proposed at the beginning of the school year as a way
to obtain information about students' thoughts and feelings about the museum visit in a different kind of format,
one with which students would be familiar as they are used to reading comics and watching cartoons and that
would allow for creative self-expression through both images and words in a pictorial sequence. The use of
images is similar to the use of drawings in the journals and is commonly used when the students illustrate stories
or essays for other assigned projects. Theoretically, comic books "convert thoughts into forms that can traverse
the physical world and be re-converted by one or more sense back into thought" (McCloud, 1993, p.195). The
students were introduced to the assignment before they left for the RiverGlen while they were still at school and
were required to hand in their comics two weeks after the trip. The students' essays and comics were viewed by
the teachers, parents or family members, and fellow students, while the journals were usually only viewed by
the teachers and, possibly, parents or family members.
         The author gave the students a sample comic (created by the author) about a girl who visits a science
museum for the first time. The comic tries to communicate the girl's apprehension before the visit, how she describes

                                                                                                                        3-
       various activities in which she engages at the museum, including providing information about different museum staff
       encountered, and gives advice about what to do when going to a museum, such as making sure to bring a journal and a
       camera. Students were given blank pages with empty comic panels on them and told they could use one or two sheets,
       which would equal two or four comic book pages respectively. Most students followed the same format as the sample
       comic by talking about their feelings before the trip, describing what they did, alone and/or as part of the group during
       the trip, and providing advice to others who might visit RiverGlen in the future.
               A total of 36 comics were analyzed for this study. The author and three other researchers engaged in
       two coding sessions based on a breakdown of areas of interest generated by the author in accordance with the
       RiverGlen  curriculum   and  review   of other data.  After initial coding  and   discussion, consensus   was  reached
       about coding    categories and    guidelines about    what  kind of  content was    considered   appropriate  for each
       category. A total of seven categories emerged, each broken down into subcategories of words and images. Three
       researchers engaged in coding of the comics during the second session and this data was used to check for inter-
       rater reliability across the categories using Cronbach's Alpha of .70 or greater. Only one category, environment,
       is not considered reliable using this criteria. (See table below).

       Conclusion and Significance
               So, what did students take away from their field trip? In contrast to a teacher-mandated reflective essay
       that limited students to interpreting their field trip experience in terms of environmental science education only,
       the comics demonstrated that students understood the field trip as being about more than just science content
       knowledge acquisition, although the means of instances of science words and science images were the highest
       (5.33 and  3.52, respectively).   For example,   in terms   of affect, students used   images and   words  to describe
       expectations and feelings such as anxiousness, happiness, excitement, fear, nervousness, and sadness. Students
       also described learning about historical events and people, art making, and numerous and diverse kinds of social
       interactions with adults and peers, including references to friends and sports and other activities with friends.
       (Future work will explore further the areas of environment and other to deconstruct what students took away
       outside of the aforementioned areas).
               In general, the comics provided detailed insight into student understanding about learning during the
       field trip that was not available through other data sources. Field trips are about much more than acquisition of
       content knowledge     and  these  comics  show   exactly   how   students interpret what  happens    and  how. Future
       research about comics and other alternative data sources is necessary to build upon this insight.

       Table 1: Inter-rater Reliability.

       Subject/Area Overall Reliability         Words                                    Images
       Affect = .81                             .88                                      .83
       Science = .93                            .93                                      .94
       History/Social Studies = .93             .95                                      .91
       Art = .98                                .97                                      1.0
       Social = .93                             .90                                      .92
       Environment* = .66                       .53                                      .36
       Other = .80                              .68                                      .69
       *inter-rater reliability .70 (Cronbach's Alpha) not achieved

      References
       Anderson, D., Lucas, K. B., Ginns, I. S. (2003). Theoretical perspectives on learning in an informal setting.
               Journal of Research in Science Teaching 40(2), 177-199.
       Banks, J., Au, K. H., Ball, A. F., Bell, P., Gordon, E. W., Gutiérrez, K. D., Heath, S. B., Lee, C. D., Lee, Y.,
               Mahiri,   J., Nasir, N.   S., Valdés,  G.,  Zhou,   M. (2007).  Learning    in and   out of school in  diverse
               environments: Life-long, Life-wide, life-deep. Seattle: The LIFE Center.
       Eisenhart, M.   (2001). Educational    ethnography    past, present  and  future: Ideas   to  think with. Educational
               Researcher 30(8), 16­27.
       Gilman,   B. I. (1984).  The  museum     docent.   In Nichols,   S. K., Alexander,    M., Yellis,   K. (Eds.) Museum
               Education Anthology 1973-1983: Perspectives on Informal Learning, A Decade of Roundtable Reports.
               Washington, D.C.: Museum Education Roundtable, 148-161.
       Griffin, J. (2004). Research on students and museums: Looking more closely at the students in school groups.
               Science Education 88 (Suppl. 1), S59-S70.
       McCloud, S. (1993). Understanding comics: The invisible art. New York: Harper Perennial.
       Zeidler, A. L., Surber, J. R. (1999). Understanding topic, structure, and importance of information in a visual
               and verbal display. Journal of Experimental Education 67, 114-132.

3-
