An aesthetic for adaptations: Going beyond knowledge and skills in
                                 explanations of adaptations

      Lee Martin, School of Education, University of California, Davis, 1 Shields Ave., Davis, CA, 95616,
                                              leemartin@ucdavis.edu

        Abstract: Adaptive expertise is often defined by the presence of both procedural and
        conceptual knowledge. While knowledge and skills can explain how people find a new
        path   when  confronted   with    a difficulty  (a  fault-driven   adaptation), something    else is
        needed to explain when and why people make a beneficial, but unnecessary change (a
        prospective    adaptation).   In  an  interview,    participants gave   examples   of  adaptations
        from their everyday lives. Their examples appeared to arise from aesthetic judgments,
        not from a conceptual understanding of the domain. These findings suggest that values
        and aesthetics ought to be a more explicit focus of research on adaptive expertise.

        How are some experts able to adapt to new situations and make effective changes when needed, while
others can become stuck in routines? Most studies of expertise emphasize the quantity and structure of experts'
knowledge (e.g., Chi, Feltovich, & Glaser, 1981), and the fluency and efficiency of their skills (e.g., Biederman
& Schiffrar, 1987). Hatano and Inagaki (1986) distinguish between routine and adaptive expertise, and state
that, while routines require only procedural knowledge, adaptations also require conceptual knowledge so that
experts can consider alternatives and invent new approaches to problems. Viewing adaptations as conceptually-
driven responses to difficulties can effectively explain what can be called fault-driven adaptations, which arise
in response to a specific difficulty, or impasse. However, this account has more difficulty explaining prospective
adaptations,  which  are  changes    that are   beneficial, but not  strictly necessary   (Martin   &  Schwartz,  in
preparation). For example, Martin and Schwartz (2007) had students work on a medical diagnosis task. They
found that  graduate   students spent a   significant amount  time  at the  onset  of the task  creating  an external
representation (e.g., a contingency table) of the information in the reference materials. Although undergraduates
were capable of creating external representations when access to reference materials was restricted, they did not
do so spontaneously, but instead worked with the materials as given. The difference between the groups arose
not from what students knew, but rather from what they chose to do. These results suggest that conceptual and
procedural knowledge are necessary, but not sufficient, to explain prospective adaptations.
        Little research has been conducted on unprompted, prospective adaptations. To investigate potential
sources for  prospective adaptations,    adults (graduate   and undergraduate   students)  were  asked,   in a semi-
structured interview, for examples from their lives where they made a prospective adaptation.

Method
Participants
        Twelve students (four graduate students, eight undergraduates; five men, seven women) participated in
the study. They had just completed a 45 minute medical diagnosis task (see Martin & Schwartz, 2007, for a
description of this study)   and were  paid  for their  participation. In  service of brevity,  only data  from  two
participants are presented here.

Procedure
        Participants were asked to give examples from their own lives where "you could have gotten by just
fine with a default or normal way of doing things, but instead, you invested some time up front, and maybe you
were inefficient for a while, in hopes of a benefit later on?" Participants were probed for details as needed.

Results
        Two focal examples provide a sample of participants' prospective adaptations and the thinking behind
these adaptations.  The  first  example   comes  from   an   undergraduate   economics    major who    described her
approach to writing in-class essays.

        During high school and then college I realized that everyone wanted to get the question and
        start  writing right away.... [Some]    people  are  like, "Oh   I have no  time, I've  got to start
        writing." But [my friends], they take out 15 minutes, and write out a really nice outline, and
        ... once they write the essay it's a lot more effective ... So when I did that, the 15 minutes was
        really worth it, although people were ahead of me [at first], in the end, it was really easy for
        me to write the rest of the thing.

                                                                                                                        3-
                Creating an outline is a prospective adaptation, as it is not strictly necessary and it does not directly
       advance the goal of completing the essay text ­ as she notes, other students are "ahead" when she completes the
       outline ­ but it sets the stage for faster, easier, and more organized writing. What she learned from her friends in
       this story was not knowledge about how to structure essays or how to create an outline, but rather the value of
       upfront organization. Through her friends, and through her own experience of trying this method, she acquired
       an aesthetic sense that outlining was a valuable, worthwhile activity ­ the right way to do things ­ within the
       context of in-class essay writing.

                The second example comes from an engineering graduate student who does woodworking as a
                hobby: I'm a woodworker for one ... [and] setting up the wood shop for me takes, forever. I
                could get right into working on some projects, but it would be inefficient for me in the long
                run when I'm always looking for, "Where's my chisel, where's my plane, where, hey, what did
                I'd do with that thing?" ... It's almost a deferred gain. You know that you have to pay a little
                bit upfront, and then you'll get more in the return.

                As he notes, his preparation is time-consuming, is not strictly necessary, and does not occur in response
       to any immediate difficulty. By these criteria, it is an example of a prospective adaptation. As in the outlining
       example, the actions he takes are not merely cognitive. He actively arranges his immediate external environment
       to make it more amenable to his forthcoming activity. He later presents his approach to woodworking as an
       instance of a more general "life lesson" he has learned on the value of taking time up front to prevent waste.

      Discussion and Conclusion
                Participants  clearly articulated the value they  perceived   in spending  time  at the onset  of a task to
       organize and structure their immediate environment to better prepare themselves for future action. Thus, the
       decision to make a prospective adaptation appeared to come from values-based or aesthetic judgments, not from
       a conceptual understanding of the domain. Conceptual understanding played a role later in the determination of
       how to enact the adaptation. Certainly, the data presented here do not suggest that prospective adaptations are
       never motivated    by  conceptual  knowledge.  Instead, they  show that   a theory of adaptations  and  of adaptive
       expertise must go beyond consideration of knowledge and skills to include values and aesthetics. The findings
       presented here, exploratory as they are, suggest a hypothesis: wherever one finds mature adaptive expertise, one
       will also find a set of values and aesthetics related to when to attempt an adaptation, sacrificing initial efficiency
       in favor of  a long-term    benefit. Moreover,  these   values and aesthetics  may    be  instrumental, not  merely
       epiphenomenal,     and thus  may  be a reasonable  target  for educational  interventions  intended to  support the
       development of adaptive expertise.

      References
       Biederman, I., & Shiffrar, M. M. (1987). Sexing day-old chicks: A case study and expert systems analysis of a
                difficult perceptual-learning  task.  Journal  of Experimental     Psychology:   Learning,  Memory,    and
                Cognition, 13, 640-645.
       Chi, M. T. H., Feltovich, P., & Glaser, R. (1981). Categorization and representation of physics problems by
                experts and novices. Cognitive Science, 5, 121-152.
       Hatano, G., & Inagaki, K. (1986). Two courses of expertise. In H. Stevenson, H. Assume, & K. Hakuta (Eds).
                Child development and education in Japan (pp. 262-272). New York: Freeman.
       Martin, L., & Schwartz, D. L. (2007). "Catalysts to creating representational tools and the benefits for learning."
                In Chinn,     C., Erkens, G., &   Puntambekar,    S.  (Eds.), Proceedings    of the  Computer     Supported
                Collaborative Learning Conference (pp. 496-498). New Brunswick, New Jersey.
       Martin, L., & Schwartz, D. L. (in preparation). Prospective adaptation in the use of external representations.
                Manuscript submitted for publication.
       Schwartz, D. L., Bransford, J. D., & Sears, D. (2005). Efficiency and innovation in transfer. In J. Mestre (Ed.),
                Transfer   of  learning  from  a  modern    multidisciplinary  perspective (pp.  1-51).  Greenwich,    CT:
                Information Age Publishing Hoyles.

      Acknowledgements
       This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant SLC-0354453.
       Any opinions, findings and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the authors
       and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation.

3-
