     Sick at South Shore Beach: A Place-Based Augmented Reality
  Game as a Framework for Building Evidence-Based Arguments
 James Mathews, Christopher Holden, Ming-Fong Jan, John Martin, University of Wisconsin-Madison, USA
  Email: jmmathew@wisc.edu, holden@math.wisc.edu, mingfongjan@wisc.edu, regardingjohn@gmail.com

          Abstract: Recent research on Augmented Reality (AR) gaming suggests that place-based AR
          games embedded in larger curricular units provide contexts and scaffolding for developing
          students'  scientific argumentation    skills. This   project explores  the  potential of  one    specific
          place-based AR gaming unit, Sick at South Shore Beach, to develop students' argumentation
          skills and     increase their  understanding      of the role   that  social interactions  play    in the
          development of scientific arguments.

Introduction / Statement of Problem
          The    National   Science   Educational    Standards     (National   Research   Council,   1996)     identifies the
following scientific literacy goals for fifth through eighth graders: (1) Use appropriate tools and techniques to
gather,  analyze,   and   interpret   data. (2) Develop     descriptions, explanations,   predictions, and     models  using
evidence. (3) Think critically and logically to make relationships between evidence and explanations. Despite
these goals and    recent   initiatives to  support  them,  students   still struggle  to construct, justify,   and  evaluate
scientific arguments (Kuhn, 2005; Weinberger, et al., 2006). Many researchers trace this problem to the nature
of traditional school-based science, which tends to center around well-defined problems that train students to
look  for one right  answer     (Chinn  &   Malhotra,  2002;    Lemke,   1990).  This  approach  does  not     address socio-
cultural  contexts  that  shape   argumentation   and  meaning     making    in science   and does   little to help  students
understand the nature of scientific inquiry outside the classroom. It may also lead students to view science as the
accumulation of facts instead of a negotiation of knowledge within scientific communities (Chinn & Malhotra,
2002).

Our Project
          Sick at South Shore Beach is a place-based AR game and curricular unit designed around South Shore
Beach, a mixed-recreational park in Milwaukee - an urban city of 600,000. Students role-play as water chemists,
public health doctors, or wildlife ecologists who have been called upon to investigate a collection of illnesses
that are linked to the beach. During the unit, players visit South Shore Beach to play the AR game on a GPS-
equipped PDA. The information gathered during the game/visit, along with research conducted in the classroom,
provides  students   with   evidence    to  formulate, present   and  defend    their final hypotheses.     Using  a situated
cognitive  view   of learning,    the game   and curriculum     attempts  to situate  students' learning    around  authentic
contexts and position them as active participants in the inquiry process, allowing them to use the language and
practices of doctors and scientists to investigate and discuss similar "real-world" problems (Shaffer, 2004). The
design of Sick at South Shore Beach builds on earlier research surrounding AR games (Squire & Jan, 2007;
Klopfer, Squire, & Jenkins, 2003; Squire, et, al., 2007) and pays special attention to the use of differentiated
roles, game challenges, and local place as tools for structuring student learning. More specifically this micro-
study, which is an offshoot of a larger research project, seeks to identify design elements that address students'
difficulties in developing causal arguments at both the data interpretation level (e.g., misinterpreting charts and
graphs) and the procedural level (e.g., tying faulty evidence to claims, making claims based on single pieces of
evidence, and ignoring non-causal evidence) (Kuhn, 2005).

Methods / Data Collection / Analysis
          Sick at South Shore Beach was implemented in nine classrooms across five schools and four subject
areas. Participants were chosen to allow for comparisons across school setting (e.g., SES, race), content area,
grade level, background knowledge, and reading level. Each teacher implemented the entire 15-hour gaming
unit, modifying the base curriculum to meet his or her local classroom needs (e.g., student reading levels, course
content, reading comprehension strategies). We observed sample lessons and game play activities, conducted
individual and focus group interviews with teachers and students, and collected student work. We paid special
attention to students' notes and final presentations in order to identify areas where they struggled to develop
causal arguments and then used this analysis to redesign specific components of the game and curriculum.

Findings
          Our    initial implementations     suggest   that Sick   at South    Shore   Beach  provides   a   semi-structured
framework that guides the inquiry process and scaffolds students' ability to develop causal arguments. Other

                                                                                                                                3-
       findings suggest that we need to better align the game with the range of conceptual knowledge and reading
       levels found in typical middle school classrooms and pay special attention to students who struggle with data
       interpretation (e.g., it was    hard  for students who    misinterpreted   data  to  use  that data  to develop sound
       arguments).  While    problems    surfaced   with  many   students'  arguments,     the following game-based    design
       elements   emerged as    particularly influential  in helping   students, albeit to  various   degrees, develop causal
       arguments:

           1.   Game   Challenge:   The  goal    of identifying the source  of   the illnesses in order to  prevent additional
                people from getting sick motivated students during the inquiry process and provided a clear cause and
                effect inquiry framework (Kuhn, 2005). Many students reported that the mystery nature of the game
                motivated them to solve the problem and made them feel like they were working on an authentic case.
           2.   Local  Place:   Allowed   students   to draw  from  prior  knowledge,    provided   a "real-life" context  that
                anchored  the   inquiry, and  allowed   students to  gather evidence    through   empirical observations  they
                made during the fieldtrip.
           3.   Differentiated Roles: Role-specific skill sets, tools, and data proved helpful in developing collaboration
                between players, getting students to recognize that different professions view problems differently, and
                encouraging students to use domain specific language (Gee, 2003).
           4.   Collaboration/Competition:    Inter-role  collaboration   within  groups,   along  with  informal  and formal
                cross-group   discussions   encouraged    students  to (re-)evaluate, present,  and   defend their hypotheses
                (Weinberger,    et al, 2006), and   allowed  teachers  to identify   areas where  students  needed  additional
                scaffolding.
           5.   Checkpoints/Staged     Access    to Data: The   game   incorporated   checkpoints   where   students accessed
                (unlocked) additional data they could use as evidence to support and/or modify existing hypotheses.
                While these checkpoints did not always generate sound scientific thinking (e.g., some students stuck
                with a hypothesis despite the fact that they had access to new evidence that could have disproved their
                claims) they did provide opportunities for teachers to redirect students to the central inquiry question,
                gauge their understanding, and challenge their claims and supporting evidence.

      Implications / Re-Design
                These  findings    are being  used   to  re-design  our  next  generation   of  place-based  AR    games.  We
       developed and implemented two new games in the fall of 2007, and are in the process of revising these designs
       for spring implementation. Based on our findings, we increased the level of differentiation between roles (e.g.,
       provided more unique tools, tasks, and skills to individual roles), added more explicit opportunities for making
       observations during the game/site visit, incorporated direct instruction related to data interpretation, and added
       additional organizational   tools (e.g.,  charts  and concept   maps)   to help  students  classify  and   analyze their
       evidence.

      References
       Chinn, C.A. & Malhotra, B.A.(2002). Epistemologically authentic inquiry in schools: A theoretical framework
                for evaluating inquiry tasks. Science Education, 86(2), 175-218.
       Gee, J. P. (2003). What video games have to teach us about learning and literacy. New York, NY: Palgrave
                MacMilian.
       Kuhn, D. (2005). Education for Thinking. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
       Klopfer, E., K. Squire & H. Jenkins (2003). Augmented Reality Simulations on PDAs. Paper presented at the
                national American Education Research Association (AERA) conference, Chicago, 2003.
       Lemke, J. (1990). Talking science: Language, learning, and values. Norwood, NJ: Ablex Publishing.
       National Research Council (1996). National Science Education Standards. Washington, DC: National Academy
                Press.
       Shaffer, D. W. (2004). Pedagogical praxis: The professions as models for post-industrial education. Teachers
                College Record, 106(7), 1401-1421.
       Squire, K. D., & Jan, M. (2007). Mad City Mystery: Developing scientific argumentation skills with a place-
                based augmented reality game on handheld computers. Journal of Science Education and Technology.
                16(1), 5-29.
       Squire, K., Jan, M., Mathews, J., Wagler, M., Martin, J., DeVane, B., & Holden, C. (2007). Wherever You Go,
                There You Are: Place-Based Augmented Reality Games for Learning. In Shelton, B. E., & Wiley, D.
                (Eds.), The Educational Design and Use of Simulation Computer Games (pp. 265-296). Rotterdam,
                The Netherlands: Sense Publishers.
       Weinberger, A., Sampson, V., Jaspers, J., Fischer, F. (2006). Argumentative Knowledge Construction in CSCL.
                In Barab, S., Hay, K., Hickey, D. (Eds.), Proceedings of the 7th international conference on Learning
                Sciences, (pp.1094-1100). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.

3-0
