What kind of difficulties may teachers encounter, in the process of
                       constituting a virtual learning community?

    Anastasios Matos, Greek Secondary Education, Eleftherias 20, Tirnavos, Greece 40100, anmatos@sch.gr
         Vassileios Kollias, University of Thessaly, Glavani 182, Volos, Greece 38221, vkollias@uth.gr

          Abstract: We studied a virtual teacher community that had some crucial attributes that could
          lead to disruption of outdated learning and professional development norms. An analysis of
          factors that prevented the emergence of a learning community leads us to point to the crucial
          role of some moderator practices: open negotiation of hidden tensions, the sensitive use of
          learning  opportunities   to build personal   interest for   the subject  matter   to   the community
          members, the bringing in of experts in a way that respects the members prior contributions

Short description of `Friktories'
          "Friktories" is a virtual teacher community (www.komvos.edu.gr/fryktories/index.php), constructed by
the Centre   of the Greek   Language    (C.G.L.), in   order to  support   teachers of   Greek  language     in Universities
around the world. These teachers are appointed by the Greek Education Department and are selected among
Greek secondary education teachers.
          "Friktories" is a special virtual teacher community in three respects: a) the members have much higher
academic   credentials  than  the   average  Greek   secondary   education   teacher     b)   the  members      have  strong
motivation   to collaborate: they   are isolated  in different  countries  having   to   build their  own    curriculum   for
teaching Greek as a foreign language (Loughran & Russell, 1997), and c) the virtual community is not mediated
by their hierarchical seniors (the Department of Education) but by a research center (C.G.L.), which is also
responsible for their initial training through a two week long face to face course prior to their travel.

Research questions
          Studying this virtual environment (for 40 months, starting at the beginning of its functioning in 2002),
we focused on establishing whether it became a learning community and to furthermore understand: a) why the
afore-mentioned    propitious   circumstances   did    not lead  to  a learning    community,      and   b)  what   was  the
significance of community coordinators' management of the team for the culture that finally developed.

Development of collaboration and community activity in `Friktories'
          We analyzed in both quantitative and qualitative ways the written exchanges between all communities'
members in the collaboration spaces of the environment, following an ethnographical technique to understand
community's life (Barab et al., 2004). These collaboration spaces are a) Discussion forums, b) "Teachers of the
Greek language", a space allocated for publishing and annotating lesson plans or other passages written by the
community    members    about   the characteristics  of the  Greek  studies  in their  Universities,    and  c) "Electronic
Workshop"    a  collaboration space,   designed  by    the community   mediators    (aiming    to raise  the standards   and
transform  the  environment   into  a  learning community)     where   members     interacted  with   experts   in Teaching
Greek as a Foreign Language (TGFL). We also analyzed the content of two semi-structured interviews with the
two main community's mediators, and studied and analyzed the user interface and the design of the "Friktories"
environment.
          Our analysis shows that two different types of engagement emerged in the community: a) a "core" of
high participation in all three collaboration spaces of the environment and b) a periphery of much less active
members. There was no members' shift from one type of engagement to the other during the three years of our
study, as we arguably expected (Lave & Wenger, 1994). The active members developed a sense of ownership of
the environment and considered "Friktories" the result of their own contributions in teaching resources and in
comments.
          Although active members took advantage of the community environment and used it as a new tool for
reading and writing and incorporating it in their teaching, there wasn't observed joint creation of common lesson
plans  or exchanges    focused  on  pedagogical   issues   related  to TGFL.    Moreover     although    there  were  many
conflicts and misunderstandings about objectives and norms that emerged, none was discussed openly within the
community. Some members express their readiness to "to put everything on the tapis", but mediators didn't
initiate any kind   of open  discussion  in  which   those  matters would   be  brought   in   the foreground.     As it was
presumable   (Navridis,  2005),  this  blocked   much   the  members'    activity,  e.g. making    comments      and  giving
feedback to other members work. Those silenced matters caused inconvenience and made some members to be
silent and not  to  participate actively in  the  life of  the community,    as has   been  found     by other  studies  too
(Edmondson, 1999).

                                                                                                                                3-
                 As far as the community's development is concerned, an initial "intensive activity period" (the first 17
       months)   led   to the establishment      of a   culture characterized   by  individual   contributions.   Mediators  tried to
       encourage    community      members     in   building  stronger   relations  among   them.    They   also  exhorted   them  to
       exchange    individually    made    lesson   plans,  by   publishing  them   in  the "Teachers     of the   Greek   language"
       collaboration   space.     However     the mediators     made   very  limited   use  of  the  opportunities   offered   by the
       community     contributions   to  bring    forth interesting  theoretical issues   related to the  TGFL     and  making  them
       topics of discussion, supporting thus the development of personal rather than situational motivation for TGFL.
       Instead,  thinking    that  there was   a  potential  for   greater learning and   joint  production  they   explicitly  called
       members to participate in "Electronic Workshops", under the guidance of experts, in a form of distant education.
       The Workshops did not built on prior relevant discussion on the same issues by the members and there has been
       no discussion    on   objectives    and processes    aiming   towards  members'     consensus.     This top-down approach
       (Scardamalia, & Bereiter, 2003) met a lot of members' resistance, overt or covert, and finally faltered.

      Discussion
                 Based on the interaction in the community's forums we noted that there was a strong resistance to
       deeper collaboration and joint material construction.
                 This phenomenon is in accordance with an unwillingness to coreflect and codesign with peers which is
       common in Greek secondary schools. Teachers' professional identity seems to include elements of individuality
       and lack of peer collaboration in joint resolution of problems. Teachers seem to believe that they will be able to
       manage their professional challenges acting as individuals (Little, 1990) and this kind of mentality follows them
       when they enter in the community environment.
                 Moreover Friktories' members often had different visions about their role as TGFL teachers and had
       different pedagogical       philosophies,  issues   on which    members   did   not manage    to  arrive   into some  form  of
       compromise      through    conflict management.      To  a  certain extent  this is attributed  to   their fear and  hereupon
       refusal to discuss openly, procedural matters and bring in the front of the stage burning issues (Grossman et al.
       2000).
                 Finally moderators combined a "distant" attitude with respect a) to engaging in learning opportunities
       for TGFL the contigently appeared in the process              b) to training members in collaborative work (communal
       objectives   and   efforts, legitimate  norms    in the  community)    and   c) to  bring  in the foreground    and  discusses
       openly and sincerely every issue that causes anxiety or inconvenience among community members (a change in
       the community's goals, a raise of its standards e.t.c.) with        a top-down teaching format in the workshops.
                 Our   study  reveals    that individual   credentials  and  an  external  motivation    to seek   the help  of other
       members are not enough to create a culture focused on learning and joint production of cultural artifacts. They
       also need to work on passing from situational interest to personal interest on the content of the community's
       work through opportunities offered by the issues that come forth.

      References
       Edmondson AC. (1999). Psychological safety and learning behaviour in work teams. Admin. Sci. Q. 44:350­83.
       Barab,   S.  et  al., (2004).   Designing    system    dualities:   Characterizing   an  online   professional   development
                 community. In S. A. Barab, R. Kling & J. H. Gray (Eds.) Designing for Virtual Communities in the
                 Service of Learning (p. 18), New York: Cambridge UP.
       Grossman,    P.,   Wineburg,    S., &   Woolworth,       S. (2000).  What   makes    teacher  community     different  from  a
                 gathering of teachers (No. O-00-1): Center for the Study of Teaching and Policy, Center on English
                 Learning & Achievement.
       Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1994). Situated learning: Legitimate Peripheral Participation, New York: Cambridge
                 University Press
       Little, J. W. (1990). The persistence of privacy: Autonomy and initiative in teachers' professional relations.
                 Teachers College Record, 91, 509-536.
       Loughran,    J. &   Russell,  T.  (1997)    Teaching     About  Teaching:   Purpose,    Passion   and Pedagogy     in Teacher
                 Education, (London, Falmer Press).
       Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (2003). Knowledge building environments: Extending the limits of the possible
                 in  education     and   knowledge      work.   In  A. DiStefano,    K.E.   Rudestam,     &  R.   Silverman    (Eds.),
                 Encyclopedia of distributed learning. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications
       Navridis, K. (2005). Teams' psychology: a clinical psycho-dynamic approach. Athens Papazisis (in Greek)

      Acknowledgments
       We would like to acknowledge the valuable help and remarks contributed by Mr. Dimitris Koutsogiannis who
       was the Friktories' inspirer and Mrs. Ioanna Kitsou who was the Friktories' moderator.

3-
