       Using Geographic Information Systems to Support Student
                               Learning through Urban Ecology
                                 Michael Barnett, Meredith Houle, Boston College
                                     Email: barnetge@bc.edu, houleme@bc.edu

         Abstract: This paper describes our urban street tree curriculum project in which we engage
         students in an ecological and economic evaluation of trees in highly populated areas through
         the use of Geographic Information Systems and modeling technologies. In particular, students
         conduct a tree inventory of the grounds surrounding their school and then use an urban tree
         modeling    extension    in  ArcView       called  CITYGreen     to   evaluate   the   value  of  their
         neighborhood     trees. Using     these technological   tools  students are   able to   ask   "what if"
         scenarios and evaluate the impact of redesigning the green space around their school. Using a
         mixed method approach we have found that students show significant increases in learning
         outcomes    and  express     considerable     interest  in  becoming    caretakers   for  their  urban
         environment.

Introduction and Purpose
         Today many students are immersed in a culture of video games, cell phones, podcasting, blogging,
instant messaging and other kinds of media-intensive experiences. This rapid emergence of the current media
culture in which students have access to information technology tools has democratized how youth participate in
the world . For instance, according to Henry Jenkins who directs the MIT media literacy program argues that
youth  are no   longer  spectators,   or   even  consumers    of information   rather  they   are active  participants in
contributing and shaping information through the use of information technology tools and resources (Jenkins,
2006). As  a result, students    are immersed    in a  cultural context that is  often at odds    with typical classroom
experience. Namely, in classrooms students are expected to be consumers, rather than producers of knowledge.
On top of this rapid shift has been a shift in the nature of knowledge.      Further, as argued by Duguid and Brown
(2004) knowledge is understanding how to search, evaluate, organize and use information in order to learn,
problem-solve, make decisions -in formal and informal learning contexts, at work, at home and in educational
settings. Unfortunately, today too many students are leaving are not equipped with either the technological or
analysis skills to examine information, ask questions, indentify patterns, and be able to explain the meanings
behind the patterns discerned through a critical analysis (National Research Council, 2006). This gap is most
prominent when one discusses students from underrepresented backgrounds in science and technology fields.
Research on the use of information technology in classrooms reveals that students in high poverty urban areas
are consistently  falling behind     their peers  (National   Telecommunications      and Information     Administration,
2000). For example, a national study by Becker (2000) documented that students in low income areas often use
technologies for repetitive activities, whereas students in higher-income areas often use technologies for higher-
order thinking, problem solving, and other intellectually challenging activities (Ladson-Billings, 1997; Pollard,
1993). Further, information technology is often used independently of content in urban classrooms, which limits
the understanding that students, and in turn the meanings that they can develop regarding the use of information
technologies (Songer, Lee, & Kam, 2002). With the above concerns our project team has been developing,
through support from the National Science Foundation, a Geographic Information System technology-enhanced
curriculum  project  to support   urban    students in learning  about  the  impacts   of urban   forests on  their city's
climate, environment, energy use and how those factors impact climate change. It is the focus of this paper to
describe the program and how participation in the program has impacted student learning outcomes.

Background
Theoretical Framework
         This study and the design of our project is grounded in a theoretical framework of learning referred to
as situated cognition (Brown, 1989; Cobb & Bowers, 1999; Cognition and Technology Group at Vanderbilt,
1993). From a situated cognition perspective learning and action are not separate constructs, but rather learning,
action, and context are deeply intertwined with one another. In short, learning is mediated and shaped by the
context, social  interactions,   and  tools  such   as community     resources   that  constitute  a  particular learning
environment.  From   a  situated  learning   perspective   if students are  to develop    rich, meaningful   and  useable
understandings of scientific phenomena as well as the process of scientific knowledge construction, they need to
be engaged in a scientific community of practice in which they are doing science in a real world setting not
simply   reading about  science   (Barab,   Hay,   Barnett,   &  Keating, 2000;  Lave   &   Wenger,    1991).  From  this
perspective the urban environment, specifically urban ecosystems, have significant potential to become learning

                                                                                                                             1-
       resources that teachers can leverage to engage students in the study of phenomena that is both locally relevant
       and has a direct impact upon their daily lives (Bouillion & Gomez, 2001).
                Previous research has highlighted that access to resources, though important, is only part of the story
       (Spillane, Diamond, Walker, Halverson, & Jita, 2001). Spillane and colleagues (2001) point out that the impact
       of resources on student achievement requires extending our vision of resources beyond the school and classroom
       to include the entire school community. In addition, it is not sufficient to simply identify the resources, but to
       understand how to use, or activate these resources to ensure that they are usable by students. Historically, the
       resources that  schools  have  used    to teach  science are  the  classroom,   laboratory,  and  the  outdoors  (Orion  &
       Hofstein, 1994).    Unfortunately,  the   outdoor environment     is the one  most   neglected   by teachers,  curriculum
       developers, and researchers (e.g., Orion & Hofstein, 1994). Researchers have also found that teachers tended to
       avoid   outdoor   activities because    they    were  frequently   unfamiliar   with   the  philosophy,   technique,   and
       organization of field trips (Fido & Gayford, 1982).      In other words, the teachers did not have the requisite skills,
       knowledge or confidence to activate the urban outdoor environment as a learning resource. Hence, our work has
       focused  on  designing   and   researching   projects   that  support  teachers and    students  in activating  the urban
       environment, with the support of information technologies, as a learning resource for their students.

       Urban Environmental Science Education and Information Technologies
                Urbanization trends of the past century show a dramatic rise in the size of cities. Over 300 cities have
       more than 1 million inhabitants, and 16 "megacities" have populations exceeding 10 million. In light of such
       population  pressures, urban   natural    resources,  such as  urban   watersheds,  forests, and  wildlife are  critical to
       maintaining cities and to providing economic, civic, and public health benefits for metropolitan area residents
       worldwide   (Grimm,   Grove,   Pickett,   &  Redman,    2000).  At   the forefront  of ensuring   that urban  ecosystems
       maintained are young people who are and will be living in cities. Unfortunately, all too often students in cities
       are not provided with the training they need to understand or appreciate the ecological richness of their city, nor
       do they have the scientific skills to understand how their actions impact their urban ecosystem, how they can
       improve and change their city's ecosystem for the better, and how a healthy urban ecosystem impacts their own
       lives (Manzanal, Barreiro, & Jimenez, 1999). In fact, to date teaching of ecology in high school classrooms has
       primarily focused   on  the  study  of    areas where   there has  been  relatively  minimal     human   intervention. For
       example,  in  their 2004   review  of  environmental    science  high  school   textbooks,   the Environmental   Literacy
       Council (2004) found that very few books critically examined urban ecosystems, the impact of cities on the
       environment, and the role that humans have had in creating, changing, and impacting urban ecosystems. Thus, it
       is not surprising that there have been few research studies that have examined student beliefs and understanding
       of urban ecosystems as documented by Rickinson's (2001) extensive review of the empirical environmental
      education research literature.
                Geospatial technologies such as Geographic Information Systems (GIS) have emerged over the last
       fifteen years as  one  of  the key  tools   used  by   environmental   scientists  (National  Research   Council,   2006).
       However, a disconnect exists between the research conducted by professional environmental scientists and how
       environmental science is taught in typical public school classrooms. Few students work with tools regularly
       used by scientists or pursue authentic inquiries using current scientific data, regional or global information, and
       available research   tools   (National Research   Council,    2006).   However,    recently  there  has  been  a dramatic
       increase in the availability of user-friendly geospatial technologies for educators (such as MyWorld, Google
       Earth,  and  ArcExplorer)    have  increased    the  potential for   use  of Geographic     Information   Systems   (GIS)
       technologies in schools.     During    the previous   two  years   our project  team   has  been  developing   curriculum
       materials for use in urban schools that leverage ArcView, the premiere GIS software package and CITYGreen
       which is an extension for ArcView which allows students to evaluate the economic and ecological value of
       urban street trees.

      Study Context
       Curriculum Project Description
                Our urban tree project capitalizes upon the increased recognition that city street trees have significant
       positive ecological impacts (McPherson et al., 1997). The urban street tree inventory is conducted using               GIS
       technologies and CITYgreen, a software package develop by American Forests that plugs into the Geographical
       Information Systems software package, ArcView. CITYgreen allows students, through the use and labeling of
       satellite images, to link each tree location to a database of geographic, classification, and health information and
       to   conduct      analyses     regarding     the     economic      and    ecological    benefits      of   urban    trees.
       http://www.americanforests.org/productsandpubs/citygreen/ for a description of CITYgreen).
                In  this project  students collect     data on tree  location   and condition  in   the field and then  and   use
       CITYgreen    to evaluate   the economic    value  of  street trees on  such  constructs as   storm  water  runoff,  energy
       savings, and air pollution removal. The students also evaluate the impact of street trees on air quality and the

1-
rate of  carbon sequestration  and   determine  how    much   carbon is  stored  in their urban street   tree sample.
However, what is perhaps most powerful about this project is that once students have collected their data (or
used  data from  an existing  street inventory    for their neighborhood)  and   conducted  an  initial baseline data
analysis, they can then ask "what if" questions.      For example, in the city of Boston there has been significant
news coverage of the "Big Dig" where the city has diverted the major interstates that were running through city
into underground    tunnels and   currently in the    process of converting  the reclaimed  land into   green  space.
Further, a number of cities in the United States are currently undertaking massive tree campaigns to increase the
tree canopy of their city. In particular, the city of Boston will be planting 100,000 trees in the next ten years to
increase the city's tree   canopy from 26%     to 35%.   Thus,   through the use of  the  ArcView and    CITYGreen
students are able to write a letter to the mayor of the city and request that trees be planted in particular areas and
be able to justify their reasoning with a dollar figure. As a result, students can quickly generate findings that are
not only relevant to themselves, but they can also generate knowledge that is useful to policy makers and the
general public (See Figure 1 and 2 for images of student work).

  Figure 1.  Students' GIS map of planting trees around their school in grassy areas and then evaluating their
  ecological and economic impact in 20 years. Students are able to "re-draw" their urban neighborhood and
 evaluate the impact of their tree planting locations on the environment. Note that in this project students have
  several layers (left side of the image) in which they have tested and evaluated various scenarios including
whether Linden, Pear, or Crabapple trees are best to plant and they have also investigated where would be good
                                             locations plant the trees.

                                                                                                                          1-
        Figure 2. A student generated report.  This figure shows the impact of planting 25 trees and their ecological and
        economic impact on the neighborhood in 20 years.         Students are expected to understand the science and be able
         to interpret the above report. Then, using this report student can then justify or argue against planting trees in
                                            particular locations in their neighborhood.

       Sample
                Our research has taken place in two major locations.         First we have implemented our project in four
       inner city high schools (N = 215) whose population is mostly (94%) from students who are considered to be
       from underrepresented populations in science.      We have also conducted our research in an urban-suburban high
       school (N=385) whose population was quite mixed with 40% white, 30% Hispanic, 15% African-American,
       10%  Asian,  and   5%   a mixture   of other   cultures). The last  location was  an  affluent   suburban  schools    who
       population was predominately Caucasian (N=70, 88% Caucasian, 10% Asian-American, 2% other).

      Research Questions and Methods
                Our   research  and  development    agenda  has   been consistent   with  Brown's   (1992)  notion    of "design
       experiments", (design experiments have been refined to and now referred to as designed-based research (DBR))
       in which entire instructional interventions are designed (as opposed to constrained laboratory contexts) and the
       impact of innovations on the learning and teaching process are examined. The lessons learned are then cycled
       back into  the next   instructional intervention,   where   we  can  examine   the   impact  on  our    teaching  and  our
       students' learning.
                Design-based     research (DBR)    is ideal for  mixed-methods     studies, and accommodates      some    of  the
       strengths and weaknesses of qualitative and quantitative approaches to education research.              DBR is generally
       situated within   qualitative  methodologies    of   description,  but explicitly    studies a   theoretically   informed
       intervention (in our case a situative designed elementary science methods course) within the messy context of a
       real-world setting. DBR is iterative; research findings derived in situ are used to refine the original theories that
       helped construct the intervention, and it is understood that the intervention will be strategically amended as the
       research  progresses  to  better  accommodate      amended    theoretical understandings.    That   is, based  upon    our
       research findings   we  have  been  continuously    revising  and  refining  the structure   of our elementary    science
       methods courses.
       DBR is an ideal research framework for our work as it serves both the local needs of informing our course
       design and fills in the gaps in the global research knowledge base.       Locally, our findings will be used to inform
       the redesign of our methods course. At the global level, given that every teacher education program engages
       students in an elementary science methods course, we hope that our findings will provide guidance to other
       teacher educators regarding the use of authentic contexts and engaging pre-service teachers in the evaluation and
       implementation of reform-based curriculum as a core aspect of an elementary science methods course.
                We    have   been  conducting      design experiments    in  which   we   have  been    researching     how   our
       interventions play out in the complex and messy world of classrooms and use the results of research to redesign
       our materials. To that end the driving questions for our work have been:
           1.   What  are  the   challenges   that teachers and   students  experience  while  attempting   to  implement     the
                project?
           2.   How does participation in the project improve student learning outcomes?
           3.   What are the barriers to implementation of the project in the classroom?
           4.   What are teacher and students perceptions of the technological tools?

      Data Collection and Analysis
                A mixed methodological strategy was used for data collection in this research (Tashakkori & Teddlie,
       1998). We administered a pre-post content exam that consisted of multiple choice items that were derived from
       standardized exam questions and open ended questions. We also randomly selected a subset of students (N=30)
       and  administered   a  pre-post   semi-structured   content  interview  in   which   we  explored   students'    depth of
       understanding, their knowledge of GIS and their perceptions of their urban environment. We also conducted
       classroom observations and teacher interviews to better understand the type and nature of the questions that the
       students asked and to evaluate the challenges that teachers experienced while implemented a GIS based project.
                Data analysis consisted of conducting a paired t-test analysis on the students' content exam and the
       development    of rubric  for the  students' open   ended   questions  and  interview responses.    We   also  conducted
       ANOVA and ANCOVA analysis to evaluate any gender and race effects and overall project effects. The content
       exam reliability was found to be .75 and we have not conducted an inter-rater reliability analysis of the rubric
       analysis as of this writing. We assessed student understanding as measured by the interviews by listening to the
       audio recordings of the interviews and scoring the student responses by a rubric. The rubric is based upon the
       categorization scheme used by a number of researchers (e.g. Keating, Barnett, Barab, & Hay, 2002). Both the
       pre and post-interview responses were scored using a rubric adapted to the question of interest.           In evaluating

1-
the open ended student responses and the student interviews we developed a rubric and scored each question.
Lastly, using a grounded-theory approach to examine our field notes we indentified and searched for confirming
and  disconfirming    evidence  regarding  teacher   and  student  challenges  in  implementing   and  completing      the
project (again for the purposes of this proposal we will focus on the student outcomes).

Findings and Discussion
         For the purposes of this paper we are focusing our attention on student outcomes.         We have found that
students who participate in the project show significant growth in terms of their content understanding (tpre =
2.5, p < 0.01,  tpost = 3.4, p<0.01)   for urban   students and (tpre =  3.1, p <  0.01,  tpost = 3.6, p<0.01)     for the
urban/suburban students). In evaluating the difference on urban as compared to suburban students we found
significant difference between students from under-represented backgrounds in science regardless of location
we found a significant difference, F(2, 660)=6.0, p<.01) with students of color improving their performance on
the  content exam  (Mpre_urban  = 5.5, Mpost_urban = 8.0) as compared    to the   Caucasian students   (Mpre_urban =   7.5,
Mpost_urban = 9.8). Further, to evaluate the overall impact of the project on student outcomes we conducted an
analysis of covariance with the pre-test as being the covariate and found that all students showed a significant
increase in their content understanding regarding the functioning and process of urban trees, F(2,669) = 5.5,
p<.01).
         We also found similar results for the interview and open-ended responses as we did for the content
exam (tpre_all = 2.0, p < 0.01, tpost_all = 3.2, p<0.01). However, through our analysis of the interviews we found
that at the beginning of the projects nearly all students, but particularly, urban students did not recognize that
urban trees had value beyond removing carbon dioxide from atmosphere and adding oxygen to the atmosphere.
For example, the following interview exchange was typical:

         Interviewer:    So what do you think is the most important contribution of trees to the environment?
         Student:        Well, it would have to be that they give us oxygen and take out carbon dioxide.
         Interviewer:    Where did you learn that?
         Student:        I don't know. Middle school? Just have heard it for a long time.
         Interviewer:    Why is taking carbon dioxide out of the atmosphere important?
         Student:        Well, it is important because of global warming.     Carbon dioxide is important because it
                         is causing the planet to warm up.
         Interviewer:    Anything else that trees add to the environment?
         Student:        Hmm. Not that I know about.      Oh, I guess that help make the city cleaner.
         Interviewer:    How do they make the city cleaner?
         Student:        I guess they clean the air?  Oh, they also make the city look nicer.

However, as the project progressed students began to recognize that urban trees are considerably more valuable
than they had previously thought.    This shift in perception is represented in the following excerpt from a student
presentation in which a group of students were articulating why they were suggesting particular locations to
plant trees:

         Our research question was: "What would be the impact of planting 25 Norway maple trees
         around  our   school.  We   found that by   planting  the trees on   the south  side of  the building
         provided the most energy savings for the school and also provided the best way to slow global
         warming because by planting them there 555,000 lbs of CO2 would not be produced by the
         school because the building wouldn't need to be air conditioned as much.           We found Maple
         trees would    be the  best of any  tree  species  we tried  because  they also absorbed     the most
         pollution. We believe this to be the case because they tend to be bigger trees and have larger
         leaves and as a result have more surface area on which to absorb pollution as you can see here
         on the reports [points to the CITYGreen reports that on the screen].

The above quote shows that the students are generating results that are based upon their own research questions
and that students' are generating scientific arguments based upon their own findings and using those finds to
make recommendations that can have a significant environmental impact in an area where they live.
         Another important finding is that the students could articulate the importance of urban trees compared
to trees in other areas as noted by the following student interview:

         Interviewer:    Tell me about your research question.
         Student:        We investigated whether planting Linden trees on the streets that did not have
                         trees would have more or less impact than trees planted around the school.
         Interviewer:    What did you find?

                                                                                                                              1-
                Student:       We found that the trees near the school were better.
                Interviewer:   Why?
                Student:       They were better because they could shade the building which reduce energy
                               costs and keeps the parking area cooler which reduces energy costs and they
                               also absorbed more pollution.      They are more valuable too because they also
                               prevent more carbon dioxide from entering atmosphere than the trees far away
                               from the building because of the energy use.

       In analysis of the opened response items we also found that students' increased the complexity and scientific
       accuracy of their responses. In the pre-tests most students described that urban trees were important for cleaning
       the air, removing    CO2,  and  making    the city a  more    comfortable  and   aesthetically pleasing   place   to live.
       However, in the post interviews students increased the complexity of their responses and also used evidence
       collected  during their investigations to defend   and   justify their  responses.   This shift is exemplified by the
       following typical student pre-post open ended response:

                Student Pre:      An   increase  in  Boston's   tree canopy    would  bring  many   benefits.  First, it
                                  would clean up Boston's air. Second, it would help our problem with global
                                  warming     by removing    CO2   from    the atmosphere,    as well as  helping   the
                                  city's aesthetics. That is how an increase in Boston's tree canopy percentile
                                  would  benefit  Boston.    In terms   of where   to plant  trees I would  probably
                                  plant them in areas that don't have any trees.

                Student Post:     There are many potential benefits of increasing the tree canopy in Boston.
                                  One of the ways it would help the citizens of Boston is through reduction of
                                  heat. Trees   provide   shade and   by   shading the  city  they  help  regulate  the
                                  amount   of  heat  that Boston     absorbs.  Another  way    a  larger  tree canopy
                                  would be beneficial is through cleaner air. The trees take out both CO2 and
                                  other pollution like Ozone which is very bad for one's health particularly
                                  those  with    respiratory conditions.   I   would  plant   my   trees  near  homes
                                  because the home is a main source of greenhouse gas emissions.               Thus by
                                  planting trees near homes they will provide shade and help reduce electricity
                                  costs  which   then  will  reduce   the  amount    of CO2    from   going    into the
                                  atmosphere due to energy production.         Trees near homes will also provide
                                  energy savings in the winter because they will block the wind and keep the
                                  homes warmer.

       In comparing and contrasting the above response it is evident that the student had developed a significantly
       richer understanding  of  the  complex  relationships  that   exist between    urban street  trees and  their  ecological
       impact on the city.
           We    have  also indentified three  themes   that  cut across   the  study   sample   through  our  analysis   of the
       interviews and classroom observations.

           1.   Students enter the project with a number of misconceptions regarding the role of urban street trees.          In
                particular, students often believe that the Ozone layer depletion has a strong effect on global warming
                and that trees' primary role in slowing global warming is due to their ability to sequester carbon from
                the air, however, through the project students come to recognize that urban tree carbon sequestration is
                trivial compared to the ability of trees to prevent carbon dioxide from entering the atmosphere.
           2.   Students   leave the  project understanding     what  ecological   changes    would   benefit  their  school  or
                neighborhood     yet struggle to  articulate  how    they  would   increase   their  societal  participation  to
                implement those changes
           3.   Generally, students quickly learned the software and found the project to be more interesting than their
                traditional school work because it engaged them in a topic that they never thought about before, or as
                one student stated in an interview: "I had no idea that such things existed before or that I could use
                them and figure out that a tree in front of my school was worth something."

      Implications
                There is compelling evidence that humans are altering the Earth's ecosystems. In fact, humans are
       creating new ecosystems specifically for dwelling: these are urban ecosystems (Alberti et al., 2003). However,
       to date the teaching of ecology in high school classrooms has primarily focused on the study of areas where
       there  has been relatively minimal  human     intervention.   For example,  in   their 2004   review   of environmental

1-
science high school textbooks, the Environmental Literacy Council (2004) found that very few books critically
examined   urban  ecosystems,     the impact    of cities on the  environment,    and the role that  humans  have   had   in
creating urban ecosystems. Our work has focused on engaging those populations in critically examining their
urban ecosystem.
        Urbanization trends of the past century show a dramatic rise in the size of cities. Over 300 cities have
more than 1 million inhabitants, and 16 "megacities" have populations exceeding 10 million. In light of such
population  pressures,  urban     natural resources, such    as urban   watersheds,  forests, and wildlife are   critical to
maintaining cities and to providing economic, civic, and public health benefits for metropolitan area residents
worldwide   (Grimm     et al., 2000).  At  the  forefront  of   ensuring that  urban  ecosystems  maintained    are young
people who are and will be living in cities. Unfortunately, all too often students in cities are not provided with
the training they need to understand or appreciate the ecological richness of their city, nor do they have the
scientific skills to understand    how    their actions   impact  their  urban ecosystem   (Manzanal    et al.,  1999).   To
facilitate high school student understanding of and engagement with their urban ecosystems we have found that
engaging   students  in   uing  GIS   coupled   with  computer    modeling    technologies    within an urban    ecological
framework can improve their understanding of the value of their urban ecosystem.
        Lastly, to date there have been few research studies that examine students' use of GIS technologies and
students understanding of the impact of urban ecosystems on their environment. In fact, one of the outstanding
questions  put  forth  by   the   National  Resource      Council (2006)   is: "How    might   current  versions  of  GIS
(geographic information system) be incorporated into existing standards-based instruction?" The work described
here addresses    both of these   issues  and   suggests  that  GIS technology    coupled with  exploration  of  an urban
ecosystem can provide students with in-depth knowledge of how the value of their urban ecosystem.

References
Alberti, M., Marzluff, J. M., Shulenberger, E., Bradley, G., Ryan, C., & Zumbrunnen, C. (2003). Integrating
        humans into ecology: Opportunities and challenges for studying urban ecosystems. BioScience, 53(12),
        1169-1179.
Barab, S.   A.,   Hay,  K.    E., Barnett,  M.,    &  Keating,   T.  (2000).   Virtual solar   system   project: Building
        understanding through model building. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 37(7), 719-756.
Becker, H. (2000). Findings from the teaching, learning, and computing survey: Is Larry Cuban right? Paper
        presented at the School Technology Leadership Conference of Council of Chief State School Officers,
        Washington, DC.
Bouillion, L. M., & Gomez, L. M. (2001). Connecting school and community with science learning: Real world
        problems and school-community partnerships as contextual scaffolds. Journal of Research in Science
        Teaching, 38(8), 878-898.
Brown, J. S. (1989). Situated Cognition and the Culture of Learning. Educational Researcher, 18(1), 32-42.
Cobb,  P.,  &   Bowers,    J.  (1999).    Cognitive  and   Situated  Learning     Perspectives in Theory    and  Practice.
        Educational Researcher, 28(2), 4-15.
Cognition and Technology Group at Vanderbilt. (1993). Anchored instruction and situated cognition revisited.
        Educational Technology, 33, 52-70.
Environmental     Literacy    Council.    (2004).  http://www.enviroliteracy.org/article.php/1126.html.          Retrieved
        February, 22, 2006, from http://www.enviroliteracy.org/article.php/1126.html
Fido, S. H., & Gayford, G. C. (1982). Field work and the biology teacher: A survey in secondary schools in
        England and Wales. Journal of Biological Education, 16, 27-34.
Grimm, N. B., Grove, J. M., Pickett, S. T., & Redman, C. L. (2000). Integrated approaches to long-term studies
        of urban ecological systems. BioScience, 50(7), 571-584.
Keating, T., Barnett, M., Barab, S. A., & Hay, K. E. (2002). Developing conceptual understanding of scientific
        concepts through building three-dimensional computational models. Journal of Science Education and
        Technology, 11(3), 261-275.
Ladson-Billings, G. (1997). It doesn't add up: African American students' mathematics achievement. Journal for
        Research in Mathematics Education, 28(6), 697-708.
Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. New York: Cambridge
        University Press.
Manzanal, R. F., Barreiro, L. M. R., & Jimenez, M. C. (1999). Relationship between ecology fieldwork and
        student   attitudes   toward  environmental    protection.  Journal    of Research in  Science  Teaching,   36(4),
        431-453.
McPherson, E. G., Nowak, D., Heisler, G., Grimmond, S., Souch, C., Grant, R., et al. (1997). Quantifying urban
        forest structure, function, and value: The Chicago urabn forest climate project. Urban Ecosystems, 1,
        49-61.
National Research Council. (2006). Learning to think spatially: GIS as a support system in the K-12 curriculum.
        Washington, D.C.: National Academies Press.

                                                                                                                               1-
         National Telecommunications and Information Administration. (2000). Falling through the net: Toward digital
                  inclusion. Washington, D.C.: authoro. Document Number)
         Orion, N., &   Hofstein, A. (1994). Factors that  influence learning during a scientific field trip in a  natural
                  environment. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 31, 1097-1119.
         Pollard, D. S.  (1993).  Gender,   achievement,  and African-American   students' perception   of   their school
                  experience. Educational Pscychologist, 28, 341-356.
         Rickinson,  M. (2001).   Learners and learning in environmental  education: A  critial review  of the  evidence.
                  Environmental Education Research, 7(3), 207-320.
         Songer, N. B., Lee, H.-S., & Kam, R. (2002). Technology-Rich inquiry science in urban classrooms: What are
                  the barriers to inquiry pedagogy. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 39(2), 128-150.
         Spillane, J. P., Diamond, J. B., Walker, L. J., Halverson, R., & Jita, L. (2001). Urban school leadership for
                  elementary science instruction: Identifying and activating resources in an undervalued schools subject.
                  Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 38(8), 918-940.
         Tashakkori, A., & Teddlie, C. (1998). Mixed methodology: Combing qualitative and quantitative approaches
                  (Vol. 46). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.

       Acknowledgements
         This work is supported in part through a National Science Foundation Information Technology Experiences for
         Students and Teachers    (ITEST)  program (Grant  #  0525040); Hewlett  Packard Foundation     ­ Teaching   with
         Technology Program (Grant# 189660).

1-100
