            Why are Online Games So Compelling and What Can
       We Learn from Them to Design Better Educational Media?
                                     Susan Maunders, University of Colorado
                                        Hilda Borko, Stanford University

        Abstract: Poster will report Phase I of a three-phase mixed methods research project currently
        underway. My research explores teens' beliefs and motivations that keep them playing online
        games   at a rate that some  describe  as "addiction." Early  findings  indicate that teens believe
        school is not preparing them for the future, but online gaming is. This belief may indicate a sea
        change in how teens feel about educational institutions and their willingness to learn from them.

The Problem Space
        A number of ideas about secondary education, the future, and online gaming are currently receiving
much attention in national discussions and the academic journals which report them:
     x  High school graduation rates are poor and many remaining students are unengaged (Ordfield, Losen,
        Wald & Swanson, 2004).
     x  American youth are not being educated to meet the socio-technical demands of the future (Sawyer,
        2006; Gee, 2000)
     x  Computer games may be usable in education in various ways, for various purposes (Jenkins, 2006;
        Barab, Tomas, Dodge, Carteaux, and Tuzun, 2005)
        As  we  review    the research, we  find  that much  of it  intersects with our    understandings, based  on
informal conversations and the emerging literature on computer gaming, about why teenagers play massively
multiplayer online games and their "tremendous motivational power" (Barab et al., 2005).
        Our poster will report the findings of Phase I of a three-phase mixed methods research project. The
project is an attempt to delve deeper into the beliefs and motivations, as well as lived experiences, which keep
teenagers playing online games. Our goal is to inform the design of other educational media.

Background
        That there   is an    educational potential  to the highly-popular     interactive experiences now      called
massively multiplayer online games (MMOGs or MMORPGs) is not a new idea. What is new is the attention
educators are paying to games because of the staggering numbers of people playing them 24/7 and with people
from all over the world in collaborative, social, virtual environments (Jenkins, 2006).
        Concurrent with an increase in gaming is a decrease in high school attendance. Many teens do not see
high school  as important  to  their future lives (Baines  &   Stanley, 2003)   and others  report  teens  feel more
significant learning occurs outside of school (Kirshner, 2006). The only growth in secondary education is in
online high  schools  and  online  classes  to supplement   available   in-school options   (Pape,  2005).  We    are
suggesting that having additional ways of understanding the reasons teens are attracted to online games could
help inform the development of online courses and other virtual learning environments in productive ways.
Despite the attention on gaming in educational spheres, there are few systematic investigations of why teens play
and what gaming gives them for their effort (Steinkuehler, in press). This research attempts to understand more
fully the motivations and experiences teens have that maintain this compelling pastime.

Research Design and Timeline
        Phase I of the project consisted of ten interviews with young men between the ages of 16 and 21, all
attending or recent graduates of American high schools. The interviews each lasted about one hour. We found
the participants by referral: we asked parents and high school teachers if they knew of teens "who were really
into games." We    sought  participants who    were: 1)  male  (1), 2)  between  16  and   21, 3)  "experienced"  in
MMORPG gaming. "Experienced" was operationally defined as either playing online role-playing games for
more than one year or having reached certain levels of proficiency in certain games, such as reaching level 70 in
World of Warcraft. To increase the variety of perspectives represented, once we got a referral, we asked the
referring adult or child to refer someone else. We included the second referral in the sample also.
        We analyzed the interviews using a qualitative method called "history in person" (Holland and Lave,
2001). We chose this approach because it illuminates "the historical production of persons and personhood"
(p.9). The method is based on the premise that the history of a broad political struggle can be chronicled in
many individual histories lived at the level of "local struggles." The "history in person" approach is usually used
in large political or historical struggles, however we see MMORPGs as logically akin to "local struggles" within
a greater historical struggle  of the   "disruptive"   technology  changes of   the early   21st century.  Thus,  we

                                                                                                                         3-
       speculated that this method might help us to understand the impact of gaming on both the individual participants
       now and larger society as they go forth to meet the socio-technical demands of the future.
               Our analysis traced the practices of identification in the local struggle, relations of those practices to
       broader structural forces in teens' lives, such as high school, and then the counterbalancing effects the teens had
       on the struggles themselves. For example, we traced participants' use of avatars and how their avatars changed
       over time as the participants changed their gaming activities and their decisions about what they wanted to do in
       the game. We looked for both how the games changed them, and how they also changed the game.

      Findings
               Teens are compelled by both the complexity of the social interaction skills they needed to succeed and
       the independent strategic thinking required to proceed in play. The participants pointed out that these are both
       skills that help them in all parts of their lives and will contribute significantly toward their future. They liked
       what they learned in games and how they developed as people. They also liked having the many different types
       of impact that gaming allowed them to have, impact that was rarely possible in their high schools.
               Here, in summary, are the central themes that were present in teens' reports of reasons that they were
       motivated to play MMORPGs, and one or two examples of their comments around those themes.
       1) The games developed their social interaction skills by increasing their abilities to play both with people they
       didn't know, and with people they "raided with" repeatedly under highly stressful performance situations.
               x  "To log on and go on a raid with five people you don't even know, that's really fun."
               x  "If you are antisocial in an MMO, you are just basically worthless. You are not going to have fun;
                  you are not going to go far. It's just going to be a worse experience."
       2) They found themselves developing their own strategic thinking skills.
               x  "I discovered I can influence outcomes a lot more if I am a priest, so that's what I am now."
       3) They learned to work in teams, which meant          developing political          savvy,   respecting team    members,
       understanding authority structures, as well as developing well-defined internal judgments of other players. (2)
               x   "My best friend lives in North Carolina. We are on a team from all over the country and we have
                  to do stuff together to win. It's a really good thing to learn how to do that."
       4) They had a chance to rehearse life: they practiced living and dying as many different avatars and learned who
       they liked being, how they wanted to interact, and which reactions they most liked getting from other people.
               x  "You can be whoever you want to be. If it doesn't work out too well, you just come back as another
                  person and try it all again and see if that works out better."
               x   "Dying is a good thing. It teaches you to be brave."
               Participants echoed the themes over and over: in games, they learned a lot about social, strategic, and political
       realities that they would need to know to succeed in the future. In all, the gains they attributed to game playing seemed to
       be more social than cognitive, and those gains track well with predicted needs for the future, such as learning to work in
       multinational teams to achieve specific results (Gee, 2000).We suggest gaming can be described as "sociotechnoplay," a
       term coined by game developer Deb Todd, to describe a new form of play in virtual environments that prepares teens for
       future work in similar highly technical and social environments. Findings also suggest a potential sea change in how
       teens feel about educational institutions and their willingness to learn from them.
               Brief summary of the rest of the project: In Phase II (late spring), we plan to interview five developers
       of the MMORPGs about the motivators and challenges consciously designed into the games (Todd, 2007) to see
       how closely they match teen beliefs and experiences, or if our findings are unintended consequences for players
       of our participants' age group. In Phase III (late summer and fall), we will do an internet survey of a much larger
       sample of players of the same age to confirm (or refute) the findings of Phase I. Analysis for Phase III and the
       final report are to planned be completed by late 2008.

      Endnotes
        (1) Research indicates that males and females play games for different reasons (Yee, 2006).
        (2) Some participants reported having to follow the orders of raid leaders without deviation, so findings about collaboration
            had to be tempered with the realization that teamwork did not always mean collaboration as usually defined.

      References
       Barab, S., Tomas, M., Dodge, T., Carteaux, R. & Tuzun, H. (2005). Making learning fun: Quest Atlantis, a
               game without guns. Educational Technology Research & Development, 53(1), 86-107.
       Gee, J. (2000). Communities of practice in the new capitalism. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 9(4), 515-523.
       Holland, D. and Lave, J. (Eds.) (2001). History in person. Santa Fe, NM: School of American Research Press.
       Jenkins, H., III. (2006). Convergence culture. New York: New York University Press.
       Kirshner, B. (2006). Apprenticeship learning in youth activism. In P. Noguera, S. Ginwright, & J. Cammarrota
               (Eds.) Beyond resistance: Youth activism and community change. Oxford, UK: Routledge.

3-
Orfield, G., Losen, D., Wald, J., & Swanson, C. (2004). Losing Our Future: How Minority Youth are Being Left
       Behind by the Graduation Rate Crisis. Cambridge, MA: Civil Rights Project at Harvard University.
Pape, L. (2005). High school on the web, American School Board Journal, July, 12-16.
Sawyer, R.K. (2006). Conclusion: The schools of the future. In R. K. Sawyer (Ed.), The Cambridge handbook of
       the learning sciences (pp. 567-580). NY: Cambridge University Press.
Steinkuehler, C. (in press). Massively multiplayer online games as an educational technology: An outline for
       research. Educational Technology.
Todd, D. (2007). Game design: from blue sky to green light. Wellesley, MA: A K Peters.
Yee, N. (2006). The demographics, motivations, and derived experiences of users of massively multi-user online
       graphical environments, Presence, 15 (3), 309-329.

                                                                                                                  3-
