           Understanding Professional Vision in Inquiry Science Teaching

                Abstract: To understand inquiry science teaching, we must understand how practicing and
                prospective teachers see the activity of teaching.     This study examines how practicing and
                prospective    teachers highlight and code    classroom   activity in an effort  to understand  the
                nature of professional pedagogical vision (Goodwin, 1994).         Results indicate that differences
                exist in terms of:  actor focus, questions, grain-size and enactment.

      Problem
       Describing inquiry science teaching as an activity in real classrooms is lost somewhere between high level
       standards describing broad criteria and particular idealized examples of inquiry often used to exemplify the
       standards.   In science education two fields are typically drawn upon to provide implications for science teaching
       ­  learning  sciences and  science studies.  One   provides   implications  of how  students   learn, while the other
       provides implications about the epistemological underpinnings of science as a discipline and social practice. As
       an  activity, teaching  has  largely  been ignored  as  having  independent    theoretical value,  while  theories of
       phenomenon related to teaching, primarily learning theories, have been misconstrued as theories of teaching.
       Learning theories typically make predictions about learning outcomes based on treatments and presuppose a
       theory of teaching (Kerr, 1981).   A theoretical base for science teaching and learning thus lacks a key third leg ­
       the theoretical understanding of classroom science teaching as an activity. To advance the field in terms of
       understanding enactment of classroom inquiry science teaching there is a need for a theory of teaching grounded
       in practice.

       The development of inquiry fostering curricula and technology, even supported with professional development
       is not adequate to reform science teaching without a clearly articulated theory of classroom inquiry science
       teaching to guide teachers and professional development leaders. For a theory of teaching to impact science
       pedagogy teachers need to be able to see this theory in practice. This requires the ability to examine classroom
       practice as an expert does, because expert and novice teachers literally see science classrooms in quite different
       ways. Simply watching exemplary science teaching does not mean that prospective teachers can understand or
       even attend to what is relevant in the activity.   If prospective teachers cannot attend to the key aspects of the
       outer manifestation of classroom inquiry science teaching, then they cannot understand the true principles of
       construction. The difference between how professionals and novices see classrooms can be described in terms of
       professional vision, specifically three aspects of professional practice: coding, highlighting and articulation of
       representations (Goodwin, 1994). This study investigates the questions: How do expert and novice teachers see
       (code and    highlight) science  teaching  differently; and   how  can  these  differences   begin to  define  cultural
       categories that comprise professional vision for classroom inquiry science teaching?

      Design and Analysis
       This study of professional pedagogical vision occurred in the context of the Invisible College of Inquiry Science
       Study (ICISS), a professional learning community consisting of practicing science teachers, prospective science
       teachers, doctoral students, masters students and university faculty in science education. This particular study
       included 6 practicing and 17 prospective teachers. All 23 participants were asked to individually view a 33
       minute science lesson and mark sections of the lesson they felt represented "inquiry science teaching" using
       Studiocode® video analysis software. Each participant was asked to write an articulation of why they labeled
       instances as they did.  Finally, there were two 1.5 hour conversation   between   participants about what constitutes
       inquiry  science  teaching   using the   participants'  video  analysis as  a  scaffold.   The  discussions   between
       participants  were recorded    and transcribed for  analysis.  The  Studiocode®    documents   were   analyzed  using
       simple descriptive statistics to determine the how much of the lesson was coded as inquiry, how many instances,
       how long each instance was, etc. Teachers were able to mark time in and time out for each instance and were
       asked to  be  as  careful as possible to mark  the instance   that they were   selecting.  The content of the coded
       instances (i.e. what was going on in the lesson at the time) was not coded for analysis in this study.      The only
       data from the video analysis documents used were the number of instances and their length.          The remainder of
       the data  analyzed  for   this study, which  included   documents   submitted   by students    and transcripts of  the
       discussion of the videos, were coded based on Miles & Huberman (1984). The initial coding was developed
       around two of Goodwin's (1994) components of professional vision: coding and highlighting.

      Findings
       On  average   the prospective  teacher highlighted  23.5%   of the  lesson  as inquiry.   This is in sharp contrast to
       practicing teachers who, with one exception, did not see any examples in the sample lesson of inquiry science

3-
teaching.  The one practicing teacher who did code five instances of inquiry marked just over 4% of the lesson
as inquiry. Prospective teachers averaged 8.78 instances of inquiry within the 33-minute lesson.            This indicates
there are   substantive  differences   between    prospective and  practicing  teachers    view  of  inquiry   pedagogy.
Analysis of the qualitative data provides detail about the difference between experts and novices pedagogical
vision. Differences between participants' analysis of classroom practice occurred in four areas: actor focus,
questions, grain-size and enactment.

Actor Focus - Both groups talked about the activities in the classroom.          However, they differed in terms of
which   actor they   indicated was primary    in  the instances  they  highlighted.  The prospective teachers talked
almost exclusively about the activity of the teacher, while the practicing teachers talked almost exclusively
about the activity of the students. This focus on self as teacher in prospective teachers is not unusual, and
beginning teachers tend to move from self focused to student focused over time (Richardson, 1990).

Questions - Expert and novice teachers differed in how they viewed questions and the relationship between
questions and inquiry.   Both groups paid particular attention to the questions asked during the lesson and linked
them to inquiry science pedagogy.      The prospective teachers tended to equate the existence of questions in the
classroom with an inquiry lesson and believed student questions were particularly strong examples of inquiry
when the teacher did not answer them directly.        The expert teachers were much more nuanced in their view of
how questions were used and when the use of questions led to sections of the lesson being categorized as inquiry
or not. Practicing teachers were looking for questions to     be both generated by   and answered by students.

Grain-size - A third difference that emerged between prospective and practicing teachers was in the "grain-size"
they  perceived   for inquiry  science    pedagogy.    While  both    groups attended   to the   activities and specific
individual  interactions between   teacher   and   students,  the practicing  teachers  not   only  went    beyond those
interactions, but were looking beyond the single lesson to multiple lessons (which had not been provided for
analysis), units or even classroom culture. There was no indication of this larger grain-size notion of inquiry
within the analysis of any of the prospective teachers.

Enactment - The final difference between practicing and prospective teachers was in their ability to differentiate
between the plan and the enactment.        Almost all the expert teachers (5 of 6) indicated the lesson could have
been, or was  intended  as inquiry even though    they indicated  the lesson contained  no inquiry.  Practicing teachers
indicated that what made the lesson inquiry or not was based on the enactment of the activity by the teacher not
the activity itself.  This separation between plan and enactment was not expressed by any of the prospective
teachers.

Contribution
This study indicates there are significant differences between prospective and practicing teachers in terms of
their professional   pedagogical vision.    Expert  teachers  focused  on the  discourse   in more   nuanced   ways and
relied more heavily on the big picture of enactment to determine if teaching was inquiry or not.             Prospective
teachers tended to focus on the organization of the classroom activity (e.g. whole group vs. small group) and
whether question were part of the discourse.      They were less concerned with the nature of the questions.       These
differences may make it difficult for prospective teachers to even see what is going on in a science classroom,
much less understand the implications for inquiry science pedagogy. Prospective teachers not only missed the
underlying  principles   of the lessons   construction,  they did  not  attend   to the relevant   aspects  of the outer
manifestation of the phenomenon. As a field we need to understand expert teachers' professional vision well
enough,   and  be able  to  articulate it clearly enough, to  allow   prospective   teachers  to see classroom   science
teaching.  It is critical to a theory of teaching and for the reform of science pedagogy.

References
Goodwin, C. (1994). Professional Vision. American Anthropologist, 96(3), 606-633.
Kerr,   D.  H. (1981).   The    Structure   of Quality   in   Teaching.   In  J. F.  Soltis   (Ed.), Philosophy     and
          Education (pp. 61-93). Chicago, IL: National Society for the Study of Education.
Miles, M. B., & Huberman, A. M. (1984). Qualitative Data Analysis: A sourcebook of new methods.
          Beverly Hills: Sage Publications.
Polman,    J.  L.  (2000).   Designing     Project-Based      Science:  Connecting      Learners     Through    Guided
          Inquiry. New York, NY: Teachers College Press.
Richardson,    V.    (1990).   Significant   and   Worthwhile      Change     in Teaching     Practice.     Educational
          Researcher, 19(7), 10-18.

                                                                                                                             3-
