       Learning and Knowledge Building with Wikis: The Impact of
Incongruity between People's Knowledge and a Wiki's Information

     Johannes Moskaliuk, Joachim Kimmerle, University of Tuebingen, K. Adenauer 40, 72072 Tuebingen
                         Email: j.moskaliuk@iwm-kmrc.de,        j.kimmerle@iwm-kmrc.de
               Ulrike Cress, KMRC, K. Adenauer 40, 72072 Tuebingen, u.cress@iwm-kmrc.de

          Abstract: The study reported in this article aims at empirically testing a theoretical model of
          collaborative knowledge    building  with wikis  which was    recently  introduced  by Cress    and
          Kimmerle  (2007;   in press). This  model   assumes  that  individual  learning and collaborative
          knowledge    building  are based   on   the interplay between    people's    knowledge   and    the
          information available in the wiki. This interplay takes place in the form of externalization and
          internalization respectively. Individual learning is considered as happening through internal
          processes of  assimilation and  accommodation.     Collaborative    knowledge   building happens
          through activities of external assimilation and accommodation. This study demonstrates these
          four processes in an experimental setting. As postulated by Cress and Kimmerle, the results
          show that  a  medium    level  of   incongruity  between   people's    knowledge   and   a wiki's
          information supports individual learning. A medium level of incongruity also leads to more
          external  accommodation    processes,   despite  the  fact  that high    and medium      levels of
          incongruity result in the same amount of text complements.

Introduction
          Wikis are compilations of web-sites on the internet or on an intranet. They cannot only be read by users
but  they can  also be  edited  online  (Leuf  &  Cunningham,   2001).   Wikis   can be   employed   without   special
software, they are very easily accessible and simple to use (Désilets et al., 2005). Usually wikis are used for
writing and revising text. Users can create content and hyperlink it with other contents, they can add, delete, and
change any part of the text if they want to (Raitman et al., 2005). This way, a group of users can jointly create
one artifact and this activity facilitates the collaborative development of knowledge (Fuchs-Kittowski & Köhler,
2005; Köhler & Fuchs-Kittowski, 2005). These characteristics of wikis make them a precious technology for
many purposes, especially in an educational context (Bruns & Humphreys, 2005; Chong & Yamamoto, 2006;
Notari, 2006; Wang & Turner, 2005). Some researchers have pointed out to wikis' potential for collaborative
learning: Chong    and  Yamamoto     (2006) refer to  wikis' ability to facilitate debate-based  learning.  Reinhold
(2006) assumes that wikis support the shaping of knowledge. Wikis are considered as supporting processes of
learning since they facilitate collaboration (Kim et al., 2006; Notari, 2006). They have been associated with an
enhanced inventiveness (Guzdial et al., 2001), with design-based learning (Rick & Guzdial, 2006), or with the
co-construction of knowledge and inquiry learning (Yukawa, 2006).

Wiki-supported knowledge building
          Cress and Kimmerle (2007) assume that wikis are supportive of learning and knowledge building. The
theory of knowledge     building addresses  how   a community   of   learners manages  to  jointly create knowledge
(Scardamalia   &   Bereiter, 1994).  This   approach  focuses  very  much     on using computer    technologies  and
emphasizes the impact of epistemic artifacts for knowledge-building purposes. Thus, knowledge building plays
an important role in the context of CSCL (Hewitt & Scardamalia, 1998; Kali, 2006; Lee et al., 2006; Oshima et
al. 2006;  Scardamalia   &   Bereiter,  1996).  Cress  and   Kimmerle   (2007)   presume   that  people's  individual
knowledge can be used as a supply for learning processes of other people (cf. also Kafai, 2006; Scardamalia &
Bereiter, 1994). The authors argue that a wiki as an artifact is perfectly dedicated to support this kind of mutual
use and development of knowledge (cf. also Bruckman, 2006; Norman, 1991).
          Cress and Kimmerle (2007) argue that wiki-supported knowledge building can be considered from a
systemic point of view. They distinguish the cognitive systems of the users from the social system wiki (the
corresponding wiki community respectively). It is assumed that individual learning and knowledge building is
facilitated by the interplay between people's knowledge and the information available in the wiki. This interplay
allows a mutual development of a social system and cognitive systems. This so-called co-evolution is enabled
by various basic processes. These processes arise from the distinction of externalization and internalization on
the one hand and from the distinction of assimilation and accommodation on the other hand. Externalization is
an activity in which people introduce their own knowledge to the wiki. This can lead to individual learning since
this externalization process might activate deeper elaboration of knowledge. Internalization is the activity in
which people take up information from a wiki. This can lead to individual learning since this internalization

                                                                                                                          2-
         process might expand people's individual knowledge. Thus, externalization and internalization describe how
         knowledge and information are interchanged between the individual's cognitive system and the wiki.
                  In order to explain the processes in the cognitive systems and the social system respectively Cress and
         Kimmerle (2007) refer to Piaget's model of equilibration (Piaget, 1970). This model describes how people take
         up novel information from the environment and how they integrate it into their own knowledge. People try to
         keep equilibrium between their existing knowledge and the information from the environment. New information
         which is not in line with prior knowledge causes cognitive conflicts. Such a cognitive conflict can result in new
         knowledge. If information cannot be easily integrated into prior knowledge, people have to process this new
         information somehow. There are two ways to deal with this incongruity and to solve cognitive conflicts. People
         can either assimilate new information or they can accommodate prior knowledge. Assimilation is the process in
         which    individuals  use  their prior   knowledge     in  order to  comprehend     new   information.  In  the process  of
         accommodation people change their knowledge by dealing with new information. Here, people truly change
         existing knowledge instead of simply assimilating new information into prior knowledge.

        Four processes of knowledge building
                  People who interact via wikis can learn by externalisation or internalization respectively. This learning
         can  occur   as   assimilation or  accommodation       since people     can simply  add   new  information   to their  prior
         knowledge or they can change their knowledge and develop new understandings. It is assumed that equilibration
         does  not   merely    occur   in cognitive    systems   but  also    externally  in wikis.   Therefore,  assimilation   and
         accommodation are not merely processes of individual learning but also of collaborative knowledge building. It
         is a matter  of   external   assimilation when   information     is simply  added,  i.e. when  it is introduced   to a wiki
         without  being    explicitly connected    to formerly   existing    information. In this process  the  wiki's  organization
         remains unchanged. With other words, the wiki assimilates this new information. However, a wiki can also
         accommodate. This external accommodation takes place when the information in a wiki is newly-arranged by
         rewriting paragraphs, by reorganizing pages, or by integrating new and existing information (cf. also Majchrzak
         et al., 2006).
                  Altogether,     the co-evolution    of cognitive   systems   and   the  social system which    in turn allows  for
         individual  learning  and    collaborative   knowledge     building  is based   one four  different  processes: 1. Internal
         assimilation which represents the (quantitative) acquisition of factual knowledge. 2. Internal accommodation
         which    represents   the  (qualitative)  acquisition   of   conceptual     knowledge.   3. External   assimilation   which
         represents quantitative knowledge building. 4. External accommodation which represents qualitative knowledge
         building.  Internal   assimilation and    internal    accommodation     are  processes   of individual  learning.  External
         assimilation and external accommodation present processes of a collaborative knowledge building in reference
         to the wiki.
                  The description of these four processes is the starting point for our empirical investigations. Cress and
         Kimmerle    (in   press) observed  external     assimilation and    accommodation    in  Wikipedia.   They  did   not  focus
         examining internal processes of assimilation and accommodation. Our first research question is whether there is
         empirical evidence for all the four processes of learning and knowledge building. We want to examine whether
         these four processes can be adequately observed and documented in an experimental setting.
                   The second research question aims at empirically testing concrete hypotheses derived from the model
         of Cress and Kimmerle. These authors do not only describe incongruities between people's knowledge and the
         information    in the wiki.  In  this context   they  also  address  people's   motivation  to participate  in  knowledge-
         building processes. They assume that people's motivation for externalization and internalization is determined
         by (in)congruities between people's knowledge and the information in the wiki. While working with a wiki
         people are continuously checking whether the information provided by the wiki fits into their own individual
         knowledge. With a very low incongruity there is no need for a wiki user for equilibration. People then do neither
         assimilate nor accommodate, neither externally nor internally. With a very high incongruity people have no
         point of contact for any processes of equilibration. Cress and Kimmerle conclude that individual learning and
         collaborative knowledge building are most successful with incongruities between people's knowledge and the
         information    in the wiki   on  a medium       level (cf. Hunt,    1965).  In the  following  we   aim at examining    this
         prediction.

        Hypotheses
                   Concretely, these theoretical considerations and the according research questions presented above lead
         us to the following hypotheses:

              1.)  Incongruities between people's knowledge and the information in the wiki on a medium level lead to
                   more knowledge building compared to low and high incongruities. More precisely:
                        a.   Incongruities on a medium level lead to higher quantitative increases of information in the
                             wiki (external assimilation) compared to low and high incongruities.

2-00
              b.   Incongruities on a medium level lead to higher qualitative increases of information in the wiki
                   (external accommodation) compared to low and high incongruities.
     2.) Incongruities between people's knowledge and the information in the wiki on a medium level lead to
         more individual learning compared to low and high incongruities. More precisely:
              a.   Incongruities on   a medium       level lead to  a higher  increase  of   factual  knowledge    (internal
                   assimilation) compared to low and high incongruities.
              b.   Incongruities on a medium level lead to a higher increase of conceptual knowledge (internal
                   accommodation) compared to low and high incongruities.

Method
         To test the hypotheses presented above, we ran an experiment in a laboratory setting. In the following
we present the sample, the material, the measures, and the procedure we applied in this study.

Participants
         61 university students participated in this study. 43 of them were women, 17 were man (and 1 missing
value). The participants' mean age was 24.6 years (SD=10.6).

Material
         For  conducting   the experiment      a wiki   was    provided,  which   informed   about    the mental   disorder
schizophrenia. In order to guarantee the comparability with real wikis the welcome page of the experimental
wiki   presented an overview   about  all  mental    and   behavioral  disorders  described   in    the ICD   10.  However,
participants  were  asked  to work  on     the area  on    the causes  of  schizophrenia     first. The   other  areas  were
technically blocked.
         There are different positions about the causes of schizophrenia. One position suggests a genetic or
biological sensitivity for schizophrenia; the other position considers the social environment and psychosocial
stress as  main  factors. The  diathesis-stress   model      tries to integrate   the two  different    positions  into  one
explanation: external stress can uncover an inherent vulnerability (diathesis). The experimental material for the
wiki entry about the causes of schizophrenia consisted of ten arguments. Four arguments were assigned to the
position that a genetic or biological tendency causes the disorder, four arguments were assigned to the position
that considers the social environment and psychosocial stress as causal. Two arguments were assigned to the
diathesis-stress model. An example for an argument according to the biological position is: "Schizophrenia is a
hereditable   disorder."  An  example   for    an    argument   according   to  the   social position     is: "Double-bind
communication in a person's family leads to a higher probability to come down with schizophrenia."
         The ten arguments were used to build four different entries about the causes of schizophrenia from
which three conditions resulted. The entry in the low-incongruity condition contained all arguments; it can be
described as a complete entry. Taking into account potential qualitative differences between the two positions,
the medium-incongruity condition was build with two versions of the entry: One version contained the four
genetic/biological arguments and the other version contained the four social arguments. It can be labeled as one-
sided content. The entry about the causes of schizophrenia in the high-incongruity condition did not contain any
content.
         In order to make sure that prior knowledge of the participants was evenly low, we asked them for their
knowledge about the causes of schizophrenia. It was found that all participants indicated low prior knowledge.
To guarantee a basis for the work with the wiki ten short texts (in the style of popular science newsletters) were
provided   to the  participants. Each    text    contained   one   argument    and  was   complemented        by  additional
information which was irrelevant for the significance of the argument (information about the scientist/institution
who postulated/researched the statement and a scientific survey or an example to illustrate it). The newsletters
were introduced as info alert for researchers or practitioners adapted to the look and feel of a scientific webpage.
So the   experimental setting  was  comparable       to real learning  settings:  people  read   other   sources   about the
relevant domain, extracted the relevant information and structured it with the goal of editing a wiki article.
         Since each participant was provided all newsletter texts we ensured that all participants had the same
prior  knowledge   about  the  causes   of schizophrenia     before   they started  working   with    the wiki.   The  three
experimental   conditions  differed only   in    the information    available  in the  wiki.  This   resulted   in different
incongruities between a wiki's information and people's knowledge in the three conditions. Figure 1 shows the
four different entries about the causes of schizophrenia and the three conditions.

                                                                                                                                2-0
                                                                            condition 1                    condition 2                   condition 3
                                                                                                       a                 b

                                                                           complete wiki                one-sided content                no content

                                                             lowincongruity                          medium incongruity                 highincongruity

                                                                                 diathesis
                                                                                 stress
                                                                                 diathesis/stress

           Figure 1. Four different wiki entries to manipulate incongruity between people's knowledge and the wiki's
                        information. In all conditions the participants were aware of all arguments in advance.

                   The other entries about schizophrenia in the wiki contained information about the different kinds and
         states of the disorder, or about diagnostics and therapy. Since participants were instructed to edit the entry about
         the causes of schizophrenia, there were only very few changes on the other entries.

        Measures
                   We   measured  external   processes                                      which        represent         knowledge   building             in the artifact and  internal
         processes which represent individual learning. As indicator for external assimilation we measured quantitative
         changes   in the  wiki: this is the case if                                     a person        simply        adds  new    information             to the wiki's entry  without
         changing prior information or connecting new information with the existing content. Assimilation in people's
         cognitive system can be described as quantitative learning: learners add new facts to their prior knowledge,
         however, without restructuring or rebuilding their mental models. In contrast, accommodation is indicated by
         qualitative processes. Qualitative changes in the wiki are represented by reorganizations of the text or by phrases
         like  "on  the other hand..."   or  "against                                    this..."        which  clarify         or explicate            different  positions. Qualitative
         individual learning is indicated by a deeper understanding of the subject area and by more complex conceptual
         knowledge. Correspondingly, there are four dependent variables which are shown in Table 1.

         Table 1: The dependent variables of the experiment.

                                                                 Wiki's                                                         People's
                                                                 information                                                    knowledge
                             Quantitativechanges                 Sum of added words                                             Factual knowledge
                             Qualitativechanges                  Accommodation index                                            Conceptual knowledge

                   Changes in the wiki were examined with the aid of log-file analyses. We compared the version of the
         entry which    a participant had started with                                      to    the    last version        of the entry            at the end   of the experiment.  As
         indicator for quantitative processes we simply counted the number of words which participants had added to the
         wiki text.
                   In order to measure the qualitative processes we developed an accommodation index. For this purpose
         we analyzed every sentence which the participants had added. We counted the phrases, which contained an
         allusion  to the diathesis-stress-model  or                                     to an     interaction         between     both      causes.        Besides, we   considered the
         structure of the arguments. For example, we accepted sentences with phrases like "on one hand... on the other
         hand...", "in contrast...", "nevertheless...", or "however...".
                   Factual knowledge is represented by the number of facts the participant have learned about the subject
         area. In the process of this quantitative individual learning new facts complement the prior knowledge of a
         person. Factual knowledge is measured with a test of 21 statements about the causes of schizophrenia (e.g. "The
         double bind hypothesis is an empirically proven theory about the causes of schizophrenia."). Participants had to
         decide, whether the statement is correct or not. They could also choose the option "I don't know". The number
         of correct responses was measured; the option "I don't know" was counted as wrong response.
                   The degree to which participants developed conceptual knowledge represented qualitative changes in
         their cognitive  systems. In  order  to measure                                          this   qualitative        individual  learning,           participants  were  asked to
         provide the best argument with respect to the causes of schizophrenia. The answers were categorized as simple

2-02
or complex answers. It was counted as a complex answer if participants referred to both causes (biological and
social), presented the diathesis-stress model, or if they referred to an interaction between different causes. A
simple answer only presented one cause or was characterized by a lack of coherent argumentation.
        All dependent variables were measured after the work with the wiki. Additionally, we measured two
control variables: the total time of editing the wiki (in relation to reading the wiki) and the prior knowledge
about schizophrenia.

Procedure
        The experiment was conducted in groups with 5 to 10 participants. Passing the complete experiment
took about 2 hours. Participants were led to believe that everybody had to deal with another part of the same
wiki with various topics (paranoia, schizophrenia, ...). In fact, every participant worked independently from the
others with a simulated wiki with respect to the same topic. Participants could not see each others' monitors. In
order to allow for realistic situations, we provided information on prior versions of an entry, on alleged previous
authors, and on the date/time when the version was created allegedly. All instructions and a short tutorial, which
explained  the  function of                   the  wiki  tool  were    presented on   a mobile    computer.        The questionnaires which
measured the dependent variables factual knowledge and conceptual knowledge as well as the control variables
were also presented on the computer. The experimenter only took a short welcoming and, at the end of the
experiment, a debriefing about the goals of the study. The assignment to the three conditions followed by chance
and was carried out by the experimental software.

Results
        The next paragraph reports the results of the experiment. First we describe the results according to
individual learning  in person's                     cognitive system    (hypothesis 1). Second    we  describe      the result according to
knowledge building in the wiki's social system (hypothesis 2). At least we describe the results of the collected
control variables.

Results Hypothesis 1
        Sum of added words. For each participant we compared the first version of the entry about the causes of
schizophrenia with the last entry. In the medium-incongruity condition participants added significantly more
words than in the low-incongruity condition: Mmed=210.00 (SD=124.98) vs. Mlow=78.78 (SD=64.17), t(38)=4.03,
p<.01. But    there was  no                   difference between      high and  medium   incongruity:      Mmed=210.00      (SD=124.98)   vs.
Mhigh=268.70 (SD=99.35), t(40)=-1.67, p>.05.
        Accommodation                         index. We  calculated     an accommodation        index for   each     participant. We    found
significantly  more  qualitative                   knowledge    building   in   the medium-incongruity      condition      than in  the low-
incongruity condition: Mmed=3.29 (SD=2.70) vs. Mlow=1.78 (SD=1.70), t(37)=2.04, p=.02 and than in the high-
incongruity condition: Mmed=3.29 (SD=2.70) vs. Mhigh=2.05 (SD=0.94), t(39)=1.93, p=.03. Figure 2 presents
these effects.

                                                4

                                              3,5

                                                3

                                              2,5

                                                2

                                              1,5

                                                1
                                                      low incongruity      medium incongruity     high incongruity

                                              Figure 2. Qualitative knowledge building in the three conditions.

Results Hypothesis 2
        Factual knowledge. The factual knowledge acquired through the work with the wiki was compared
among  the  three   conditions.                   As expected,  there    was  a significant    difference: the     factual knowledge  in the
medium-incongruity condition was higher than in the low-incongruity condition: Mmed=15.50 (SD=2.30) vs.
Mlow=13.70 (SD=2.98), t(37)=2.16, p=.02. Factual Knowledge in the medium-incongruity condition was also

                                                                                                                                                2-0
                          accommodation index
                                    factual knowledge

                                     percentage of complex explanations
         higher than in the high-incongruity condition: Mmed=15.50 (SD=2.30) vs. Mhigh=14.20 (SD=1.96), t(37)=1.96,
         p=.03. Figure 3 shows the difference between the three conditions.
                                                                        16

                                                          15,5

                                                                        15

                                                          14,5

                                                                        14

                                                          13,5

                                                                        13

                                                          12,5
                                                                               low incongruity      medium incongruity     high incongruity

                                                                         Figure 3. Factual knowledge in the three conditions.

                 Conceptual knowledge. We compared the frequency of participants' simple and complex responses to
         the question about the causes of schizophrenia. Chi-square tests show a no-chanced distribution of complex and
         simple answers  between                                        the high-incongruity       condition and       the medium-incongruity       condition:  2(1,
         N=43)=5.23, p=.02. There is also a no-chanced distribution of complex and simple explanations between the
         low-incongruity condition and the medium-incongruity condition:                                                2(1, N=40)=4.55, p=.03. Figure 4 presents
         the percentage of complex explanations for the three conditions.

                                                                         0

                                                                         0

                                                                         0

                                                                         0

                                                                         0

                                                                         0

                                                                         0
                                                                                 low incongruity     medium incongruity     high incongruity

                            Figure 4. Percentage of complex explanations in the three conditions.

        Control variables
                 The total time of editing the wiki is higher in the high-incongruity condition than in the low-
         incongruity condition: Mhigh=86.6% (SD=12.87) vs. Mlow=75.3% (SD=16.64), t(36)=2.34, p=.025. The total time
         of editing the wiki in den medium-incongruity condition was Mmed =83.4% (SD=17.52). At first sight, this seems
         to be a trivial result since a complete entry such as in the low-incongruity condition does not require many edits.
         But it is illuminative that there is no simple correlation between the time spent editing and the increase of
         knowledge.

       Discussion
                 The postulated processes of internal and external accommodation and assimilation can be adequately
         observed in an experimental setting. Using a Diff-Tool, like the function "compare documents" of MS Word in
         order to compare two version of a wiki entry, we can document the described processes. There is evidence for
         two different processes, as postulated above: assimilation as addition of new information without editing the
         existing content and accommodation as rebuilding or restructuring of existing content to make new information
         compatible.

2-0
         As postulated in hypothesis 1, we found more qualitative knowledge building for a medium incongruity
between people's knowledge and the wiki's information than for high or low incongruity. This means that there
is more  external  accommodation      with   medium   incongruity.  The sum    of added words     is smaller   with low
incongruity than with medium and high incongruity. There is no significant difference between medium and
high incongruity. This finding seems trivial, because participants can of course add more words in a blank or a
one-sided wiki.   But  it shows  that  there is no  simple correlation  between   the sum of  written   words  and   the
amount of individual learning: in accordance with hypothesis 2 incongruities between people's knowledge and
the information   in the  wiki on   a medium    level lead to more  individual learning  compared     to low   and  high
incongruity. Medium    incongruity    between   people's  knowledge   and  the wiki's  information   leads  to a higher
increase of factual knowledge. This can be described as internal assimilation. We also found more complex
explanations   for the    causes of   schizophrenia   with a  medium    incongruity   compared    to  a  low   and  high
incongruity.   We  consider    this increase  of  conceptual   knowledge   as  evidence   for internal     processes of
accommodation. The study displays empirical evidence for the theoretical model of collaborative knowledge
building with  wikis   (Cress  &  Kimmerle,     2007, in press): a  medium  level  of incongruity    between   people's
knowledge and a wiki's information supports individual learning (internal accommodation and assimilation) and
leads to more qualitative knowledge building (external accommodation).
         In the study described here, we held people's knowledge constant and manipulated various levels of
incongruity by using different wiki entries about schizophrenia. In a subsequent study we will manipulate the
prior knowledge of the participants by giving them different information (newsletters with information about the
causes of schizophrenia) before working with the wiki. Participants in the low incongruity condition will receive
no prior information, participants in the medium incongruity condition will receive four newsletters with only
genetic/biological or social factors, and participants in the high incongruity condition will receive 2 newsletters
with genetic/biological and 2 with social factors. The entry about schizophrenia in the wiki will always contain
8 arguments, the 4 genetic/biological and the 4 social arguments. The two arguments, addressing the diathesis-
stress model will be neither contained in the wiki nor in the newsletters. The goal of the following study is on
the one  hand  to  replicate the findings,   on the other  hand  to use an additional  measurement      of external and
internal accommodation. This future study will address the question whether the participants will combine the
two  different positions  about  the  causes  of schizophrenia   by  postulating  an  interaction or a  diathesis-stress
model. This would be perfect evidence for accommodation processes.
         Further research should consider additional factors like the participant's interest in the subject area, the
motivation to acquire new knowledge, the personal involvement, or the goal and audience of the wiki. Social
factors like the perception of others' expertise or the sympathy for others are also relevant for further research.

References
Bruckman, A. (2006). Learning in online communities. In R. K. Sawyer (Ed.), The Cambridge handbook of the
         learning sciences (pp. 461-472). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Bruns, A., & Humphreys, S. (2005). Wikis in teaching and assessment: The M/Cyclopedia project. WikiSym
         2005 - Conference Proceedings of the 2005 International Symposium on Wikis, 25-32.
Chong, N. S. T., & Yamamoto, M. (2006). Collaborative learning using Wiki and flexnetdiscuss: A pilot study.
         Proceedings of the Fifth IASTED International Conference on Web-based Education 2006, 150-154.
Cress, U., & Kimmerle, J. (2007). A theoretical framework for collaborative knowledge building with wikis: A
         systemic and cognitive perspective. In C. Chinn, G. Erkens, & S. Puntambekar. (Eds.), Proceedings of
         the 7th Computer Supported Collaborative Learning Conference (pp. 153-161). New Brunswick:
         International Society of the Learning Sciences, Inc.
Cress, U., & Kimmerle, J. (in press). A systemic and cognitive view on collaborative knowledge building with
         wikis. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning.
Désilets, A., Paquet, S., & Vinson, N. G. (2005). Are wikis usable? WikiSym 2005 - Conference Proceedings of
         the 2005 International Symposium on Wikis, 3-15.
Fuchs-Kittowski, F., & Köhler, A. (2005). Wiki communities in the context of work processes. WikiSym 2005 ­
         Conference Proceedings of the 2005 International Symposium on Wikis 2005, 33-39.
Guzdial, M., Rick, J., & Kehoe, C. (2001). Beyond adoption to invention: Teacher-created collaborative
         activities in higher education. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 10, 265-279.
Hewitt, J., & Scardamalia, M. (1998). Design principles for distributed knowledge building processes.
         Educational Psychology Review, 10, 75-96.
Hunt, J. McV. (1965). Intrinsic motivation and its role in psychological development. In D. Levine (Ed.),
         Nebraska Symposium of Motivation (pp. 189-282). Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska Press.
Kafai, Y. B. (2006). Constructionism. In R. K. Sawyer (Ed.), The Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences
         (pp. 35-46). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Kali. Y. (2006). Collaborative knowledge building using the Design Principles Database. International Journal
         of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 1, 187-201.

                                                                                                                           2-0
        Kim, S.-H., Han, H.-S., & Han, S. (2006). The study on effective programming learning using wiki community
                systems. WSEAS Transactions on Information Science and Applications 3 (8), 1495-1500.
        Köhler, A., & Fuchs-Kittowski, F. (2005). Integration of communities into process-oriented structures. Journal
                of Universal Computer Science, 11, 410-425.
        Lee, E. Y. C., Chan, C. K. K., & Van Aalst, J. (2006). Students assessing their own collaborative knowledge
                building. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 1, 57-87.
        Leuf, B., & Cunningham, W. (2001). The wiki way. Quick collaboration on the web. Boston: Addison-Wesley.
        Majchrzak, A.; Wagner, C., & Yates, D. (2006) Corporate wiki users: Results of a survey. Proceedings of
                WikiSym'06 - 2006 International Symposium on Wikis 2006, 99-104.
        Norman, D. A. (1991). Cognitive artifacts. In J. M.Carroll (Ed.), Designing Interaction: Psychology at the
                Human-Computer Interface (pp. 17-38). Cambridge: University Press.
        Notari, M. (2006). How to use a Wiki in education: Wiki based effective constructive learning. Proceedings of
                WikiSym'06 - 2006 International Symposium on Wikis 2006, 131-132.
        Oshima, J., Oshima, R., Murayama, I., Inagaki, S., Takenaka, M., Yamamoto, T., Yamaguchi, E., & Nakayama,
                H. (2006). Knowledge-building activity structures in Japanese elementary science pedagogy.
                International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 1, 229-246.
        Piaget, J. (1970). Piaget's theory. In P. H. Mussen (Ed.), Carmichael's manual of child psychology (pp. 703-
                732). New York: Wiley.
        Raitman, R., Augar, N., & Zhou, W. (2005). Employing wikis for online collaboration in the e-learning
                environment: Case study. Proceedings - 3rd International Conference on Information Technology and
                Applications, ICITA 2005 II, art. no. 1488944, 142-146.
        Reinhold, S. (2006). Wikitrails: Augmenting Wiki structure for collaborative, interdisciplinary learning.
                Proceedings of WikiSym'06 - 2006 International Symposium on Wikis 2006, 47-57.
        Rick, J., & Guzdial, M. (2006). Situating CoWeb: A scholarship of application. International Journal of
                Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 1, 89-115.
        Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (1994). Computer support for knowledge-building communities. The Journal of
                the Learning Sciences, 3(3), 265-283.
        Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (1996). Student communities for the advancement of knowledge.
                Communications of the ACM, 39, 36-37.
        Wang, C.-M., & Turner, D. (2005). Extending the wiki paradigm for use in the classroom. International
                Conference on Information Technology: Coding Computing, ITCC 1, 255-259.
        Yukawa, J. (2006). Co-reflection in online learning: Collaborative critical thinking as narrative. International
                Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 1, 203-228.

2-0
