                   Creating         An     Inquiry-Learning            Environment
                                 Using     The      World      Wide    Web

 Gene Alloway, Nathan Bos, Kathleen Hamel, Tracy Hammerman, Elisabeth Klann, Joseph Krajcik, David Lyons,
   Terry Madden, Jon Margerum-Leys, James Reed, Nancy Scala, Elliot Soloway, Ioanna Vekiri, Raven Wallace

                                    Center for Inquiry Leaqiing and Technology
                                             University of Michigan
                                                1101 Beal Ave.
                                           Ann Arbor,  MI  48109,  USA
                                              soloway@umich.edu

           Abstract: The University of Michigan Digital Library (UMDL) Project provides guidelines
           and design standards for teaching and learning materials and methods to support science inquiry
           using on-line resources. In this paper, we present an initial report of our experiences using on
           line resources to promote sustained inquiry in science classrooms. We examine the challenges
           faced by teachers and students as well as the challenges posed in creating or finding useful
           content and    in designing the technological tools for students   to investigate meaningful
           questions on-line.

1.         Introduction:      Motivation    & Goals

To promote more in depth student understanding of science, a number of researchers and policy groups (e.g., Brown
and Campione, 1995; Linn, 1995; NRC, 1995; AAAS, 1992; CoVis Project, 1996) argue that students need to
engage in sustained inquiry activities, formulate authentic, meaningful questions, plan tasks, predict outcomes,
argue, evaluate and collaborate. To support students in these new types of activities, it is incumbent upon us to
provide them with a new generation of tools; just as professionals engaged in sustained inquiry make continual and
routine use of tools, students also need a full compliment of tools designed to meet the unique needs of learners
(Soloway, et al., 1994).

In this paper we describe our recent work exploring how on-line resources can be effectively utilized to support
sustained student inquiry. While still in its early stages, we have identified a number of challenges to using such on
line resources as World Wide Web sites, and suggest strategies for dealing - to some extent - with those
challenges. In what follows we outline the pedagogical philosophy which drives our use of technology; present an
overview of our work in schools; and discuss the challenges we have encountered illustrating these with vignettes.
2.         Pedagogy      First: What    is Sustained    Inquiry?
Our design of a sustained inquiry project is based on five characteristics (Blumenfeld, et al., 1991; Krajcik, et al.,
1994):

    The Driving Question. Students investigate authentic, meaningful questions or problems that orchestrate
   activities and organize concepts and principles. Sample driving questions are: What is the quality of water in the
    stream behind my school? Where does my school waste energy? Should I wear sunscreen? These sorts of
    questions are open-ended and authentic - they relate to the interests, needs, goals, and curiosity of students. Key
    is that the content is explored in the context of pursuing an authentic question.
    Investigations. Students investigate the driving question by asking and refining questions, making plans,
   designing experiments, debating ideas, collecting and analyzing information and data, drawing conclusions, and
   communicating their ideas and findings to others.
   Artifacts. As a result of performing authentic inquiries, students develop a series of artifacts or products that
    represent their knowledge in a variety of ways.
   Learning Communities. Students, teachers, and individuals outside the classroom collaborate to investigate
   a driving question. Students discuss and try out their ideas and challenge the ideas of others.

                                                                                                                    1
     Use of Technology. Computers are used as cognitive tools to help learners represent and share ideas and to
     support students' research. Communications tools enable learners to access information and interact with others.

By engaging in projects, students (1) acquire an understanding of key scientific principles, concepts, and processes,
(2) develop important habits of mind, and (3) learn to communicate their knowledge to others (Brown & Campione,
1995; Blumenfeld, et al., 1991).
3.            Technology     Second:     Why   the  Web
Central to sustained inquiry is access to resources such as information, experimental apparatus, and human experts.
Moreover,  central   to participating   in a  community    is the   sharing  of  findings with the  community.  On-line
technologies afford students opportunities to move beyond their information-poor classroom to access a variety of
information resources, as well as providing a forum for publishing their findings. The following characterizes the
unique features of on-line resources:

     Content  is  current.  Using   resources  on   the   Internet, students will  obtain the  most current information
     regarding the questions they are exploring.
     Content  can    be from  primary      resources. In  many   circumstances,    students will use the same  data  and
     information sources as scientists.
·    Content   is comprehensive. In        typical libraries used by secondary school students,      a small subset of
     popular and scholarly material on a given subject is available. The UMDL and WWW will expand the content
     enormously, giving students access to an unprecedented range of information sources.
     Resources    are represented     in various   formats.   In    particular, information is available in digital form
     for easy manipulation and use by students. Video and sound provide new information (for example, dynamic
     views of the ozone holes), and new ways of receiving information, revealing new possibilities for students to
     build understanding.
·    Student can publish on-line. Student artifacts can be shared by a wide audience.
     Content is readily accessible. Information is quickly and easily accessible -- literally just a rnouseclick
     away.
·    Students   may     engage   in   dialog   with   scientists    to seek     information    and   perhaps  to    solve
     problems.

Inasmuch as on-line resources differ from traditional print and non-print resources, new sets of issues for teaching and
learning must be confronted. In what follows, we describe our efforts to employ these features of on-line resources to
support sustained student inquiry.
4.            The    UMDL    Project:    Status    Report
A group of over thirty researchers at the University of Michigan from Information and Library Studies, Education,
and Engineering are involved in an NSF/NASA/ARPA-sponsored four year effort to construct the University of
Michigan Digital Library (UMDL). Currently, searching the WWW is like going into a library where all the shelves
are marked miscellaneous. The UMDL will be a combination digital card catalog and personal library for earth and
space science resources; students and researchers will visit the UMDL with their questions and be directed to relevant
network resources.

In preparation for launching the UMDL in the spring of 1996, we have been working with three high schools in
Ann Arbor (Community, Pioneer and Huron) since January of 1995, to explore how on-line resources can be used to
support sustained inquiry. We have developed several curriculum units that are being used in these schools including
a tutorial on how to search on the WWW using volcanoes as the subject content, and units on the content areas of
ozone and conservation.

During the 1994-95 school year, we worked with science teachers at Community and Pioneer to introduce students to
on-line search. During this academic year, we are working with all three schools.
·    Community High School. We are working with four teachers in four 9th grade science classrooms and four
     10th grade science classrooms to support students doing on-line investigations. We are also working with two
     teachers and    four freshman    classes to   create and  publish  Web     pages reflecting the results of  o n-line
     investigations.

  2
·   Pioneer High School. We are working with two teachers and nine 9th grade science classrooms to support
    students doing on-line investigations.
·   Huron High School. During the winter term, we will also be working at Huron with six teachers and 160
    freshman students in two interdisciplinary blocks.

Each school provides unique challenges. Community is a small, alternative school, which has one laptop for every
two science students. Pioneer and Huron are large, traditional, high schools with limited computer resources. In our
work we have taken field notes, collected student journals and Web-documents, and video taped classroom activities.
We have used these observations and student artifacts to inform us at various stages in our development.
5.           Experiences Using   On-line      Resources    to Support   Sustained         Inquiry
Technology alone will not by itself serve to support sustained inquiry in a classroom. Rather, all the elements of a
classroom - the content/curriculum, the teacher, the student, the technology - need to be restructured in order to
take advantage of technology's affordances. The teacher's role, for example, needs to change from the "sage on the
stage" to the "guide on the side." Students must take greater responsibility for and ownership of learning activities.
The curriculum needs to emphasize inquiry not memorization.

In what follows we describe challenges and how those challenges were met as we introduced on-line resources into
the Ann Arbor high schools. The vignettes which we present are representative of our experiences in reshaping the
four elements of a high school classroom: the content/curriculum, the technology, the student, the teacher. The
vignettes have been selected on the basis of their universality: we feel the challenges we faced are typical and hope
our strategies for dealing with them can provide useful insights as others travel the same road.

5.1   Cur riculum/Content     Challenges

5.1.1   Challenge:   How    To  Scaffold     Students    Developing   Authentic        Driving    Questions

Developing driving questions is difficult: teachers are typically focused on curriculum and content issues. Their
previous experience leads them to ask highly directive questions. For example the driving question asked by one
teacher was "Find two examples of contaminants in the Great Lakes." Students are also unused to asking open-ended
questions, instead asking such questions as "When was the last volcanic eruption?" and "How many active volcanoes
are there?"

Thus, we found that we needed to provide teachers and students with assistance at least in the initial stages of
formulating authentic driving questions - questions that are interesting to students, engage worthwhile science
content (matching with classroom objectives), and are broad enough to allow students to formulate driving sub
questions. The following are strategies we used to facilitate teachers and students developing good driving questions:
·   Modeling: One of our research team, who was more versed in facilitating open discussions,         actually led the
    several classes until the regular classroom teachers felt comfortable taking over.
·   Class   Brainstorming:  Teachers worked     with    students to construct lists    of usable  search terms. Until
    something is known about the content area, it is difficult to formulate a good driving question, or even search in
    a meaningful way. Brainstorming drew on students' prior knowledge, which in turn, set the stage for finding
    information on the Web.
·   On-line Tutorial: We constructed a set of Web pages that provided examples and prompts to help students
    develop driving questions and use an inquiry process. For example (see Figure 1), the page gives suggestions to
    help students think of a driving questions, such as asking themselves "What happens if...".
·   Off-line Materials: Attempting to compensate for the lack of context support in the technology (see Section
    5.2.1), we handed out written materials which provided static reference to the on-line tutorial and clearly
    explained what the students were expected to do during the class period. For example, the second day's
    instructions included: "At the end of the period, be ready to describe to the class one site that gave some
    information that helped you with your question."

While the on-line tutorials were the least used of the supports, most students did develop good driving questions.
Though we created materials on the computer, they were not particularly interactive, and were perceived as just
another set of written instructions - to be ignored. Modeling open discussions for the teachers was not effective in

                                                                                                                   3
changing their behavior: the teachers who started with closed questioning did not change their approach - yes/no
questions were still the norm at the end of the project.
                                                                               z.rn,.; ·ml §? ·.'j.·j.;r-#-.->.··,-· ! 0- 1:,,;f·-;l-i-i-:··-'. --."-··:-,.f-fJ-!-.;,;.·., ;N;\ets.cit,Io pe: The ,"Open'.·IT·VeP.rK·.i"tn·t··l.·1n:."d.·@feiKr(d'··.1·-.)·-· ·1·-··-·\··--1.·---·-  li!l::
                                                                                                    si},_.ii! ;;!iai.f,.No(ltQ1rfct...1if ..                       Softw'n-·..1.   ..

                                                                                 :·)iP;¥1#1#,P""r1i
-i i#o#:i.o to·.·                                                                                QpenText'",m' i"-td:N -:, etscaile'ro Market Comprehensive Intranet Solution·Figure 2: OpenText search form.
  · ftf/=::t{z
  ·· ·· ·· :Sc,;;;i,;i/f;l
       · ·: · fr@'YO/Rnz:rt.'kibJo
                                  .,,·,;.

 Figure    1: Web page to help students formulate a
                  driving question.

                                                                                    Figure 3: Results from OpenText Search

5.1.2      Challenge:                       How   To   Take Advantage   Of     The  Unique   Features  Of  The   Web       In                 The
               C lassroom

While textbooks provide text and static images, students can access video, animation, audio, and other dynamic
media on the Web - if teachers permit it. In our on-line materials, we suggested students visit specific sites where
we knew there    were videos (e.g., researchers going into active volcanoes). However, we found on the day of the
class that the computer coordinator had removed the QuickTime Movie Player from all the student PowerBooks
because the teachers did not want the students to "waste their time watching videos in class." We are working with
the teachers to change their minds on what are appropriate information resources in the classroom.

5.1.3   Challenge:                         What  can  students contribute   to a  digital library

Unlike a conventional library, students can publish their work in a digital library. In fact, knowing that they will
share their findings with others is an important aspect of motivating students to sincerely engage in an inquiry of
their driving question. Additionally, sharing and interacting with others is an integral part of developing a sense of
community, which is yet another key pedagogical characteristic of authentic inquiry.

Last  fall we  conducted                     a pilot Web publishing project with approximately one hundred 9th grade students                   at
Community High School. Students worked in groups to create Web pages about water contaminants. Each group
researched a specific contaminant (e.g. benzene, chlorine, PCBs, DMSO). Students conducted most of their research
on-line; the vast majority of information they presented was already on the Web; however, the students transformed
and represented this information in a style and format tailored to the needs of high school students, thus adding value
to the Web's existing collections.

While publishing on the Web definitely engaged students, we found that many of the student Web pages emphasized
form over content. Even when motivation is high and students are engaged for significant periods of time, it is still a
challenge to have students seriously grapple with deep content issues.

4
5.2   Technology    Challenges

5.2.1   Challenge:   How    to  Provide P o int     of View,    Context, and  History/State

Navigating with the current crop of browsers, such as Netscape, pose real challenges for learners.
·   No point of view: Unlike a textbook, with which students are familiar, the Internet does not provide a point
    of view. For example, students searching for information on lava without specifying volcanoes as a domain,
    also found information on lava lamps. On the other hand, students made connections that textbooks would not
    have provided, e.g., profession of volcanology, effects of volcanic eruptions on the local weather of Michigan.
·   Few context representation mechanisms: The Dewey-decimal organized bookshelf provides a great deal
    of information, e.g., it visually situates one book in a broader context. In contrast, when one website takes up
    the students' entire computer screen, it is not surprising that students have a hard time perceiving that this
    website actually is just one piece of a larger context - that may well contain information that should be
    explored.
·   Stateless/No History: Current browsers provide bookmarks and history files as the only record of student
    navigation. These are inadequate because they provide no context and are difficult to maintain from day-to-day.

As we mentioned, students kept journals on paper to compensate for the latter two problems, and class discussions
to deal with the first problem. The UMDL is being designed to expressly deal with all three problems.

5.2.2   Challenge:   How    To  Support  The       Query, Re-Search    Process

Teaching search strategies to students is a difficult process. The following example illustrates the inadequacy of
expecting a student to understand the process of searching on the Web. OpenText (http://opentext.uunet.ca:8080/) is
arguably one of the better Web search engines but it is not designed with a 9th grader in mind. A student wanted to
know about the impact of volcanoes on waterlife. The student typed into the OpenText form: "volcanoes, water
life"(see Figure 2) - and clicked on search, accepting the default "This phrase." OpenText retrieved zero hits. The
student clicked on "All of these words" and again, got back zero hits. He clicked on the third alternative "Any of
these words" and got back 152,076 hits! (see Figure 3) Besides being demoralizing, this sequence actually took about
ten minutes - of a 50 minute period - as the student discussed with the instructor what was happening.

The issue is not how the screen looks, but in the functionality and scaffolding (Wood, Bruner, & Ross, 1975) that is
provided - and not provided - by the interface. While students certainly understand what it means to ask a
question, it is not clear that they understand how to engage with a computer-based search engine in query, search, and
re-search. Currently, the teacher and fellow students provide assistance in this type of situation. However, the
technology, again, must bear more of the burden in the future. (e.g., Borgman et al. 1991, Soloway, et al. 1994).

5.3   Student   Challenge : How   To Support       Inquiry     And Understanding

As we argued in the Introduction, having students engage in sustained inquiry is difficult. In particular, they must
become mindful of what they are doing and monitor their progress closely, as well as understand the content being
explored. In a three-day unit at Pioneer High in the spring of 1995, we did not provide support for students in these
areas: in their evaluations, students reported that they got lost, and time on the Web was not as productive as it
might have been; as they browsed, they didn't keep track of where they had been and what they found, so that in
subsequent days of the unit, they had to start over. In sum, there was significant chaos, confusion, and little learning
taking place.

To support students in these cognitive and metacognitive activities, we tried two strategies with nine classes in a
three-day unit in the fall of 1995 at Pioneer.
·   Journals: We have students keep written research notebooks in which they record their search steps including:
    driving questions and keywords,  URLs of sites found, and comments about their strategies and experiences.
    Journals helped students keep their focus and organize their work over the course of the three-day search tutorial.
    Students could refer back to their search keywords and the URLs and notes about helpful sites. For example,
    Figure 4 depicts a page from a student's journal; here we see that the student kept track of keywords, trying to
    narrow her search. She recorded the number of "hits" and moved on to visiting sites and evaluating content after

                                                                                                                    5
    composing a search which yielded a reasonable number of hits. (Rather than having students flip between a word
    processor and Web pages, on their 12 inch monitors, we decided to use paper notebooks.)
·   On-line Tutorial: We provided Web pages which structured the Inquiry Process (see Figure 5) by providing
    starting points and examples.

While the journals were definitely a success, and helped keep the students focused, the on-line materials, though they
were crafted and recrafted, were not as effective as we intended. Once st· udents left the on-line tutorial and began to
actually search on the Web, they rarely returned to these pages.                                 0-                                  1_,,1. ·

                              l2/6/q5

          PUoM weerf,Sc&orvnc:/82o-et:h>/-lfp-1));;1,;;.;. ;_ . _
        -  IJol canoes                 02.on e               .'  1 ..:. 19 
              {. Of-   J&>G,            C--a..-1               

            th[Lw7JOC?__ZlYle.. c/,                       
                                                        J
            -&1:         1-10          C cr                 2.q)

        _  a_dc{ e.cJ   -U-rv...f-,_fiDh.15, -=- J -/ 0
           Tot,t;,/--e>r  1-4          f.)
        -  a...dAf.       ctu.,d- :::                       I-B
          ( fu4w. VV-:1- bf- d3 ';) ff
                                                                                                        Figure 5: Search tutorial page.

Figure 4: Page from a student journal showing use of
        the journal to keep track of a search.

5.4    Teacher Challenges

The most important component of creating a culture of inquiry in the context of the World Wide Web is the teacher,
their attitude about technology, their beliefs about learning, and                                   their instructional practices. Thus, it is not
surprising that issues of teaching and teachers has cropped up in all sections of this paper. Here we focus on the
bigger picture: the role of teacher in creating a climate and culture of inquiry.

5.4.1.   Challenge:   How    to         help                teachers create   a  climate              of inquiry in the classroom

In an inquiry-based pedagogy,          the teacher becomes less a deliverer of information and more a manager and facilitator
of the inquiry process - one who is supportive of and provides scaffolds for student-driven exploration (Brown &
Campione 1995, Krajcik et al. 1994, Scardamalia &Bereiter 1991). For example, in the prevalent stand-up-and-talk
style of teaching, a teacher doesn't want their class to waste time hunting around (i.e. searching on the Web); thus,
we saw teachers highly structuring the inquiry, telling the students what to do and what sites to visit. In fact, there is
a flavor of this over structuring tendency in our on-line materials, as well; we provided a step-by-step checklist on
how to do a search (see Figure 5). While some structuring, some instruction is needed - after all, the students are
content and process novices - providing just the right amounts is a tricky business.

For teachers, transitioning to this new role of manager and facilitator is exceedingly difficult. In our work with
classroom teachers, we have found no single strategy that works miracles. Using a model of teacher change (the
CEER Model - Collaboration, Enactment, Extended Time, Reflection and Planning,) we have been able to help
teachers develop and adopt and adapt more inquiry-based practices (Krajcik, et al., 1994).

6
5.4.2.   Challenge:      How   to    encourage     the  teacher   to     help  students  engage     in  substantive
            conversations

We found the most success in encouraging student-driven inquiry when the teacher managed and encouraged
classroom conversation among students and between students and teachers. As others (Brown & Campione, 1995,
Scardamalia & Bereiter, 1991) have also observed, it is a challenge for teachers to engage in this type of activity. For
example, since on-line access is such a precious commodity      - at Pioneer High, there is one computer lab with
Internet connectivity in the whole building of 2,000 students- teachers did not want to interrupt students. We
found that we had to explicitly build in class time for the following types of conversation:
    Divergent talk. At   the start  of the search tutorial, conversation was  important to   help students recall prior
    knowledge and begin to focus on the task at hand. The Driving Question posed to them was: "What do you want
    to know about volcanoes?"      They need to have some knowledge of volcanoes to be able to respond with their
    own Driving Question. Talk- with the teacher helping by asking questions and responding with open-ended
    answers and additional questions - got students thinking about volcanoes and helped them realize how much
    they already knew.
·   Exploratory talk. While working on-line, students talked to their partner and sometimes the teacher about
    what they were doing and why. Students who were unable or unwilling to talk about content were further
    isolated, either working alone or watching their partner work. Productive learning occurred when students talked
    to themselves via their journals, to each other, and to the teacher.
    Convergent talk. At the end of the class, we found it helpful to have a class discussion about what students
    did and why, and what they found. This conversation provides an opportunity for students to evaluate what they
    have found and to synthesize their ideas. It provides an opportunity for the teacher to model (and thus scaffold)
    the inquiry process.

A representative example of how difficult it is to support open conversation occurred at one of the schools:
    Several students asked the Driving Question "What is the temperature of lava?" and found differing temperatures,
    three different "answers" in all.   A class conversation ensued about why different numerical values for the
    temperature of lava were discovered. In this instance, the teacher sought a single answer, asking questions such
    as "Which one of these do you think is right?" rather than the open-ended questions that could have been asked.
    As a manager of inquiry, the teacher's stance would have been that perhaps there is no one temperature and the
    questions that might have been posed to the class could include: Who reported the information?         Under what
    circumstances was the information collected? Is there a scientific reason for differing temperatures of lava?
This episode illustrates a primary function of the teacher as a manager of inquiry: to help students break out of the
"one question, one answer" mold and become comfortable with open-ended query.
6.         Concluding        Remarks
While we agree with the nationwide call to connect kids to the Internet, it is clear that without a great deal of effort
on the part of teachers, curriculum designers, administrators, parents, and students, no great advancements in learning
will take place. While only a thimble-full, the vignettes and guidelines reported here are concrete examples of how
much change is needed in order to take advantage of what on-line resources afford.
If the current goals and instructional practices remain in effect, there is no reason to go through the enormous effort
of installing Internet connections into the classroom: if the most that students are asked to do is write two page
reports on some topic, then the library's trusty encyclopedia and reference books are all sufficient. However, if we
sincerely embrace inquiry-based learning, Internet resources will be a key support mechanism. Changing from the
dominant educational view- didactic instruction - to a more constructivist, inquiry-based model is truly the quest
- and test- of our society's commitment to children, to learning, and to a future where we educate notjust the top
20% of children, but all children.
7·         References
American Association for the Advancement of Science (1992) Science for all Americans: A Project 2061 report on literary
goals in science, mathematics, and technology, Technical Report, AAAS Publication, Washington, D.C.

                                                                                                                    7
Blumenfeld P., Soloway E., Marx R., Krajcik J., Palincsar, M. & A. (1994), Motivating project-based learning: sustaining
the doing,  supporting  the learning,  Educational  Psychologist, 26(3  &4), 369-398.

Borgman, C., et al. (1991), Project:       Comparison  of  children's searching  behavior in hypertext  and  a keyword   search
system.  Proceedings of the ASIS annual meeting, 28. 162-169.

Brown, A., and Campione, J. (1994), Guided discovery in a community of learners.       McGilly, K. (Ed.), Classroom Lessons:
Integrating cognitive theory and classroom practice, (pp 229-270). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press/Bradford Books.

Krajcik, J., Blumenfeld,    P., Marx,  R., and Soloway, E.  (1994),   A collaborative model  for helping middle   grade science
teachers learn project-based instruction. The Elementary School Journal. 94(5). 483-497.

CoVis Project (1996), "Project Pedagogy in CoVis," http://www.covis.nwu.edu/Geosciences/philosophy/projects.html

Marx, R.W.,    Freeman, J.G.,     Krajcik, J. & Blumenfeld, P. (1996, in press). Professional development of science teachers.
In D. Tobin, & B.J. Fraser (Eds.), International handbook of science education. Netherlands: Kluwer Publishers.

Scardamalia, M. & Bereiter, C. (1991). Higher levels of agency for children in knowledge building: A challenge for the
design of new knowledge media. The Journal of the Leaming Sciences. 1, 37 - 68

Soloway,   E., Guzdial,  M.,    & Hay, K.  E.  (1994) Leamer-Centered    Design: The  challenge  for HCI  in  the 21st  century,
Interactions. Vol. I, No. 2, April, 36-48

Wood,   D.,  Bruner, J. S., &   Ross, G.   (1975) The role of tutoring  in problem-solving. Journal  of Child  Psychology  and
Psychiatry, 17, 89-100.

Acknowledgments

This work was supported by a grant from the NSF/ARPA/NASA Digital Library Initiative, by a grant from the NSF NIE
Initiative, and by the University of Michigan.

We wish to thank the teachers, administrators and students in the schools in which we are working; we sincerely appreciate
their cooperation, their willingness to try something new, and their good humor!      We also wish to thank Sara Staebler for
her heroic efforts to make sure that the boxes and wires, and relevant infrastructure.... work!

8
