        Virtual-UTM:          A Web-Based Environment Customized to Support
      Collaborative Learning and Knowledge Building in Post Secondary
                                                      Courses

                               Linda Harasim, Tom Calvert, and Chris Groeneboer
                                 TeleLearning Network of Centers of Excellence
                            Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, BC Canada             V5A 1S6
                              linda@telelearn.ca, tom@telelearn.ca, groen@cs.sfu.ca

              Abstract:    Virtual-UTM   is a World   Wide  Web-based     networked  learning    environment
              customized for the design, delivery, and enhancement of post-secondary education. One of
              the main design goals is to provide a flexible framework to support advanced pedagogies
              based  on   principles  of active  learning,  collaboration,    multiplicity, and  knowledge
              building.  The   framework    consists of tools to  support  core activities  including course
              design,   individual   and  group    learning   activities,  knowledge     structuring,  class
              management, and evaluation.     The design of Virtual-UTM builds on lessons learned from a
              decade of field research in online course delivery.      A brief history of that experience is
              presented to illustrate the motivation behind some of the decisions made in the design of
              the system.  A description of   Virtual-UTM     and lessons  learned  from initial experiences
              with users are reported.

1. Introduction
        Virtual-UTM     is a  World    Wide   Web-based     networked     learning   environment      customized  for the
design, delivery, and enhancement of post-secondary education. One of the main design goals is to provide
a flexible framework to support advanced pedagogies based on principles of active learning, collaboration,
multiplicity, and knowledge      building,    varied  content    areas including    sciences  and  the  arts, and  varied
instructional   formats    including   seminars,   tutorials,  group   projects,    and  labs    [Harasim   1995].    The
framework   consists    of tools to    support  core  activities  including     course   design,  individual  and  group
learning activities, knowledge structuring, class management, and evaluation.
          The   design  of    Virtual-l.JTM builds   on advanced   research     in online   education, engineering,   and
human-computer interface design.         The educational principles are defined in [Educational Principles and
Models  of  Learning].     A   brief  history of  online   education   is    presented and   the  educational  outcomes
examined in [History of Online Education].           A  description    of Virtual-l.JTM  is presented  in [Virtual-l.JTM ]
including design decisions made based on the outcomes of the previous work in online education.                    Initial
experience  with  Virtual-l.JTM    is  described in  [Initial Experience     with  Virtual-l.JTM], and  conclusions   are
presented in [Conclusions].

2. Educational Principles and Models of Learning
        The main goal is to shape Virtual-l.JTM into a learning environment by structuring and organizing
online  interactions  based   on principles   of  active  and    collaborative  learning,   multiple   perspectives,  and
knowledge building.     Collaborative or group learning refers to instructional methods whereby students are
encouraged or required to work together on academic tasks. While there are important differences among
various theoretical   and  practical   understandings   of  collaborative    learning  [Damon     and  Phelps  1989],   all
distinguish collaborative     learning   from the    traditional  'direct transfer' model    in  which  the  instructor is
assumed to be the sole source of knowledge and skills. Unlike the teacher-centered models that view the
learner primarily as a passive recipient of knowledge from an expert, collaborative or group learning is
based  upon   a learner-centered     model  that  treats the  learner     as an active   participant.  The   conversation
(verbalizing),  multiple      perspectives    (cognitive    restructuring),     and  argument     (conceptual     conflict
resolution) that  arise    in cooperative   groups    may   explain    why    collaborative   groups   facilitate greater

120
cognitive development than the same individuals achieve when working alone [Sharan 1980; Slavin 1980;
Webb 1982, 1989; Stodolsky 1984].
         Knowledge     building is a learning  strategy in which  active  articulation, sharing  and organizing of
ideas and information into individual and group knowledge structures is encouraged. Koschmann et al.
[1993] note that as knowledge is complex, dynamic, and interactively related, it is critical that instruction
promote   multiple   perspectives,   representations,   and   strategies.  Scardamalia       and  Bereiter   [1993]
distinguish   between    knowledge   reproduction  strategies  (copy-delete   summarization),     and  knowledge
building strategies which

         "are, by   contrast, focussed   centrally  on  understanding...In  this view,      learning---like
         scientific discovery and theorizing---is a process of working toward more complete and
         coherent understanding.   The kind of discourse that supports such learning is not discourse
         in which students display or reproduce what they have learned.      It is the kind of discourse
         that  advances   knowledge     in the  sciences   and  disciplines.  It is     the discourse  of
         'conjectures and refutations' as Popper called it." [pp.37-38]

3. History of Online Education
         Research and field experience generated over the past decade indicate that computer networking,
especially computer conferencing, can support post-secondary course delivery entirely or partially online
effectively, with significant user satisfaction, and with low rates of attrition [Kaye 1991; Mason 1989;
Hiltz 1990, 1993; Harasim et al. 1995]. Online delivery of courses can enrich and expand traditional
educational   activities and  outcomes;     perhaps    more   importantly, networking       has demonstrated   the
potential to support entirely new types of educational interaction and outcomes.         There are, nonetheless,
important constraints    and challenges.

3.1 The Early Challenges of Online Education

        One of the earliest field experiments in online course delivery was at the Ontario Institute for
Studies in Education (OISE) in the mid-1980s. At that time there were no models, theoretical or practical,
to guide course design and delivery online.     Pioneering those first online courses (graduate courses and a
non-credit  professional   development     course  for  teachers) involved    conceptualizing,    designing,   and
delivering courses entirely online, using a computer conferencing system to connect students who were
geographically distributed.   The educational approach taken reformulated collaborative learning activities
for a networked environment characterized by five key attributes: an asynchronous, place-independent,
many-to-many, text-based computer-mediated system [Harasim 1989, 1990].             These five attributes have
subsequently proven to be both constraints and opportunities for enabling effective collaborative learning
online.  The educational design, tested and refined by ongoing research, has proven robust and effective
in over ten years of iterations and has been adopted by educators and institutions worldwide.

3.2 Educational Outcomes

        Analysis    of data   collected  over  ten years   of application  of this  approach     to  graduate  and
undergraduate courses, delivered both entirely and partially online, indicates important outcomes, such as
active participation, peer interaction, multiple perspectives and divergent thinking.        Problems associated
with collaborating   online,  especially   as related  to  information management       and  lack  of educational
supports, were also identified.
        Significant outcomes of the experience with online collaborative course design were:
   Active learning:   specifically, active participation by students.
   Interactive learning:  specifically, in peer-to-peer discussion and exchange.
   Multiple perspectives:    specifically, through reading input from all the other online students as well as
    the instructor.
   Metaphor:   e.g., a spatial metaphor to ease the transition from traditional face-to-face classrooms to
    structured online classrooms.

                                                                                                               121
          System generated data showed a high volume and number of conference messages written by the
students.  Students regularly input large amounts of original text, generating a rich database of information.
Not   only   was  the  overall  volume    of  messaging    high  in  the online classes,   but   it was  fairly  evenly
distributed among the students in each class. Most students participated most of the time, sending several
messages each week. The major factor supporting the participation noted by students was the increased
access opportunities offered by the asynchronous, place-independent environment.
          Group   interaction  was   also motivating   to  students.  Student interviews    and  feedback    comments
emphasized that the group interaction was intellectually stimulating and fun, and that they worked harder
and   produced   higher   quality work    online.   The  online   courses  developed,   in  varying    degrees,  strong
communities of friendship.
          Students also reported that they appreciated the exposure to a diverse range of perspectives in the
group learning design:     online students read input from all other students, rather than only the ideas of the
instructor and a few students.    Student interaction was not only significant in term of message volume, but
also in quality of intellectual content.      Analysis of selected contents of the online courses indicates that
learners  formulated    positions and   responded   to  their  peers  with active questioning,      elaboration, and/or
debate. Transcript analysis and message map analysis of interaction patterns showed that students used the
online seminars and small group activities to build on one another's ideas [Harasim 1991] and that students
referred to one another's messages, adding to and building on the ideas posed [Winkelmans 1988].
          In the  early   weeks   of  online discussion,   many    students reported  communication        anxiety and
feeling 'lost in space';   nonetheless, they soon learned how to direct their comments to the appropriate
conference space. Students reported that the existence of conferences for different topics and types o f
activities helped   to  orient  them   to the  course  curriculum    and  facilitated their navigation     through  the
conferencing system.
          These  early  field  studies on    networked  learning   environments   suggest   that it  is important  that
participants form mental models of the "spaces" where they are working - the virtual seminar, the virtual
discussion   group,   the virtual laboratory,  the  cafe   for social interactions,  etc. [Feenberg     1993; Harasim
1993b]. This is important if they are to apply appropriate "social factors" to their interactions.

3.3   Problems

          While   research   has  demonstrated     the potential   of networked   technologies      to  support  active
collaborative learning and interaction [Harasim 1990, 1993], important problems were also identified. Until
recently   online  course    delivery  was    based  on    generic  networking    tools   such  as   email,  computer
conferencing, or newsgroups.      The use of generic networking tools has imposed significant overhead on the
user, since  these  tools  were   not designed  specifically   to  support  educational   activities [Feenberg   1993;
Smith 1988; Harasim 1993].
          Key problems in using generic networking environments for education included the lack of tools
to support instructional activities such as course design and group design, and lack of tools to support key
learning   strategies such   as  knowledge    building  and    multiple  representations   of  ideas   and  knowled g e
structures [Harasim 1990, 1991, 1993].
          There  was  an  urgent  need    to create network    environments   specially   customized    for education,
which could facilitate easy adoption and adaptation (tailoring of individual courses) by the educators and
which provide embedded tools to support specific instructor and learner activities. There was also a need
for   the development     of discipline   specific  tools, to  expand the  types  of  course  content   that  could be
delivered over networks, especially those related to mathematics and lab-science instruction, and to the
cultural and fine arts.

4. Virtual-UTM
          Based on the decade of field research in online course delivery described above, the design and
development of the system now known as Virtual-UTM was initiated in 1994.                 The goal was to provide a
flexible framework to support advanced pedagogies based on principles of active learning, collaboration,
multiplicity, and knowledge building, varied content areas including sciences and the arts, and varied
instructional  formats    including   seminars,    tutorials,  group  projects, and   labs  [Harasim     1995].    The

122
framework    consists  of   tools to support    core  activities including     course   design, individual      and group
learning activities, knowledge structuring, class management, and evaluation.
         The attention to pedagogy is what distinguishes Virtual-lJTM from other virtual universities.                The
Web    has typically  been   used  as  a  publishing  environment      characterized     by  a correspondence       course
model or a broadcast model of learning in which faculty post lecture notes or students post assignments
online.

4.1.  Design Directions

        The designers and implementors of Virtual-lJ'fM comprise a multidisciplinary team of educators,
HCI    specialists,  engineers,     computing     scientists,    database      designers,    instructional      designers,
implementors, instructors, learners, and researchers.       The initial design is based on networked muultimedia
workstations (PC's or Macs) and a unix server. The decision was made to build on widely available World
Wide Web (WWW) tools since there is active interest in developing these tools for multiple platforms.
Thus   the students  and instructors   using Virtual-UTM    need   only     a Netscape  browser      on their workstation
because all of the Virtual-lJ'fM software resides on a central server. The major components of the system
include the architecture, campus spaces, and tools, all of which contribute to shaping the environment
specifically for online learning.

4.2. Web-Based      Client-Server   Architecture

        The architecture is a hybrid distributed-star configuration consisting of a central server, a set of
local  servers, and   a  set  of  networked     multimedia     workstations     in  which    local    servers   may  also
communicate with each other directly.        Multimedia resources and specialized knowledge are distributed
throughout the system (and beyond). In order to use the system, the student activates the browser and
contacts the server   WWW address. A security system allows registered students to access materials for
the course in which they have enrolled.      Users can also link directly to other WWW resources.
        The    conferencing   system   is  based  on  a structured     file system.  This   works    well   for a  limited
number of users, but for large scale deployment it will be reimplemented with a database structure. The
user interface and the tools available are evolving as the Web-based tools evolve.              For example, the next
release of the Netscape browser will support frames and other techniques which allow a more intuitive
interface.  The   use of    Java, Director,  and   other  software     makes    it possible  to play     animations  and
simulations    which  greatly   enhances    the   potential content    for    specialized areas      such as    laboratory
experiments and dance instruction.

4.3.  Spatial Metaphor

        Until   recently  online  learning   environments      were  completely     text  based    - much   like   reading
prose, the participants form their own imagery of the virtual environments. With multimedia which provide
2-dimensional images of 3-d scenes, and even video or animation, it is possible to provide the students
with  explicit cues  which   help  them    orient themselves,    both  in   terms  of navigating     around    the virtual
environment as well as in setting social norms as to the appropriate behaviour expected in each virtual
space.
        The    approach  is to  use  a spatial  metaphor    in which     users navigate   using    images   of  university
buildings, offices  and  study  areas  [see Fig.  IJ.   While  the   key    spaces  are instructional,    such  as virtual
classrooms  for seminars    and discussion   groups   and   spaces   for team   projects, labs, etc.,   the Virtual-lJ'fM
environment    also includes  spaces   for academic   advice,    for administrative     activities   such as  registration
and fee payment, for access to library and other information resources (including an art gallery [see Fig.
2J) and for social interchange (the virtual cafe).
        While   a   spatial metaphor   may   be   helpful during     a transitional   stage, more     experienced   users
sometimes find that it gets in the way of efficiencj.          Therefore,     users are  provided    with   five ways  of
navigating   Virtual-UTM     and  accessing tools:    spaces   (graphic     imagery),   a navigation      map,  menus, a
control panel, and hot-key alternatives.

                                                                                                                      123
    Virtual,.U
    Campus

                         Figure 1: Map of the Virtual-UM campus.

                   Figure 2: An exhibit room in the Virtual-UM art gallery.

124
4.4.  Functional Components to Support New Pedagogies

        Another  major   component   of Virtual-UTM  is the  set  of  tools to support  core  activities including
course design,  individual and  group learning  activities, knowledge     structuring,  class management,    and
evaluation.  Tools to support course design include a course structure tool and a group design tool.         The
course structure tool  consists of a  template for the  course     syllabus.   Instructors fill in  the  template
obviating the need for knowledge of HTML in constructing the syllabus.         The group design tool facilitates
the shaping of conferences for effective online collaboration and communication.
        Virtual  Groups, a Web-based    conferencing system      designed   and developed  by   the Virtual-lJTM
team,  mediates online group   interaction.  The annotation      tool and the  tool for creating  concept   maps
provide ways of organizing ideas and structuring knowledge.       The hypermedia environment also supports
knowledge structuring through hyperlinks and multiple media, namely, text, graphics, images, video, and
sound. An online grade book assists in class management [see Fig. 3], and evaluation is supported by the
polling facility, conference logs, and logs of usage statistics.

                      Figure 3:  Interface for an instructor to view the Grade Book.

                                                                                                              125
5. Initial Experience with Virtual-UTM
          Current pilot course offerings on Virtual-l.JTM include two communication courses which focus on
 student-moderated     online seminars,   project   teams,   debates, and projects     which     involve inquiry, goal
 setting, group  dynamics,  analysis,    and  reflection; an engineering  course      (with a virtual  lab component),
 and various courses from business, education, and computer science. The results of data captured from
 user reports and  usage  statistics are being applied  to the next  iteration of VirtuaJ-lJTM   development.
          An iterative method of development for Virtual-l.JTM has worked well because feedback and newly
 available technology can be incorporated early on.          For example, on the Web, the sense of 'place' users
 reported experiencing with previous versions of computer conferencing systems              was lost. With the release
 of Netscape  2.0,  new   features   such as  frames,   multiple windowing,     and   Java  support   were  adapted   to
 provide context.      The message list in a conference can now be accessed in one window, a particular
 message selected, and the contents of the message displayed in another window.
          Other   refinements such    as  easier navigation   and   multiple   views  of  conference   discussions    are
 contributing to development of this      new generation of Web-based conferencing systems.                For example,
 conference messages can be text, graphics, or animation -- the next version of the conferencing system
 allows HTML in the body of a message.         The need for a submit form for submitting work to the server has
also been identified.
          In addition, multimedia forms of collaboration and conferencing are being explored, such as real
 time video conferencing, image conferencing (shared white boards, many of which include video), and 3-d
 real-time messaging    using Worlds     Chat.   As multimedia    communication       becomes    increasingly possible
over networks, there is a need to identify which media are most effective for which educational activities.
Appropriate and effective use of powerful broadband networks is critical.         It is also imperative that tools be
developed   to   assist educators    and learners   in designing  and  integrating    multimedia    products  into    the
 virtual learning environments.
          Efforts in developing a virtual lab and a virtual art gallery have met with initial success and will
continue   to evolve.    Currently   an  online  dance    course is being developed.        This   project raises many
interesting issues and challenges for technology regarding how certain some types of instruction can be
done online.

6.  Conclusions
          Observations   from  the   use  of  early versions  of Virtual-UTM    suggest     that a spatial metaphor   is
necessary to provide a sense of place and that it provides a useful mental model to assist navigation. The
nature of the cues that can best support this metaphor range from text to explicit 3-d spaces, and these are
being  investigated.    Significant  activity continues   in further  customizing     the Web    space into a learning
environment by developing advanced teacher and learner tools. Specific embedded supports to facilitate
course design, collaborative learning, knowledge building, and visualization tools are currently underway.

7. References
 [Cohen 1984)  Cohen, E.G. (1984). Talking and working together: Status, interaction, and learning. In P.L. Peterson,
          L.C. Wilkinson, & M. Hallinan (Eds.),  The social context of instruction, pp. 171-187. New York: Academic
          Press.

 [Damon and Phelps 1989]   Damon, W. & Phelps, E. (1989). Critical distinctions among three approaches to peer
          education. International Journal of Educational Research, 13 (1), pp. 9-19.

 [Feenberg 1993]  Feenberg, A. (1993). Building a global network:   The WBSI executive education experience. In L.
          Harasim (Ed.). Global Networks: Computers and International Communication. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

 [Harasim 1995) Harasim, L. (1995). The Virtual University: New Approaches to Higher Education in the 21st Century.
          Keynote Address to the Australian Society for Computers In Learning In Tertiary Education Conference
          (ASCILITE'95). Melbourne, Australia.

 [Harasim et al. 1995)  Harasim, L., Hiltz, R., Teles, L., and Turoff, M. (1995) Leaming Networks: A Field Guide to
          Teaching & Learning Online. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

126
[Harasim 1993]   Harasim, L. (1993). Collaborating in Cyberspace: Using Computer Conferences as a Group Learning
       Environment. Interactive Learning Environments 3 (2), pp. 119-130.

[Harasim 1993b]  Harasim, L. (1993b). Networlds: Networks as Social Space. In L. Harasim (Ed.). Global Networks:
       Computers and International Communication. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

[Harasim 1991]   Harasim, L. (1991). Designs and tools to augment collaboration in computerized conferencing
       systems. Proceedings of the Hawaiian International Conference on Systems Science, Vol. IV, Organizational
       Systems and Technology Track, edited by Jay Nunamaker and Ralph Sprague, pp. 379-385.

[Harasim I 990]  Harasim, L. (1990). Online education: An environment for collaboration and intellectual
       amplification. In L. Harasim (Ed.) Online education: Perspectives on a new environment (pp. 39-66). New
       York: Praeger Publishers.
[Harasim 1989]   Harasim, L. (1989). Online education: A new domain.  In R. Mason & T.Kaye (Eds.) Mindweave:
       Computers, communications and distance education (pp. 50-62) Oxford: Pergamon Press.

[Hiltz 1990]  Hiltz, S. R. (1990). Evaluating the virtual classroom. In L. Harasim ed.Online education: Perspectives on
       a new environment (pp. 133-185). New York: Prager Publishers.
[Hiltz 1993]  Hiltz, S. R. (1993). The virtual classroom: A new option for learning via computer networking.
       Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
[Koshmann et al. 1994] Koshmann, T., Myers, A., Feltovich, P., Barrows, H. (1994) Using technology to assist in
       realizing effective learning and instruction: A Principled Approach to the Use of Computers in Collaborative
       Learning. Journal of the Learning Sciences. 3(3), pp. 227-264.

[Kaye 1991]   Kaye, A. (1991). Computer Networking in distance education: Multiple uses, many models. In A. Fjuk
       and A.E. Jenssen, eds. Proceedings of the Nordic Electronic Networking Conference, Oslo, Norway: NKS, pp.
       43-51.

[Mason 1989]   Mason, R. (1989). An evaluation of CoSy on an Open University course. In Mason, R. & Kaye, K., eds.
       Mindweave: Communication, Computers and Distance Education. Oxford: Pergamon Press.

[Scardamalia and Bereiter 1993] Scardamalia, M. & Bereiter, C. (1993). Technologies for knowledge-building
       discourse. Communications of the ACM, 36(5), pp. 37-41.

[Sharan 1980]   Sharan, S. (1980). Cooperative learning in small groups: Recent methods and effects on achievement,
       attitudes, and ethnic relations. Review of Educational Research, 50 (2), pp. 241-71.

[Slavin 1980] Slavin, R.E. (1980). Cooperative learning. Review of Educational Research, 50 (2), pp. 315-42.

[Smith 1988]  Smith, R. C. (1988). Teaching special relativity through a computer conference. American Journal of
       Physics, 56(2), pp. 142-147.

[Stodolsky 1984] Stodolsky, S.S. (1984). Frameworks for studying instructional processes in peer work-groups. In
       P.L. Peterson, L.C. Wilkinson, & M. Hallinan (Eds.), The social context of education. New York: Academic
       Press, pp. 107-24.

[Webb 1982]   Webb, N. (1982). Group composition, group interaction, and achievement in cooperative small groups.
       International Journal of Educational Psychology, 74(4), pp. 475-84.
[Webb 1989]   Webb, N. (1989). Peer interaction and learning in small groups. International Journal of Educational
       Research, 13(1), pp. 21-29.

[Winkelmans 1988]  Winkelmans, T. (1988). Educational computer conferencing: An application of analysis
       methodologies to a structured small group activity. Unpublished MA Thesis, University of Toronto.

Acknowledgements

We gratefully acknowledge the support of the TeleLeaming-Network of Centres of Excellence (TL-NCE), the Canadian Network for
the Advancement of Research, Industry and Education (CANARIE), Human Resources Development Canada, the British Columbia
Skills Now Innovation Fund, and the Centre for Distance Education at Simon Fraser University.

                                                                                                                    127
