                                  Three     Electronic         Networks:
           Three     Kinds       of   Computer-Mediated                Communication

                     Nancy G. Ishihara, TERC             nancy_ishihara@terc.edu
                    Deborah Muscella, TERC            deborah_muscella@terc.edu
                   Katherine Frome Paget, TERC            katherine_paget@terc.edu
                       Joseph Walters, TERC           joseph_ walters@terc.edu

       Abstract:   School restructuring   calls for   change   without tools.    This  paper
       describes   innovative  tools  for  professional    development    that  use  computer
       networking   to  establish  communities     of  teacher  scholars.  The   networks  reviewed
       include  the ATLAS     Communities   network,     Kids Network,  and    LabNet. The    paper
       describes  how  these  networks    operate, in    what  ways they  deploy    different kinds  of
       communication    devices,  and  what  the   researchers   have  learned   about teacher
       change   in  these  settings.

      Professional development for teachers is at a crossroads.           In the current calls for school
restructuring, we have given teachers mandates without tools.          One of the important missing
links is a correspondence between existing designs for professional development and what
teachers now need so they can deepen their subject-matter knowledge, experiment with
pedagogy, alter the assessment practices-all changes central to reform efforts (Little, 1993).
Telecommunications offers new possibilities for teachers to expand the horizons of their
knowledge and practice.    The question, however,         remains,  How do we use this medium to
offer teachers the same cutting-edge design in professional development as that advocated by
calls for school reform?
There is no question that teaching is an isolated and isolating profession. No profession can be
transformed without the concerted effort of the professionals who examine their practice, create
new visions, and invoke changes in practice.       Such collective    vision, however, can occur only
when teachers have meaningful and useful venues for substantive dialogue and the time to
engage in  such dialogue.  Isolation as a defining dimension of the       profession   points  to both the
promise and potential challenges we face in using telecommunications effectively.
Computer mediated communication (CMC) has the potential to alter the isolated conditions of
teaching and provide teachers with colleagues-both within and beyond the confines of their
school district-with whom they can share the experiences of their own practice and their
students' learning. Because teachers work in isolation, however, they often lack the
experiences, skills, and frame of reference to come together and share the intimate work they
pursue in their classrooms.   Thus, CMC will not assist in transforming the teaching profession
unless we understand how teachers use the medium.
During the past several years we have watched how teachers develop electronic communities of
practice. Our research with three different electronic networks indicates some factors that allow
CMC  to   supersede the status quo of teaching.       It also suggests the ways in which existing
norms of the profession hamper the development of electronic networks for professional
development.   What   we have discovered through our analysis of network conversations is that

                                                                                                           143
there are many variations in how networks are used. Specifically, our research findings
suggest:

   There are many different ways that teachers use electronic networks, including resource
     exchange, collaborative projects, courses, seminars, discussions of hot topics, data
     exchange, and structured and facilitated conversations.
  텶n as much as the articulated intentions and purposes of networks differ, so do the ways
     that teachers use them.

   Network discourse can be facilitated in many different ways, but facilitators or moderators
     are key in pursuing new ideas about teaching.

   Cultural norms and rules-both explicit and implicit-evolve through CMC.
     Understanding how these norms and rules govern network discourse is essential to
     understand how learning occurs through CMC.
   Grounding discourse in practice is key if substantive conversations are to occur that
     influence teachers' knowledge and practice.
To illustrate both the findings and the questions that have arisen during the course of our
research, we present three cases of electronic communities developed for distinctly different
purposes. Through these cases, we show how these purposes led to different kinds of
discourse and self-designed communities. Following these cases, we present our assessment
of the current status of networks for professional development and the directions we consider
important for future research.
During the past eight years, we have developed and studied electronic networks for teachers'
professional development.  Three of these illustrate how the initial purposes and designs of a
network generate particular norms and rules that guide how teachers use these networks.     The
intentions and uses of each of these networks differ dramatically. The Collaborative
Assessment Conference focuses the conversation on specific pieces of student work.
KidsNetwork relies on the sharing of data from science projects with a common time-table and
curriculum activities. Resource exchange, whereby teachers exchange ideas about teaching
projects is by far the most typical way that teachers use LabNet, although there are many
examples of seminars on LabNet.

On the Collaborative Assessment Conference, we found that conversational rules-agreed
upon by all participants-and the formation of a small private group were essential if teachers
were to engage in seminar discussions about student work. KidsNetwork, designed for the
sharing of data among classes working on the same collaborative science projects, lured
teachers into conversations about their practice through conversations their students had on the
network.  LabNet demonstrates how a network with specific intentions, left unstructured, can
lead to interesting and provocative conversations that do not necessarily influence discipline
knowledge or practice.  What follows are brief cases that highlight some of the unanticipated
things that happened on each network that we believe provide insights into the conditions under
which CMC can support innovative designs for professional development.

Case One:   The  Collaborative     Assessment    Conference
The Collaborative Assessment Conference (CAC) is CMC at its most structured with teachers
using a carefully-facilitated forum to discuss student work for portfolio assessment. The CAC
format has been used successfully in face-to-face meetings and in a recent experiment at Project

144
Zero the same conversational structure was implemented using telecommunications. This case
reports the structure of the conversation, summarizes the lessons learned, and suggests that
conversations of this sort can be used to enhance the diagnostic skill of teachers.
In our research at Project Zero on effective practices with portfolio assessment, we found that
an important element of assessment was the thoughtful review of student work.       Our research
showed that the skills necessary for a careful reading and analyzing of portfolio materials are
even more important than developing scoring rubrics.    However, we also found that teachers
are not typically skilled in this careful reading; when asked to review student portfolios in small
groups, their natural tendency is to judge the work, to give it a grade, or to compare it to the
work of other students. Careful reading, in contrast, must postpone such judgments in service
of careful observation with probing questions.
To address this issue, we developed a structured conversation format called the Collaborative
Assessment Conference in which teachers in small groups review a single piece of student
work. One teacher selects a piece of work for review; a second teacher facilitates the
discussion; three other teachers, who do not work directly with the student, review that work.
At the beginning of the conversation, everyone carefully examines the piece, taking as much
time as they need. Next, the three reviewers offer their comments: they describe exactly what
they see; they select one thing they find most striking; and they develop questions the piece
raises for them. Then the presenting teacher is allowed to comment-for the first time
offering additional information about the student and the piece and reacting to the comments of
the reviewers. Finally, the facilitator asks all participants to suggest next steps for the student
or ideas about how to respond to the work, drawing the conference to a close.
Recently, we conducted an experiment in order to discover whether telecommunications could
simulate the face-to-face meeting using the FirstClass bulletin board system. Teachers from
three states who had never met participated and a researcher at Project Zero served as the
facilitator. A high school teacher volunteered to present a piece of student work. She selected a
biography assignment in which her students developed a two-page sketch of a family member
and posted the piece in the "CAC" folder on the bulletin board. The three reviewing teachers
read the piece and posted their responses in the same folder. Following the CAC format, they
talked about what they noticed, what was most remarkable, and questions the piece raised for
them. Then the presenting teacher wrote her reactions.
We learned two lessons from this first electronic conversation. Because all the messages were
posted publicly, other members of CAC followed the conversation and several even began to
participate. Second, the electronic conversations were more slowly paced than we had
expected. The entire process took nearly a month, even though the participants were diligent in
reading and responding to one another.  This slowness of response was often interpreted by
the participants as a lack of interest by others. At worst, they saw it as a subtle form of
criticism. Several teachers admitted privately that they felt that if their ideas had been more
interesting, others would have responded more promptly.
We addressed the teachers' concerns during a second month-long e-CAC session.        First,  to
give the conversation a sense of privacy, we used the private e-mail feature of the network,
addressing messages to the participants rather than to a public folder. Second, the facilitator
proposed a quick-response rule-all participants pledged to log onto the system once a day and
to respond immediately to all messages. If they did not have time to write a detailed answer,
they would wrote a short acknowledgment   and provide more detail later.   These adjustments
gave the second CAC   more of a feeling of a small group discussion; thus,  teachers and
facilitators thought the second e-CAC was generally thought to have been more successful.

                                                                                                     145
From this experience, we learned that the CAC format can indeed be implemented with
telecommunications, but like the face-to-face version it requires careful facilitation of the rules
of conversation. Also, those rules must be adjusted somewhat to accommodate the particular
requirements of the electronic mail system. Finally, in both CAC experiments, the teachers
engaged in rich and rewarding discussions about student work, bringing their often isolated
classroom practice into a collaborative setting. They became more adept at making thoughtful
reviews of their students' work. By drawing teachers together in a conversation about a
sensitive and substantive issue like classroom assessment, the electronic CAC serves as an
important demonstration of professional development at a distance.

Case Two:     KidsNetwork:     A Data   Exchange  Network
The NGS KidsNetwork is an activity-based network that connects students, classes and
teachers in a collaborative learning and teaching environment. Students use the network to
share data from common experiments; they debate topics of social concern that are related to
these experiments;  and they exchange ideas for further research projects. Although the
exchange of data is carefully timed, the conversations are more loosely structured than the
CAC. This case describes several of those conversations, in which students debate the
interpretation of data and teachers share pedagogical experiences. Although the teacher
conversations become the central focus for this report, the expectations for the data exchange
network in general, and the student exchange in particular provide the basic scaffolding
material.
Explicit expectations concerning form and content of class data exchanges are articulated in the
NGS KidsNetwork Teachers' Manual, but individual students and teachers communicate with
each other. We have observed two characteristics of the Data Exchange Network that appear to
foster important communication between individuals on the network.
A clear   focus  gives rise  to the need  for clarification    which has     important
intellectual  benefits for   students.  Using  CMC   to resolve     their    dilemmas    with
one another    gives  teachers  new  insights into how  students     grapple     with
conceptual    dilemmas.
Since the KidsNetwork curriculum requires precise and accurate data for its implementation,
sharing attitudinal or belief data that is typical but doesn't represent individual differences
serves to prompt individual participation. As part of a field test of the NGS Kids Network unit,
How Does Your Body Get the Oxygen It Needs?, classes are asked to share the results of a
vote taken in their classroom about whether smoking should be banned in public places. When
one class emerges as an outlier-they alone vote NOT to ban-individual students of the
majority or minority opinion in that class express their reasoning on the network and students
from other classes respond. Jennifer wrote that she disagreed with the majority of her class
and said "it was a scary thought to find out that I get 2 cigarettes without even smoking." And
Danielle responded that she agreed with the majority of her class and said "If someone in a mall
is smoking and you don't want to smell or breathe the air, you could just walk around that
particular person."
The questioning of anomalous data revealed students as scientists--debating data with peers.
A high mean vital capacity reported by another class prompted Brian to write that his class
discussed the outlier and assumed it wasn't caused by inaccurate information given the care
with which his own class took their information. So they asked the school in Madison,
Wisconsin to explain. The class from Madison replied that they realized they were an outlier,
rechecked their calculations and found their numbers were an order of magnitude off because

146
"What goofed us up was all the tick stuff. We used 1000 ml. beakers and really didn't need the
ticks."
These focused debates between students and their peers in other classes provide teachers with
an important window on student understanding
Groundedness     in the curriculum     and  classroom  context        gives rise to
intellectual  musings  about  teaching   and  learning among           the teachers.
As the Data Exchange Network is grounded heavily in the classroom context, discussion of
implementation issues is the explicit expectation. Such implementation sharing leads to
discussions on a different level of analysis. During a single week five teachers engaged in a
conversation which evolved from "whether to teach glycolysis" to "what our job as science
teachers is". Grounding the exchange in science content with which all participants were
currently grappling gave them a chance to introduce elements of their own practice as they
reflected upon the problem.
Tom's class had just completed an activity in the curriculum designed to further kids'
understanding of the carbon dioxide/oxygen exchange when he posted this message on the
forum:
   I am curious as to how anyone deals with the common misconception among students that
   the oxygen that they breathe in comes back out as carbon dioxide, when in fact the oxygen
   they inhale is converted to water during glycolosis. The carbon dioxide is released from
   the break-up of glucose.
Virginia turns the conversation into a more substantive one about depth of science
understanding by asking "what do we teach at what time to what depth???" leading Bob to
frame the dilemma as "The problem with teaching science is that there is too much out there, all
of it is important and there isn't enough time to teach it all".
Gary picks up this theme without reference to the original glycolysis question by suggesting
that "Perhaps our job isn't as much to solely instruct but to foster that innate curiosity to
encourage them to raise questions, and show them that wondering should be as highly valued
as knowing".
It is our hunch that the tension between the requisite precision, accuracy and fixed time-table of
expectations for this data exchange network and the groundedness of the curriculum context
provides the correct mix and balance for growing discussions about teaching and learning.
One of the other things we observed was how the interest among students sparked interesting
conversations among the teachers. It was almost as if the teachers had the chance     to look over
their students' shoulders as they worked together to sort out their ideas. Watching their
students solve problems through CMC allowed teachers-perhaps for the first time,-to step
out of their roles as guide, lecturers, and facilitators and merely observe learning. We suspect
that the "freeing-up" that CMC affords teachers could enhance their diagnostic skills in similar
ways to the CAC approach.

Case Three:     The LabNet   Network
LabNet was developed to promote project-based science teaching by creating a forum so that
teachers could reflect on the teaching and learning that occurred as students worked on projects
(Roupp, Gal, Pfister, and Gal, 1992). As the modus operandi for developing LabNet, the

                                                                                                   147
staff encouraged and supported teachers in defining the network for themselves. Thus, the
rules and norms of the network evolved through its use by middle and high school science
teachers (Jacobs and DiMauro, 1994). This case describes the rules and norms of one
particular genre that emerged, the "hot topic," or discussion about a controversial issue. The
case concludes that conversations about hot topics follow a different set of rules but
participating in these conversations may enable teachers to take risks in entering discourse
about pedagogy.

A random sample of over 10,000 archived messages indicates that 89% of the LabNet
messages were of the "how-to" variety. The other 11% were interesting experiments in creating
forums that promoted discourse about teaching projects, knowledge, philosophy and methods
of science (Muscella and Kopicko, 1995). The prevalent number of folders focused on craft
knowledge, which is a typical response to experimenting with new pedagogy because teachers
were seeking practical knowledge about teaching science (Fullan, 1991; Hall and Hord, 1987).
Other LabNet folders were an attempt to grapple with the issues of teaching science in an
innovative way. The problem was that none of LabNet conversations were grounded in a
common practice or a common task as the    CAC or KidsNetwork conversations had been.         As
a result, the conversations about craft were brief and to-the-point and the conversations about
philosophy, knowledge, and methods of science began and remained ungrounded in practice;
hence, the conversations lacked purpose and focus.   At the same time, because a hot topic like
Creationism considered particular philosophical or science issues, the discourse was forceful,
opinionated, and sometimes vitriolic. Although few in number, these folders shared two
characteristics which we believe important in supporting teachers to experiment in their
practice. We describe these excerpts from the Creationism conversation.
Few messages    argued   from  extant   research     and when  either     side brought     up
legitimate questions   that might     have grounded     the conversation     in the    theory   of
science, the  questions  w ere ignored     and never     addressed     in he   conversation.
In early December, Gary, who acknowledged his belief in creationist science, tells why he has
difficulty with the theory of evolution. He writes:

   ....I have never been satisfied by any explanations...about the missing transition forms
   between species from the fossil record. This was a problem for Darwin, too, and he
   hoped that they would surface in the years following his proposal for natural selection as a
   driving force for trends towards complexity. To my knowledge the few transition forms
  that are...offered as examples are severely debated between the evolutionists themselves...

Two messages later in the folder, Ted, a physicist who supports the theory of evolution, asks
the biologists in the folder to address some of the issues that Gary has raised. In short, Ted
asks others to address issues Gary raises with scientific information.

  I believe you (Gary) raise some very interesting questions about the lack of confidence
  many scientists have in biological evolution theories. I regret that I don't have much of a
  biology background to refute each issue raised...Perhaps some biologist will enlighten the
  rest of us non-biological scientists with and issue-by-issue argument against your
  objections.

Craig posts some quotes from Stephen Jay Gould, a noted Harvard evolutionary biologist.
Yet, the quotes he uses are Gould at his most philosophical and he does not quote Gould's
simple prose that explains evolution eloquently. No others address either Gary's issues on
Ted's request for explanations. Gary's proposition about evolutionary theory and Ted's
entreaty for a debate grounded in theory remain unheeded in the folder.

148
There   was  conflict  between    the  norms   by which     LabNet   usually   operated     and
responses   used    during hot    topic  conversations.
One of the overarching and explicit rules that guided LabNet was supporting participants, that
is, teacher moderators and most teachers avoided disagreement that would make others feel
uncomfortable.  Thus, when a teacher raised a point of disagreement during a seminar
discussion about science or pedagogy, the message was typically: 1) ignored, 2) supported
indirectly, or 3) addressed obliquely by raising philosophical questions to circumvent overt
disagreement (Muscella and DiMauro, 1995; Muscella and Kopicko, 1995).
In the Creationism folder, however, it was difficult to maintain the norm of supporting
participants. The following messages from Andrew and Colleen underscore how teachers'
sensibilities about science superseded this particular LabNet norm.  Andrew writes first and
Colleen follows. Colleen writes:
   Creationism is not  a science. It offers no rational explanation for the natural wonder  of the
   world.   Instead it relies on an appeal to faith....Nor will I accept the term science as part of
   its definition, for by its nature, it has shown itself to reject limitations that science sets for
   itself.
Craig responds with a message intellectually sympathetic to Colleen's.
   Science is a discipline, not a religion. We deal in facts and observation, hypotheses    and
   theories, and paradigms, which we are continually evolving to accommodate new
   evidence.  It is a dynamic process.  We are constantly engaged in trying to poke holes in
   the popular theories of the day in an effort to arrive at a better approximation of why
   things are the way they are.....
Although the Creationism folder seems an exaggeration of day seminar discussions on LabNet,
because the teaching of evolution theory has been controversial, both historically and currently,
teachers have strong opinions about it. Thus, the folders' emotional character  and  level of
participation were more accelerated than other conversations. We suspect that both the hot
topics and seminar discussions were attempts to ground conversations in the knowledge and
pedagogy of teaching   projects. Perhaps if the staff or moderators had suggested   reading a
Stephen Jay Gould chapter and then discussing evolution, the folder might have allowed
teachers to deepen  their own knowledge of science. Or maybe, if teachers had considered how
to use empirical science in presenting evolution theory to their students who believe in
creationist science, the conversation would have become grounded in practice. We remain
convinced that the hot topic platform offers a way to expand teachers' ability to engage in
intellectual debate about pedagogy and science.

Conclusions   and     Questions   to Pursue
Can we bring about a renaissance in designs for professional development? If so, what would
such designs look like when enacted?    Recently, educators and researchers have proposed new
ways to pursue professional development for teachers (Lieberman, 1995; Little, 1993; Little
and McLaughlin, 1992). Little (1993) proposes the conditions and parameters for such a
vision. She imagines that any professional development endeavor will offer teachers
"meaningful intellectual, social and emotional engagement with ideas, with materials, and with
colleagues both in and out of teaching (p. 138)." She also argues, among other things, that
professional development must take "explicit account of the contexts of teaching and the
experience of teachers (p. 138)."

                                                                                                       149
Electronic  networks  offer one venue for both of these propositions,        but as their CMC
characteristics vary so do their functions and respective strengths.        One ofthe important
challenges we faced in these three networks was finding ways for teachers to share their
classroom and schoolcontext electronically, crucial if electronic discourse is to impact practice.
How can we use the medium to help teachers provide rich descriptions of the teaching and
learning that takes place in their classrooms? What other sorts of technologies would best
provide the needed "texture"    to what might be seen as a bare-bones        verbal medium?   Perhaps
something as simple as a few photos of students working on projects, scanned into an
electronic folder, would spark a more detailed discussion about what and how students learn.
Our research also suggests that the cultural norms of teaching filter into the CMC world.              And,
the medium itself gives rise to norms that are both explicit and implicit.       From our work we
suspect that cultural rules and norms on networks greatly influence the kind of professional
development   activities that become possible      electronically. Without knowing more about how
the interactions between norms and network participation, it will be difficult to exploit CMC to
its fullest potential for teachers.
Finally, we need to explore how to reap the benefits of the network and help teachers to bring
the knowledge back home to their schools.          There is the danger that teachers will develop
cyberspace communities and yet continue to work behind closed doors, perpetuating the
profession's  isolation. If CMC is to become a useful tool for professional development, then
we must give careful consideration to the relationship between electronic and school
communities.   We argue that the careful study of district-wide reform efforts linked        to CMC
professional development is essential if electronic networks are to support school restructuring.

References
DiMauro, V. & Gal, S.  (1993).  Socio-technical factors of telecommunications for promoting reflective
  dialogue. National Association of Research on Science Teaching, Annual Meeting, Atlanta, GA.
Fullan, M. (1991). The new meaning of educational change. New York: Teachers College Press.
Jacobs, G. & DiMauro, V., (1994).   LabNet Survey 1994. Working Paper, TERC: Cambridge, MA.
Hall, G. and Hord, S. (1987) Change in Schools: Facilitating the Process. Albany: The State University of New
  York Press.
Lieberman, A. ( 1995) Practices that support teacher development.  Phi Delta Kappan, Vol 76, #8, pp 591-6,
  April.
Little, J. W. (1993). Teachers' Professional Development in a Climate of Educational Reform, Educational
  Evaluation and Policy Analysis, vol. 15, No. 2, 129-151.
McLaughlin, M. W. (1990). The Rand Change Agent Study: Macro perspectives and Micro realities.
  Educational Researcher. 19, 11-16.
McLaughlin, M. W. and Little, J. W. (Eds.) (1993). Teachers Work:  Individual, colleagues, and contexts. New
  York, Teachers College Press.
Muscella, D. and DiMauro, V. M. (1995). Talking about Science: The case of an electronic conversation.
  Journal of Technology and Teacher Education.
Muscella, D. and Kopicko, R. (1995). Electronic Networks: Problems or Promises.   Paper presented at the
  annual meeting of the American Educational Research Association, San Francisco.
Ruopp, R., Gal, S., Drayton, B., & Pfister, M. (Eds.)., (1993). LabNet: Towards a community of practice.
  Lawrence Erlbaum: New York.

150
