MEANINGFUL               CONTEXTS             FOR    MATHEMATICAL                     LEARNING:
           THE POTENTIAL OF GAME MAKING ACTIVITIES

                        Yasmin   B.     Kafai  &   Cynthia    Carter    Ching
                               University of California, Los Angeles
                      Graduate School of Education & Information Studies
                                2331 Moore Hall, Mailbox 951521
                                Los Angeles, CA 90095-1521 USA
                                        kafai@gse.ucla.edu
                                          cching@ucla.edu

            Abstract:    There  is    a need     for educational     researchers   to   find
            connections between formal education and the many other activities and
            contexts  which  inhabit  the "real  world"    of children.  While    there has
            been some research on the potential of game playing for learning, the
            benefits of game making activities have not been examined. In this paper
            we present the analysis of a design session in which four elementary
            school-students  designed   computer     games    to teach  fractions  to other
            students. We analyzed the design interactions in a microgenetic fashion
            to identify  the progression      of students'    mathematical   thinking.    In
            addition, we paid close attention to the contribution of students' social
            interactions to the increasing sophistication of fraction representations in
            the game context. We argue in this paper that not only is the context of
            game-making itself relevant to children's "real world," but that it also
            provides opportunities for children to explore mathematical ideas within
            many   other "real  world"   scenes   and  situations    as they design     their
            games.

Introduction
What is learning for "the real world?" One possible answer to this question has been to identify
authentic learning contexts and activities    (Lave, 1988;  Saxe,    1988).  Researchers    have    studied
everyday activities that involve mathematical     practices   (such  as cooking,   shoping,   and   candy
selling) with the intention to connect learning inside and outside of school (Resnick, 1987).
While these efforts, among others, have led to revisions of the mathematics curriculum (NCTM
standards, 1989), there is a need to find connections into the many activities and contexts which
inhabit the "real" world    of children   and  are   often  noticeably  segregated    from    their formal
education.  This  approach   is often described   as  building   on  students' "informal      knowledge"
(Mack, 1993).
        One starting point to  look for such connections is      to  examine   children's   activities and
interests and their potential for learning. Game playing has always been a central activity in
children's  lives and many   researchers  have   emphasized      the benefit of   games   for  children's
intellectual, social, and emotional development (e.g.,        Broner, Jolly  &    Sylva,  1976;     Piaget,
1962;   Sutton-Smith, 1986).   Game     playing  activities have  found   a  place in   the   mathematics
curriculum,  as   indicated  by the     large number   of     instructional  games    found   in    teacher
publications (Bright, 1985).    Their   educational  relevance,   however,    has  not  been   examined
extensively  (Ainley, 1991).    Only  now     have   some   researchers   started  to   study  children's
learning of mathematical concepts and operations in game playing contexts (Saxe & Bermudez,
1996).

164
        A different starting point to investigate the potential of games for learning is to examine
the benefits   of  game   making     activities. A   first study    looked   at    children's  design   and
implementation of fraction computer games as a way to further their mathematical learning
(Kafai, 1995). In the following study, we examine a design session in which a team of four
elementary-school students designed computer games to teach fractions to other students. In
contrast to previous research situated in the same framework, here the children only created
games on paper and in discussions but did not proceed to implement them on the computer. We
analyzed the design interactions in a microgenetic fashion (Siegler & Crowley, 1991) to identify
change  in  students'    mathematical    thinking.   In  addition,  we      paid   close attention   to the
contribution   of  students'    social  interactions to    the  increasing   sophistication    of  fraction
representations in the game context (Granott, 1993). We discuss the results of this analysis by
re-examing the meaning of authentic, "real world", contexts to promote mathematical thinking.
Furthermore,   we    look  at  the pedagogical constraints      for implementing      such    game   design
activities for learning.

Theoretical    Background
Using computer game design as a context for students' investigations of fractions is based on
the premise that video games are a significant part of     children's   culture (e.g.,   Greenfield, 1984;
Kinder, 1991; Provenzo, 1991). Instead of using the activity of game playing to learn about
fractions (as  it is done  in   most educational   games   in  mathematics),     this study   proposed  the
activity of game making for learning fractions. Developing a computer game to teach fractions to
others  promotes     the activity  of   designing   fraction   representations     (Kafai,  1995).   Many
researchers  have    identified  the importance   of students'     use   of multiple   representations   in
developing more      sophisticated understandings    of  fractions  and  rational  numbers    (Bell, 1993;
Lesh, Landau & Hamilton, 1983; Kaput, 1991; Streetand, 1991; Tierney, 1987).
        This approach draws most notably on Harel's study (1991) in which she asked a class
of fourth-grade students to design instructional software in Logo to teach fractions to younger
students in a four month long intervention. The students in Harel's project chose and designed
their own representations according to what they thought were the most important and difficult
aspects of fractions to learn. Harel proved that the process of constructing, programming, and
explaining  of representations     facilitated students'   significantly    better understanding     of the
representational   structure    of fractions.  However,      in comparing        the  quality  of  fraction
representations between Harel's instructional designers and those of the game designers, Kafai
(1996) found that the game designers did not develop as sophisticated representations due to
their concentration on game design. Saxe (1992) reported that some strategy choices in game
playing also hindered students' later mathematical development.
        A central question of this study was whether game making could become a more fruitful
context for  exploring   multiple   fraction representations,   if  one  limits  the  investigations to the
game   design phase   without   considering    potential software   implementation     issues. In  creating
computer games       which are     both fun  and  educational,  children    can    become   designers   and
teachers. In this process, they then draw on their "real world" experiences as game players and
school  learners.  We    argue  in this paper  that  not only   is  the  context   of game-making     itself
relevant to children's "real world", but that it also provides opportunities for children to explore
mathematical ideas within many other "real world" scenes and situations as they design their
games.

Learning Context and Methods
The present study was conducted as part of an effort to develop a prototype for educational
interactive television   in elementary school    mathematics    (Miller, 1994).    The   development    plan
forsaw  the   involvement     of   young students    as  game   design    consultants    for   professional

                                                                                                          165
designers,   programmers,    and  content   specialists. The  game    design  sessions were    conducted
with  a fifth grade  class  of a  suburban   elemantary   school     with an  ethnically mixed    student
population.   Before beginning    the  game  design   discussions,    students were   asked to  generate
ideas for  computer    games   to teach fractions  as    part of   their homework.    Worksheets    were
provided that asked students to describe their game ideas, game characters, and fraction ideas.
The class of 32 students was divided by the teacher into eight teams of four students each.
Three groups were of single gender (two all-girls teams, one all-boys team), and the rest were
mixed gender teams. The design sessions took place           on three consecutive days,    for one  hour
each. The sessions were conducted in the after-school room, around a table with five chairs.
Large pieces of butcher paper were placed on the table for students to draw on and on the board
for the researcher to note students'      ideas.  All the    sessions    were video   taped by   another
researcher for later transcription. The present analysis focuses on the first design sesssion of
one design team, four girls, that was conducted by the first author.

Results

We analyzed the fraction game development over the whole 50-minute session by looking at the
different game scenes. Overall, the four girls developed and discussed 24 different fraction
game scenes during     their first design session.  In   order  to document change     in  the students'
thinking about fractions, (1) we analyzed and classified the games according to integration of
fraction content and (2) we looked at the interactions between the students and their contribution
to the nature of the fraction representations.

Fraction Content Integration in Game Idea
One way   to  document the increasing sophistication of students'        thinking  about fractions  is to
examine the integration of fractions into the game context (Kafai,            1995).  We  defined   three
categories  of  fraction integration in the  game  scenes:    extrinsic,  intrinsic, and  constructivist.
Extrinsic integration of fractions describes the type of games the girls initially had in mind, in
which   the game  centers   mostly  around   arcade-style    action, and  fraction questions   are asked
occasionally but are unrelated to the game's theme or objective. For example, Melanie described
a maze game in which different things were chasing the player and in case one bumped into
them, the player had to answer a question. Emily came up with the idea of a race track game in
which the player had to answer questions in order to progress through the game.
        Instrinsic integration describes the fraction scenes shown in the microanalysis--dynamic
scenes where fractions are an inherent part of the scenery and game objective. One of the scenes
which   will  be analyzed   in more  detail in the following     section  described  a beach   in  which
various fractions   of  people  (e.g.,  ratio) are in    and  out of  the water.   Another  idea   was  a
landscape scene with trees and animals in which the user had to identify all the fractions hidden
in the picture.
        Finally, constructivist   game  ideas   allow    the  user to actively create  his  or her  own
fractions from what is provided. For example, the player could create his or her own fraction by
coloring  in  different pieces   of a  given   animal.   Thus,   rather  than constantly  quizzing,    the
constructivist  integration  allows the user   to  formulate   his   or  her  own  questions.  Both    the
intrinsic and constructivist fraction games represented a sophisticated departure from the drill
and-practice routine of traditional education and the non-mathematical focus of most computer
games.
        The importance of this classification becomes clear if one considers to what extent one
particular form of content integration provides opportunities for students' thinking about the
nature of fractions, different representations, and relations to other rational number concepts. It
is a strength and a weakness of extrinsic integration that domains of knowledge become almost
interchangeable. It is a strength because the integration is relatively easy; when answering a

166
question correctly is what allows the next move in a game, the question can be on any topic. But
this is also a weakness, because it causes the designer to loose the incentive to think deeply
about the particular piece of   knowledge.     As other   researchers noted  (e.g.,  Harel, 1991),  the
flexibility in moving between different representational forms is a sign of better understanding
of fractions.
      We      found   that as  the   SO-minute session  progressed,   the   girls' ideas   became  more
focused   on   intrinsic   and constructivist  integration.   Extrinsic integration     raised its head
occasionally later in the session when a new game or story-line idea was introduced, but when
the girls began    to revise   those  ideas to include  fractions, they   were     usually instrinsically
integrated. Related to this development in content integration is the observation that the type of
representations   (e.g., generic   fraction question, fraction as  area,    part of  set)  became  more
sophisticated  as  well.   In  fact, the two  developments    seemed   to   be inseparable.    The more
intrinsic the integration of fractions in a particular game idea or scene, the more sophisticated
types of fractional representations were being used to describe them.

In-depth Analysis of one Game Idea
An  in-depth   analysis    of discourse  segments   during  the game-making        session  provides  a
window into the types of fractional understandings children developed in this activity. The 10-
minute segment of discussion we chose to analyze shows two of the girls, Melanie and Rachel,
expanding and improving on an original idea brought in by Caren from her homework sheet.
Caren's idea involved the user picking topics about which to answer fraction questions. Her
specific example involved a room full of Power RangersTM; however, her question about this
scene was grounded in a whole number context--asking "how many?"
      Although Caren's idea was not very developed in terms of fractional understanding, it
provided  a   very useful  context   and scene idea   for the other   girls to   use in exploring  how
fractions can be used to describe "real" situations. Melanie built on Caren's idea by suggesting a
scene with racoons.      She described an area with a group of different colored racoons. One
question was about what fraction of the racoons were colored the same. Another question asked
what fraction of one racoon's body was colored black. The creation of this scene represented a
change in fraction investigations, in that Melanie was able to simultaneously explore fractions as
parts of sets and as area, since a single racoon could be a part of a larger group, or it could be
the whole which is divided into smaller body parts.

            \

                                                                                        I

Figure 1: Dynamic fraction representation--Rachel's beach scene

                                                                                                     167
       A particularly interesting development occured in Rachel's game scene when she built
on  Caren's        idea  after Melanie.      Rachel   created        a dynamic,        animated       scene   at       the beach  with
people moving in and out of the water (see Figure 1 ). During the animation the user would be
asked a question about what fraction of people were on land or in the water. We hypothesize
that the  context        of creating       a computer         game     contributed          to    the development           of such a
representation, since most computer games require animation. These animated scenes afford a
more  flexible       view   of how        fractions can       describe         "real" situations,     in  which         the parts  and
wholes are not fixed in time and space.
       It   is       important  to       situate this        development          of  fractions       understanding         within  an
interactional context. Specifically, we were looking at the girls' increasing flexibility in creating
rational number representations and how that development is mediated by context and social
interaction (see Figure 2).              The first important issue             to note is that     in the span         of  10 minutes,
multiple ways of dealing with the same concept were explored.                                The presence of others           working
on the same creative problem provided each girl with multiple perspectives on how to represent
fractions--in this case, fractions as parts of sets being used to describe dynamic scenes.
          Quality of
          representation

                                                                                         Melanie describes the beach
            rationalnumberfocus                  ·Melanie's racoons                   with ·rational numbers

           · wholenumber       ·                                               ·
             focus            Caren's                                  Rachel's beach scene
                         ... Power Ranger game
             Time                   1:01                1:06              1:07               1:08                 1:10

Figure 2: Tracking of rational number flexibility
       The second important conclusion to convey about this segment is that not only was the
initial idea explored in multiple ways, but it was also improved upon. Development in flexibility
in this situation was dependent on interaction and collaboration. We can see how Caren's initial
Power  RangerTM          representation,       which  was      based    on        a whole    number    concept,         was   extended
through Melanie's and Rachel's further idea developments of the racoon scene and the beach
scene. In addition, we see how within a brief time period, the fraction scene not only was
transformed into different ideas but also increased in its sophistication as each girl contributed.
This phenomena could be interpreted as a kind of distributed cognition or co-construction of
knowledge (Granott, 1993), which has been documented in other studies of educational game
playing and classroom learning (Saxe, 1992; Pea, 1994).

Discussion
As the analyses of the game ideas indicate, this first design session proved to be a productive
context for students to generate, analyze and extend their fraction representations. We found
evidence of students' increasing sophistication in the nature of fraction integration into their

168
games, the type of fraction representations, and in students' interactions. These results warrant
further discussion of the potential of the game context and its pedagogical constraints.
     We started the study with the premise that contexts for learning mathematics not only
need to relate to authentic activities but also to children's culture. We identified games as a
significant part of children's lives in which they practice many important activities. Previous
research looked at identifying everyday situations and their potential for mathematical thinking
as a way to connect children's learning inside and outside of school and to help them transfer
knowledge and skills. Everyday situations such as shopping and candy selling provide relevant
contexts for mathematical practice.
     Game making activities also provide relevant situations for exploring and investigating
fractions: they allow personalization of the learning context (Harel & Papert, 1990). They allow
children to relate mathematical thinking to their own culture and personal interest. Within the
context of game design, children can chose to relate mathematics to things they find interesting
or likeable, whether it be cute animals, a day at the beach, Power RangersTM, or anything else.
Similar results have been observed by Harel (1991) and Kafai (1995) in their studies. In this
way, game design in education is connected to children's "real world" experiences of familiarity
with games (educational or otherwise). What we find here is that children link fractions to their
"internalized mental environment"   (see Harel & Papert,    1990,  p.23-24).  Game design also
opens up possibilities for connections between formal education and the contents of children's
fantasies and imaginations, which often encapsulate their "real world" better than other practice
linked definitions. In the design of their fraction games, children engaged their fantasies and
built relationships with other pockets of reality that went beyond traditional school mathematics.
     Furthermore, we saw how the game context itself promoted the development of a new
type of fractional representation. In Rachel's beach scene we saw the first example of a dynamic
fractional representation. The importance of animations in games initiated students' thinking of a
context to study fractions that is not considered in traditional school mathematics. If one sees the
linking of students' informal knowledge (Mack, 1993) and the flexibility in moving between
different representations  (Streefland, 1991  )  as   evidence for  sophisticated   mathematical
thinking, then the game context provided a supportive context to develop such skills.
     While this particular game design session proved to be very productive, it is necessary
to point out some potential constraints. As the result of a previous study indicated, it is difficult
for children to develop more flexibility and sophistication in their fraction games (Kafai, 1995).
Kafai discussed extensively how games designed with extrinsic fraction integration hindered
students' further exploration of fraction concepts. Similar observations were made by Saxe and
Bermudez (1995) in their analysis of children's playing of mathematical games. They found that
chosen goals and routines sometimes limited the complexities of mathematical environments
constructed by the children. But this can be said of most learning environments. The challenge,
then, is not only to create activities which can provide the springboard for children to build their
mathematical thinking but  also to  think about interaction modalities with   other students and
teachers that can enhance the mathematical complexity of their activities.
     The    first author's pedagogical  interventions during   the game     design  session were
minimal. They consisted mostly of prompts such as "let's look at this more" or focus questions
such as "How can you design a game without asking a question?" These interventions turned
out to be crucial in helping students to move from stereotypical and limiting conceptions of
game (i.e., ask a question, bump into something, go to the next question) to more constructivist
versions. In fact, many researchers have discussed the importance of a classroom discourse
culture for mathematical learning (Lampert, 1990; Pimm, 1987). These interventions allowed
students to look at fractions, and ultimately learning, in a new light: how can you create learning
situation without asking a question? Students learned to "turn the tables" by creating situations
or context for fraction representations where the player/learner would be the one identifying or
making fractions. In the end, this is probably one of the hallmarks of learning/mathematical
thinking, when one can decenter from the passive mode of recognition to active mode of making
mathematically meaningful situations.

                                                                                               169
Conclusion

Making games proved to be a meaningful and authentic context that allowed students to connect
their mathematical ideas with their informal knowledge. Most importantly, it allowed children to
relate mathematical thinking to their own culture and personal interest.

Acknowledgements
The data collection was sponsored by the Lightspan Partnership, Inc. as part of a DOE grant.
The Lightspan Partnersip, Inc. holds the copyright to all the quotes listed in the paper. We thank
the teacher and her fifth grade class for their participation in the study.

References
Bell, D. (1993). Halves, pieces, and twoths: Constructing and using representational contexts
       in teaching fractions. In T. Carpenter,  E. Fennema & T.A.      Romberg        (Eds.), Rational
       numbers: An   integration of research (pp.  157-196).   Hillsdale,     NJ: Lawrence    Erlbaum
       Associates.
Bruner, J. Jolly, A., & Sylva, K. (Eds.) (1976). Play: Its role in development and evolution.
       New York: Basic Books.
Granott,  N. (1993).  Patterns of   interaction in the co-construction      of  knowledge:    Separate
       minds,  joint effort, and  weird    creatures.  In  R.  Wozniak        & K.    Fischer  (Eds.),
       Development in context: Acting and thinking in specific environments. Hillsdale, NJ:
       Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Greenfield,  P.M.  (1984). Mind   and  media.    The   effects of television,       video  games,  and
       computers. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Harel, I. (1991 ). Children Designers. Norwood: Ablex.
Harel, I. & Papert, S. (1990). Software design as a learning environment. Interactive Leaming
       Environments, J(l), pp. 1-31.
Kafai, Y.B.  (1995).  Minds   in Play:   Computer   Game    Design  as      a Context   for Learning.
       Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Kafai (1996). A context for constructing mathematical representations: Making computer games
       for learning fractions. Unpublished manuscript. University of California, Los Angeles.
Kaput, J. (1991). Notations and Representations as Mediators of Constructive Processes. In
       E.v.  Glasersfdd (Ed.),   Radical  Constructivism   in  Mathematics      Education.    Dordrect:
       Kluwer.
Kinder, M. (1991). Playing with power. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Lampert, M. (1990). When the Problem is not the question and the solution is not the answer:
       Mathematical Knowing and Teaching. American Educational Research Journal, 27 (1),
       29-63.
Lave,  J. (1988).  Cognition  in practice: Mind,   mathematics,   and       culture in  everyday   life.
       Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Lesh, R., Landau, M., & Hamilton, E. (1983). Conceptual Models and Applied Mathematical
       Problem-Solving  Research.    In    R.   Lesh   &   M.   Landau        (Eds.),  Acquisition  of
       Mathematics Concepts and Processes. Orlando: Academic Press.
Mack,  N.K.   (1993). Learning   rational  numbers    with understanding:       The   case of informal
       knowledge. In T. Carpenter, E. Fennema & T.A. Romberg (Eds.), Rational numbers:
       An integration of research (pp. 85-106). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Miller, I. (1994). KidVid: Math games by kids for kids. A SBIR proposal to the Department of
       Energy by The Lightspan Partnership, Inc., Carlsbad, CA.

170
National Council of Teachers  in Mathematics  (1989 ). Curriculum and evaluation   standards for
      school mathematics. Reston: Virginia.
Pea, R. (1993). Practices of distributed intelligence and design for education. In G. Salomon
      (Ed.), Distributed cognitions. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Piaget, J. (1962). Play, dreams, and imitation in childhood. New York: W.W. Norton.
Pimm,    D.   (1987). Speaking   mathematically: Communications   in  mathematics    classroom.
      London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Provenzo,   E.F. (1991).  Video  kids: Making sense    of Nintendo. Cambridge,     MA: Harvard
      University Press.
Resnick, L. (1987). Learning in school and out. Educational Researcher, 16 (12), 13-20.
Saxe, G.B. (1992). Studying children's learning in context: Problems and prospects. Journal of
      the Learning Sciences, 2(2), pp. 215-234.
Saxe, G.B. (1988). Culture and cognitive development: Studies in mathematical understanding.
      Hillsdale, NJ:: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Saxe & Bermudez (in press). Emergent mathematical environments in children's games. In P.
      Nesher,    L.   D. Steffe, P. Cobb,   B.    Goldin, &  B.   Greer    (Eds.),  Theories of
      mathematical learning (pp.51-68). Hillsdale, N J: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Siegler, R ., &  Crowley,  K.  (1991). The microgentic  method: A   direct means   for studying
      cognitive development.American Psychologist, 46(6), 606-620.
Streefland, L. ( 1991 ). Fractions in Realistic Mathematics Education. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Sutton-Smith, B. (1986). Toys as culture. New York: Gardener Press.
Tierney,C.C.   (1987). Construction of Fractions Knowledge:  Two    Case Studies.  Unpublished
      Doctoral Thesis. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Graduate School of Education.

                                                                                             171
