                              Authoring           Learning            Environments
                       Using          an    Embedded            Pedagogical             Model

                       Smadar Kedar,               David Guralnick, Ann Hoium
                          Ray       Bareiss,      Richard       Beckwith,        Alex    Kass
                                            Institute for the Learning Sciences
                                               Northwestern University,
                                                   1890 Maple Ave.
                                               Evanston, IL, 60201       USA
                      Email: { kedar,guralnick,holum,bareiss,beckwith,kass}@ils.nwu.edu

             Abstract:    For   computer-based     learning    environments  to  make    a   major impact  on
             education, we need tools to scale up construction of these systems in order to deploy the
             technology.   On the one hand, commercial authoring tools can be used by educators to
             ease construction of learning environments.       However, these tools provide no guidance in
             terms of pedagogy.       On the other hand, construction tools for intelligent tutoring systems
             (ITSs) can    assist   educators  in authoring    tutoring  systems  by    helping them    encode
             instructional content,     but many   require  authors   to specify  explicit     models such as
             teaching strategies and student models.      Although the resulting software is pedagogically
             principled, encoding these models is cumbersome.        For educators to create quality tutoring
             programs with relative ease, our approach combines the commitment to pedagogy of the
             ITS tools, with the ease of authoring of off-the-shelf tools, by embedding a pedagogical
             model  implicitly     in a tool.  The embedded     model    ensures that   the  resulting learning
             environments     will  be  pedagogically sound,    while freeing educators     to concentrate on
             curriculum content.      We demonstrate this with a case study of a prototype authoring tool,
             Investigative    Goal-Based    Scenario  (IGBS)    Builder,  intended   for educators     building
             multimedia   learning    environments   using   an embedded    pedagogical     model  of  situated
             instruction.

1. Introduction       and     Motivation
        For computer-based learning environments to make a major impact on education, we need tools to scale
up construction of these systems in order to deploy the technology.         Educational software today is frequently a
commercially available prepackaged unit of instruction, allowing educators no control in changes in the content
or in teaching style. Commercially available authoring tools [e.g. HypercardTM or Macromedia DirectorTM]
provide opportunities for creating programs tailored to instructional needs, but these tools provide educators with
no guidance in terms of selecting or structuring pedagogical content [Ed-Media, 1994].             As a result, the software
that is created may not be educationally sound.           Recent research on model-based automated generation of
interfaces, e.g. [Puerta, et.  al., 1994;   Szekely,  et. al., ,1993],   intends to alleviate   some   of the limitations of
commercial authoring tools by generating interfaces automatically from high-level models.                 However, most of
these tools aim for generality, creating interfaces with limited, generic styles (usually form- or menu-based), not
specifically tailored to instruction.
        One aim of intelligent tutoring systems (ITSs) is to instruct using sound pedagogical theories.             In order
to make a significant impact in the classroom, the future of these systems lies in scaling up their construction.
To address this issue, some researchers have created construction tools for ITSs.            [e.g. Murray and Woolf, 1992;
Major, 1993,  Frasson,    et. al.,  1992, Russell,  et. al.,   1988; Macmillan,     et. al., 1988;  Towne,    et. al., 1990].
Most of these tools are generic shells that allow educators, who need not be programmers, to specify the

172
knowledge base of an ITS.   However, in order to build a tutoring system, a serious knowledge representation
effort is required.  An educator needs to encode not only instructional content, but also explicit   models of
teaching strategy, the student, and so on. For many potential authors, this is simply not practical. Although
pedagogically principled, encoding these models along with content makes building tutoring systems is
cumbersome.
          If educators are to create quality learning environments with relative ease, we need to combine the
commitment to pedagogy of the ITS construction tools with the ease of authoring of the off-the-shelf tools.
Our approach is to design authoring tools whose pedagogical model is implicit; that is, embedded in the tool.
Limiting the scope of a tool to a specific model gives it its power.   This is the common    'generality versus
power' tradeoff found in AI, and more specifically in tools such as knowledge acquisition tools based on role
limiting methods [McDermott, 1988].      We claim that embedding the model implicitly in the tool (1) ensures
that the resulting learning environments will be pedagogically sound, and (2) frees educators to concentrate
solely on curriculum content, thus easing construction of learning environments.  We demonstrate these claims
with a case study of a prototype authoring tool, Investigative Goal-Based Scenario (IGBS) Builder, intended for
educators building multimedia learning environments using an embedded pedagogical model of situated learning.
          The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes the pedagogical model embedded in
the tool. Section 3 describes a sample interaction of constructing a tutoring system with the authoring tool,
IGBS Builder.     Section 4 presents an evaluation of the tool and a discussion of future work.      Section 6
concludes.
2. The     Pedagogical     Model:        Goal-Based       Scenarios
          An authoring tool with an embedded pedagogical model is only as good as the model embedded in it.
The model must be pedagogically sound and encompass a significant class of instruction. We discuss these two
qualities in terms of the pedagogical model of Goal -Based Scenarios  [Schank et. al., 1993], which underlies the
Investigative Goal-Based Scenario Builder tool.    The central tenet of Goal-Based Scenarios is that skills and
concepts are best learned when embedded within a problem-solving task.    In a problem-solving task, information
is more   likely to be retained by the   student and transferred  to similar problems, since its relevance and
connection to the problem can be more easily understood [Adams, et. al., 1988].     This position is shared by
other approaches to situated instruction, notably cognitive apprenticeship   [Collins, et. al., 1989] and anchored
instruction  [Bransford, et. al., 1990]. Goal-Based Scenarios are a specialized form of situated instruction,
addressing, in particular, the motivational needs of the student. A OBS can be thought of as a play, where the
student is the main actor, and some problem or conflict needs to be resolved, e.g., "Broadcast News" [Kass, et.
al., 1994], "Creanimate" [Edelson, et. al., 1993].   More specifically, in a OBS, there is a (I) mission:  the
student assumes a motivating simulated role related to a real-world task, and is given a goal to achieve which is
intrinsically motivating. For example, students may play the role of a forensic chemist helping to solve a
crime, as a way of engaging them to learn aspects of chemistry.       In addition, there are (2) pedagogically
structured activities: what to do and what is learned are tightly linked.    In order to perform the activities to
accomplish the goal, the student will need to acquire the intended skills and concepts (and therefore is assumed to
be highly motivated to do so). To continue in our example, in order to interpret the results of a test that
evaluates toxicity in a liver sample, students would need to learn relevant aspects about chemical compounds.
Finally, there is (3) tutorial support: expert advice and guidance are available 'just-in-time', and are strongly
linked to the activities of the OBS, so that the student is given feedback both about mission and what he or she
needs to learn.   For example, errors in evaluating the evidence may lead to a dangerous criminal's mistaken
release.  Currently, our tool, called Investigative Goal-Based Scenario (OBS) Builder, embodies a specialized
model of Goal-Based Scenarios, where the mission of the student is specialized to investigation tasks (as
opposed to design or simulation tasks, say).
3.  Investigative      Goal-Based        Scenario    Builder
3.1.  Overview
          In this section we describe how Investigative OBS Builder aids in authoring computer-based learning
environments, and discuss to what extend the tool satisfies our claims that embedding the model implicitly in
the tool (I) ensures that the resulting learning environments will be pedagogically sound, and (2) frees educators
to concentrate solely on curriculum content, thus easing construction of learning environments.
          IGBS Builder's key task is to use the embedded model of an investigative OBS to provide strong
guidance to the teacher or curriculum designer about how to structure the content of what to teach around an
engaging task, and how to implement it as an interactive multimedia program, so that the resulting program

                                                                                                              173
will be a GBS.   It does that by a step-by-step elicitation of the details of activities the student is to perfonn, and
connects these to the required teaching content.    The resulting interactive program is designed to engage the
student in playing a role and perfonning a task through conducting simulated activities such as asking questions
of video experts and perfonning laboratory tests by running animations and reviewing video-based evidence.
Learning the intended teaching content thus occurs in a situated context.
        As mentioned above, IGBS Builder embodies a specialized model of Goal-Based Scenarios, where the
mission of the student is investigation (see Section [Evaluation and Futur Work] for a discussion of future work
to expand the scope by a suite of tools). An investigative   GBS is structured around a goal the student is asked
to achieve which     requires  performing  an  investigation.    More  specifically, the  overall  mission   of an
investigative GBS model is divided into five phases:  The Problem phase provides the student with their role and
goal (i.e. a problem to solve); in the Do phase, the student perfonns the investigation;   deciding on a solution
to the problem occurs in the Decide phase;  communicating the decision occurs   in the   Communicate phase; and
in the Wrap-Up phase, the student sees the consequences of their investigation and decision.
        The   tool  could, in theory,  present the  abstract model  of investigative  GBS   to   the designer (i.e.
educator), and allow the designer free reign in implementing that model as an interactive program.       However,
this would be difficult since there is a vast design space for how to instantiate the model.     The tool therefore
guides the designer not only with a model, but also with an exemplar GBS that has implemented that model
successfully. The designer uses the exemplar to make the model more concrete (as in case adaptation in case
based reasoning, e.g. [Kolodner, 1993], [Bell, Kedar & Bareiss, 1994]].   The exemplar currently in the tool is an
investigative GBS called "Sickle Cell Counselor" [Bell, Bareiss & Beckwith, 1993], built for the Museum of
Science and Industry in Chicago.   This GBS teaches basic concepts of genetics, and in particular, of Sickle Cell
Disease, by allowing the museum visitor to assume the role of a genetic counselor, with the goal of advising
clients who are considering having children, about the risk of Sickle Cell Disease for their offspring.
        The exemplar helps the designer by illustrating the phases of the investigative GBS using Sickle Cell
Counselor, and this makes the investigative GBS model more concrete. For example, in Sickle Cell Counselor,
the phases are instantiated as follows: In the Problem phase, clients seeking advice about Sickle Cell Disease
appear on video, and the student is given his or her role and goal.    Investigation occurs in the Do phase, for
example, the student performs an electrophoresis test to establish the clients' genotypes. In the Decide phase, a
decision is reached by calculating the probable genotypes of the client's offspring using an animated Punnett
Square. The student conveys the decision to the clients in the Communicate phase. The Wrap-Up phase offers
feedback for the student's actions, demonstrating the ramification of students' final decision: the clients return "a
year later" to talk about whether or not they had children, and what the ultimate outcome of the disease was for
them. Preliminary evaluations show that Sickle Cell Counselor is an effective GBS:    the student's role and task
is engaging, and perfonning the activities leads the student to acquire the intended teaching content [Bell, Bareiss
& Beckwith, 1993].
        The exemplar is not useful for guiding the authoring unless it is clear how it is connected to the model.
For that, the tool provides a map of how each step in the interactive program fits into a phase and its subphases.
The tool also provides design rationale to explain how each individual screen component fits into the whole.
        Investigative GBS Builder, then, uses the embedded pedagogical model with strong guidance for
authoring: it provides both an abstract model of an investigative GBS, an exemplar, and a link between them.
In the next two sections we provide a sample interaction with the tool.   We illustrate the interaction in tenns of
an example of a GBS authored with the tool by a pair of middle school teachers (more on the evaluation and
preliminary user testing of the tool in Section 4). The teachers wanted to build a GBS to teach chemistry skills
and concepts, and decided to create an "Arson Investigator" GBS.     In that GBS, the students' role  is a forensic
chemist, and his or her goal is to investigate the cause of a fire to detennine if it was arson. As a byproduct of
perfonning the activities of the GBS and asking questions of experts, the student    learns the intended chemistry
skills and concepts.
3.2.  Design     Support
        Authoring a GBS is divided broadly into two stages:      design and implementation (often iterative).    In
the design stage, the designer sketches the broad brush outline of the three key aspects of the GBS, and makes
sure they satisfy certain constraints: (1) The designer matches what to teach to a student's mission in the GBS,
and  ensures  it is motivating  (arson  investigation); (2)  the designer sketches   the top-level   outline of the
pedagogically-structured activities, ensuring that the activities require the student to seek out what is being
taught; and (3) the designer sketches the outline for tutorial support by assigning characters in the GBS to
various categories of support.

 174
              '  ..;.  rue  riii:  E11ol  Tools  WlncJows  Doc  Loclcflle  _file

                                     This movie should show howthe first szimplc is extracted.·.··.·..·..    '  , ...,.  --,r-                         ii··loloiilo.c-.l··o

                                                Figure         1: An        Empty                                       Template                 for the
                                          Extract          Sample          Subphase                                       of    the              Do  Phase

        Conceptual design is an art.                               Currently, designers work with people experienced in designing OBS's
during the initiation of a project, and iterate through many different designs until one is found where the match
of content to mission is appropriate, and the mission is motivating.                                                                                  An on-line conceptual design document is
used to structure the resulting information and relate it to the model.                                                                                    Currently, the design document is not
connected to the rest of the tool.                             However, we are working on incorporating it, and automatically migrating
concepts from the conceptual design stage to the implementation stage (see Section [Design Support]).
3.3.  Implementation                            Support
        In the implementation stage, the tool guides the designer to implement the activities of the OBS as
interactive actions in a multimedia program.                                      The tool constrains these to be pedagogically structured activities
by guiding the designer to specify teaching content which is indexed to each activity in the following ways:
First, the designer specifies the details of an activity (e.g. collecting a burnt drape sample to determine arson).
Then, the designer specifies a set of initial and follow-up questions that are likely to be raised in the student's
mind during the activity, and provides video clips of experts answering them.                                                                                       This supplies the intended
teaching content to be delivered 'just in time'.                                                               In addition, the tool guides the designer in implementing the
tutorial support by specifying, for each of the characters in the OBS, movie clips that deliver guidance, critique,
and feedback at key points in the program.                                       We illustrate these features of implementing the OBS in the process
of defining the "Extract Sample" subphase of the Do Phase.                                                                                       The activity of "Extract Sample" is to obtain a
physical sample is obtained in order to analyze it as part of the investigation.                                                                                 In Arson Investigator, a sample
of a burnt drape from an apartment fire is collected in order to analyze whether there was an accelerant (e.g. fuel)
in it, which is possible evidence that the fire was intentional.
        The tool interacts with the designer to implement the OBS screen by screen as follows [see Figure I]:
At the top of the screen, the tool provides a map of the investigative OBS model in terms of its phases and
subphases, highlighting the current phase and subphase being implemented.                                                                                        In the center is the work area,
displaying the current screen of the OBS being created.                                                                         On the left, a dialog window guides the designer to
instantiate each component of the screen, describing how it implements the current phase and subphase. To the

                                                                                                                                                                                                 175
                             This movie should show how
                             the first sample is extracted.

              Figure    2:   Implementing                         Extract Sample  subphase  of
                        Do   Phase for                        Arson  Investigator GBS

left, clicking on the small GBS icon Jets the designer view the corresponding phase and subphase of the
exemplar GBS (here, Sickle Cell Counselor).                      The buttons below provide help on design rationale (WHY) and
guidance in using the tool (HOW). The center bottom mode buttons allow the designer to switch to RUN mode
in order to 'play' and test the portion of the GBS built so far, or to the DESIGN mode in order to review the
design. EDIT mode is the name of the implementation mode the designer is in right now.
        Below is a sample interaction (corresponding to two steps in the dialog) which implements part of the
Extract Sample subphase of the Do phase, demonstrating the creation of pedagogically-structured activities and
tutorial support:

Tool:    In  the     Extract  Sample                          subphase,   the  student   selects   the  source          of
the sample,        extracts   the  sample,                          and stores    the sample   for  analysis.
         «Designer switches to viewing SCC»
Tool:    In  sec,    the   student                          selects  blood   samples   from  each  client,           extracts
the   sample      by drawing   blood                          using  a syringe,    and places   each  blood          sample
in  a   test tube.       Now  you  will                         define  the  screens   and  their   components          for
the   Extract      Sample  subphase                           of Arson   Investigator.
         Next, the dialog window points to each empty screen component in turn, guiding the designer to fill it
with appropriate graphical items (text, graphics, video clips, etc.).              In the case of graphics or video, the designer
either can fill in the appropriate item if it already exists in a library, or if unavailable on-line, the designer can
specify a "placeholder", a to-do note which holds the place of the item until he or she shoots the appropriate
video or creates the needed graphic and inserts it.                 The designer of Arson Investigator has already created a short
QuicktimeTM video clip showing a burnt drape sample being collected from the apartment fire.             In the following

176
interaction, the designer selects that movie to insert for the Extract Sample activity in the GBS.  (See Figure 2]
for the implementation of one screen of this subphase of the Do phase.
Tool:    Insert        a  movie.      This  movie      should    show    how  the   first      sample     is
extracted.
Designer:    (chooses         a   movie   of     a person     collecting      a  sample      of  a  burnt
drape  and  storing          it   in  a container).
       We now demonstrate how the designer is guided to specify the teaching content related to this activity.
Three questions, follow-up questions, and their answers (in video clips by experts) are elicited from the designer.
The dialog window specifies three categories of questions related to the current activity:     a question on basic
concepts, a question about skills, and a questions about how to do the activity in the GBS.    The three questions
(along with their answers and follow-up questions) in Arson Investigator, indexed to the "extract sample"
activity, are as follows:
       Why  are      samples       collected       in a  paint   can?
       How  do       I collect      samples?
       What       do   I  do next?
       Finally,   we   illustrate how the tool   guides the designer in specifying one type   of tutorial support:
feedback about the ramifications of student actions.   The designer is asked to specify three possible conclusions
for the student to communicate (one correct, one incomplete, and one incorrect):
       This       was    clearly    a case   of    arson.
       There      was     not  enough     evidence      to  conclude.
       This       was    an  accidental     apartment       fire.
       In the Communicate Phase, the student is presented with a choice of these three conclusions.          Each
conclusion leads to a different ramification, and therefore different feedback to the student.      In one of the
problems presented in Arson Investigator, the investigation clearly demonstrates that there has been arson (e.g.
the drape sample contained an accelerant, and witnesses reported valuable objects stolen from the apartment).   If
the student chooses the incorrect communication "This was an accidental apartment fire," the tool leads the
designer through specifying the feedback. Possible feedback in Arson Investigator is a movie clip of a fire chief
speaking to the student a 'year later', telling the student that based on the conclusion, an arson suspect was let
go, and there has been a string of fires of a similar nature in the neighborhood since then.
4. Evaluation      and      Future    Work
       We first performed a formative evaluation [Nielsen, 1993] of the tool in order to improve it as part of
iterative design. The tool was used by 20 graduate students in computer science and education, building IO
prototype GBS's.   One successful example is Aztec P.1., in which the student, as a museum curator, is assigned
to verify the authenticity of an Aztec artifact. The students reported feeling restricted in copying and editing an
exemplar, so during the course of the evaluation we provided a facility to let them alter their GBS by adding or
deleting any screen or component they wished.         As a  result, only 5 of the  IO GBS's    kept the gist of an
investigative GBS.   One explanation is that it was more difficult to be self-disciplined in staying to the gist of
the model than to have the tool enforce that discipline automatically.   Among the lessons learned from the first
evaluation was that although copying and editing an exemplar is too restrictive, allowing unconstrained changes
to the interface can turn a GBS into an arbitrary (and possibly educationally unprincipled) program.
       After nine months of development, we performed a second iteration of user testing with a group of
eight elementary and middle school teaches from a school district in suburban Chicago.       The teachers, who had
little computer experience, used the tool in pairs to build four prototype GBSs over the summer.          The four
GBSs were: Arson Investigator for teaching chemistry concepts and investigative skills, Debt Buster for
teaching mathematics by helping a teenager manage his debt; Kid Counselor for teaching social skills by
helping youngsters reason through social problems, and Lend a Hand, for teaching accessibility issues for the
handicapped by helping a person navigate in a wheelchair to a baseball game.           It took the teachers, with
significant ILS staff support, one and a half months, in pairs to build the prototype GBS (about a third of the
content of a full GBS).   We extrapolate that building a full GBS could take them nine person/months.      This is
still less than the one and a half person/years it tool to build Sickle Cell Counselor from scratch, using a
programmer, a graduate student, and a knowledge engineer.      During this evaluation the teachers could not make

                                                                                                                 177
any unconstrained changes to the GBSs built with the tool.        The quality of the resulting GBSs was good
overall: all four GBSs kept to the model of the investigative GBS.
           Through focus groups, surveys, and informal interaction during our evaluation, we learned a number
of lessons regarding the overall effectiveness of the tool.   First, teachers are expert at content, not necessarily
software design.  The teachers found the guidance in structuring the content useful     (e.g. associating types of
experts and questions with each activity in the tool) but needed even more guidance (e.g. software design
considerations such as level of interactivity in designing a test).  Second,  although we provided some design
support, the teachers found that in implementing a GBS they lost sight of the conceptual design, and could not
'see the forest for the trees'. The problem is that while strong guidance is being provided, it is often at an
interface rather than a conceptual level. We provided the teacher hard copy design support documents, and the
teachers themselves produced detailed outlines and spreadsheets to aid their design. In addition, we are working
to make the on-line conceptual elicitation stage of the tool richer, and to migrate the information elicited
automatically into the implementation   [Bell & Kedar, 1995], [Bell, 1995].   Third, while the teachers found the
guidance from embedded model useful, they found the Sickle Cell Counselor exemplar especially useful.
However, as much as they found these helpful, they also felt constrained by them.           The current model and
exemplar are only one instance of what an investigative GBS could be.     The tool needs to incorporate a broader
range of investigation models (e.g. a factual investigation versus a laboratory investigation), and a library of
prototypes of these models.
5.  Conclusions
         Our evaluation to date does not fully substantiate our claims that the tool (I) ensures that the resulting
learning environments are pedagogically sound, and (2) frees educators to concentrate on curriculum content, but
the results are in the direction we expect. In future evaluations, we intend to investigate students' use of GBSs
resulting from the tool, and study more closely how educators use the tool to build complete GBSs.
         It is clear that educators will want to build GBSs that support tasks broader than what this tool can
support. The IGBS Builder is the first    of several GBS Builder tools currently being developed in our lab, each
supporting the construction of a different class of GBSs.   The approach currently  being pursued    at the Institute
for the Learning Sciences is to build a suite of tools, each supporting the construction of a different class of
GBSs.    The other GBS Builders are intended for tasks such as everyday procedures, interpersonal behavior,
running an organization, or evidence-based reporting [Schank, forthcoming]. The IGBS Builder is thus the first
of several GBS Builder tools, and provides an important first step towards deploying computer-based learning
environments in the classroom.

References:
Adams, L., Kasserman, J., Yearwood, A., Perfetto, G., Bransford, J., and Franks, J.         (1988).  The effects of
 facts versus problem-oriented acquisition. In Memory and Cognition, 16, 167-175.
Ed-Media    1994  Proceedings.      Vancouver, B.C., Canada.      June    25-30, 1994.  The Association for the
 advancement of Computing in Education.
Bell, B.L.  (1995). Toward Modularity in Specializing Authoring Tools.        In Proceedings of the Workshop on
 Authoring   Shells  for intelligent   Tutoring Systems,  7th World  Conference    on  Artificial Intelligence and
 Education, Washington, DC., pp. 4-9.
Bell, B.L., Kedar, S.T.  (1995). When Less is More:   Supporting Authoring and Interface Building        via Special
 Purpose Task Models.     In Proceedings of the 7th  World Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Education,
 Washington, DC., pp. 533-540.
Bell, B.L., Bareiss, R.,  and   Beckwith,  R.   (1993/1994).  Sickle Cell  Counselor:  A    Prototype    Goal-Based
 Scenario for Instruction in a Museum Environment. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 3(4).
Bell, B.L., Kedar, S., and Bareiss, R. (1994). "Interactive Model-Driven Case Adaptation for Instructional
 Software Design."    A poster in Proceedings of the       Sixteenth Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
 Society,   Atlanta, GA, 1994.
Bransford,  J.D., Sherwood,     R.D.,  Hasselbring, T.S., Kinzer,   C.K., and Williams,     S.M. (1990).  Anchored
 instruction: why   we   need   it and how  technology    can help. In R.  Spiro  and D.    Nix  (Eds.), Cognition,
 Education, and Multimedia: Exploring Ideas in High Technology. Lawrence Erlbaum: Hillsdale, N.J.

178
Collins, A., Brown,     J.S. and Newman,   S.E.   (1989)     Cognitive Apprenticeship:   Teaching the Crafts of
 Reading, Writing and Mathematics.        In L. Resnick, Ed.    Knowing, Learning, and Instruction:    Essays in
 honor of Robert Glaser.     Erlbaum:  Hillsdale, N.J.
Edelson, D.C.    (1993). Learning From Stories:   Indexing and Reminding in a Socratic Case-Based Teaching
 System for Elementary School Biology.        Unpublished Doctoral Dissertation.     The Institute for the Learning
 Sciences, Northwestern University.      Evanston, Illinois.
Frasson,  Gauthier, McCalla,     Eds. (1992).  Proceedings     of Intelligent Tutoring Systems Conference    '92,
 Montreal, Quebec, Canada, June, 1992.
Kass, A., Dooley, S., Luksa, F, and Conroy, C.    (1994).    Using Broadcast Journalism to Motivate Hypennedia
 Exploration.    Educational Multimedia and Hypermedia Annual, 1994.          Association for the Advancement of
 Computing in Education, Charlottesville, VA, 1994.
Kedar, S. T., and Bell, B. L. (1995).  Teachers in Charge: Model-Based Authoring of Educational Software.      A
 poster in Proceedings INTERCHI '95, Denver, CO.
Kolodner, J.L. (1993). Case-Based Reasoning. San Mateo, CA: Morgan Kaufmann.
Bell, B., & Korcuska, M. (1995). The Goal-Based Scenario Builder: Experiences with Novice Instructional
 Designers. Presented at the American Educational Research Association. San Francisco, CA, April, 1995.
Macmillan,   S., Emme,   D.,  and Berkowitz,   M. (1988).    Instructional planners: Lessons learned.  In Psotka,
 Massey, and Mutter (Eds.), Intelligent Tutoring Systems, Lessons Learned. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Eribaum.
Major, N.   (1993). Reconstructing Teaching Strategies with COCA.        In Proceedings of Artificial Intelligence
 in Education.   Edinburgh, Scotland, August 23-27, 1993.
McDennott, J. (1988). Preliminary steps toward a taxonomy of problem-solving methods. In S. Marcus (Ed.),
 Automating Knowledge Acquisition for Knowledge-based Systems.             pp. 120-146. Boston: Kluwer Academic
 Publishers.
Murray, T., and B. P. Woolf (1992).      Results of Encoding Knowledge with Tutor Construction Tools.          In
 Proceedings of the Tenth National Conference on Artificial Intelligence, San Jose, CA, July, 1992.
Nielsen, J. 1993).  Usability Engineering. AP Professional, 1993.
Puerta, A.R., Eriksson, H., Gennari, J.H., and Musen, M.A. (1994). Model-Based Automated Generation of
 User Interfaces. In Proceedings of the Twelfth National Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Seattle, WA,
 August, 1994.
Russell, D., Moran, T.P., and Jordan, D.S. (1988). The instructional design environment.     In Psotka, Massey,
 and Mutter (Eds.), Intelligent Tutoring Systems, Lessons Learned. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Schank, R.C. (1993). Goal Based Scenarios. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 3(4), 1993.
Schank, R.C. (Forthcoming).      Eight GBS Tools. Forthcoming technical report of the Institute for  the Learning
 Sciences.
Schank, R.C., Fano, A., Bell, B.L. , and Jona, M.Y. (1993). The Design of Goal Based Scenarios. The Journal
 of the Learning Sciences, 3(4), 1993.
Szekely, P., Luo,   P., and  Neches,  R. (1993). Beyond     Interface Builders: Model-Based  Interface  Tools. In
 INTERCHI '93, (Amsterdam, April, 1993), ACM Press, pp.383-390.
Towne, D.M., Munro, A., Pizzini, Q.A. Sunnan, D.S., Coller, L.D., Woguliz, J.L.           (1990).   Model-Based
 Tools for Simulation-Based Training.     In Interactive Learning Environments.   1: I, pp. 33-50.
Acknowledgments:
Thanks to the IGBSB team for building the tool, and the ILS graduate students and Wilmette School District #39
teachers and administrators for helping us evaluate it.

                                                                                                                179
