           Problem-Based                  Learning       Meets         Case-Based             Reasoning
                            Janet L. Kolodner, Cindy E. Hmelo, and N. Hari Narayanan
                                                The EduTech Institute
                                                College ofComputing
                                            Georgia Institute ofTechnology
                                               Atlanta, GA 30332-0280
                                           {jlk, ceh, narayan}@cc.gatech.edu

              Abstract:    The  modem     education community   agrees that deep  and effective   learning is
             best promoted      by situating   learning in authentic   activity.  Many     in the education
             community have put in place constructivist classroom practices that put students into
             situations where they must make hypotheses, collect data, and determine which data to use
             in the process of solving a problem or participating in some kind of realistic analysis or
             investigation.    Research in case-based reasoning (CBR), which provides a plausible model
             of learning from problem solving situations, makes suggestions about education that are
             consistent with these educational theories and methodologies and which can provide added
             concreteness and detail.      In this paper, we show how CBR's suggestions can enhance
             problem-based learning (PBL), which is already a well-worked-out and successful approach
             to education.      The  computational     accounts   CBR  provides   of reasoning    activities,
             especially    of  knowledge   access,  access to old   experiences   (cases), and  use   of old
             experiences    in  reasoning,  suggest    guidelines about materials    that  should  be made
             available as resources, the kinds of reflection that will promote transfer, qualities of good
             problems, qualities of the environment in which problems are solved (e.g., affordances for
             feedback), and sequencing a curriculum.     The two approaches complement each other well,
             and together, we believe they provide a powerful foundation for educational practice in the
             constructivist    tradition, one  that at  once combines   lessons   learned  from   classroom
             practice with sound cognitive theory.

1.  Introduction

The modern education community agrees that deep and effective learning is best promoted by situating learning
in authentic  activity.    Anchored   instruction,     project-based   learning,  problem-based     learning,  and other
constructivist approaches to classroom practice all focus on putting students into situations where they must
make hypotheses, collect data, and determine which data to use in the process of solving a problem or
participating in some kind of realistic analysis or investigation (Barrows, 1985; Blumenfeld, et al, 1991;
CTGV, 1993; Williams, 1993).       Research shows that students participating in these kinds oflearning activities
are more motivated to learn, that what they learn is more usable than the knowledge learned by students carrying
out rote   activities, and that they tend   to better  learn higher  order  thinking  skills  than do    students in other
learning situations (Blumenfeld, et al., 1991; CTGV, 1993; Hmelo, 1995).

Designing such activities well requires an understanding ofwhat needs to be learned and the kinds ofexperiences
that will lead to such learning.   But making learning activities work well requires that their use in the classroom
be informed by lessons ofpractice.    The classroom is complicated. Social issues, personality issues, capabilities
ofteachers, the comfort ofthe classroom, and other issues all play a role in student learning, muddling the best
educational designs or allowing poor ones to work despite their weaknesses.                Designing effective learning
activities thus requires   (1) cognitive (and social) theory to    provide guidelines     about learning,  (2) classroom
methodology, or lessons ofpractice, to provide guidelines about operationalization, and (3) trial, analysis, and
refinement (Linn & Songer, 1988) over time aimed toward operationalizing the activities well.               Logic tells us
that the more operational cognitive theories are, the easier it will be to put their guidelines into practice; and the
closer the match between the guidelines for learning and the classroom methodology, the more chance that each
could contribute toward better understanding ofthe other.

This logic, plus a desire to put the educational philosophy ofcase-based reasoning into practice and a need to
advise faculty at Georgia Tech about how to help their students learn from problem solving activity, has led us
to begin to put into place a marriage between problem-based learning and case-based reasoning.                 Case-based
reasoning (Schank, 1982; Kolodner, 1993), which originated as a methodology for implementing computer
programs that could solve problems based on their past experiences, provides a cognitive theory that situates

188
learning in  reasoning  about real-world  situations.   The computational accounts it provides of reasoning
activities, especially of knowledge access, access to old experiences (cases), and use of old experiences in
reasoning, provide suggestions about what makes a good problem, the range of problems students should solve,
the kinds of materials and resources students need to use, ways to manage the complexity of hard problems and
the kinds of reflection that should be encouraged.    Some of CBR's principles have been used to inform the
design of stand-alone learning environments (Schank, et al., 1993), but when we wanted to put its principles
into practice in classrooms, we found that CBR was lacking in telling us about the teacher's role and other
issues of classroom practice.  We thus sought an educational methodology that would provide principles of
practice to go along with CBR's educational principles.

We chose problem-based learning because of its parallels to case-based reasoning.        Problem-based learning
(Barrows, 1985) provides a classroom methodology that situates learning in problem-solving activity.        It has
been in use in medical schools for twenty years and specifies activities of students and teachers that promote
learning from problem-solving experiences.     It originated from the intuitions of excellent teachers and has
evolved into a well-developed system of practice through systematic refinement.      Problem-based learning gives
. reflection on problem-solving activity a central role, and specifies roles for students as researchers who discover
knowledge and teachers as facilitators of this constructivist process.

The two approaches complement each other well, and together, we believe they provide a powerful foundation
for educational practice in the constructivist tradition, one that at once combines lessons learned from classroom
practice with sound cognitive theory.   In this paper, we explore how these two views complement each other,
presenting each in turn, and then synthesizing them and describing the implications of their synthesis.      Each
adds to the other; CBR adds reason and specificity to some of PBL's practices and suggests some new ways of
accomplishing PBL's goals, while PBL provides for CBR a vehicle for putting its philosophy into practice.

2.  Problem-Based Learning:              A Model of the Practice of Learning from
Problem-Solving         Activity
In problem-based learning, students learn by solving problems and reflecting on their experiences. PBL is used
substantially at medical and business schools (Barrows, 1985; Williams,      1993).    Students learn by solving
authentic real-world problems; in medicine, this means diagnosing and managing patient cases.     Because the
problems are complex, students work in groups, where they pool their expertise and experience and together
grapple with the complexities of the issues that must be considered.    Coaches guide student reflection on their
problem-solving experiences, asking students to articulate both the concepts and skills they are learning, and
helping them identify the cognitive skills needed for problem solving, the full range of skills needed for
collaboration and articulation, and the principles behind those skills. But coaches do not tell students what to do
or show them how to solve problems; rather students decide how to go about solving problems and what they
need to learn, while coaches question students to force them to justify their approach and explain their
conclusions.  In this way, skills needed for life-long learning are also acquired. Research shows that students in
problem-based curricula are indeed learning facts and concepts and the skills needed for critical problem solving
and self-learning (Hmelo, 1995; Norman & Schmidt, 1992).

In its classical form (Barrows, 1985), students take no classes, but rather work on a series of 100 problems over
their first two years of medical school. Small groups of 5-7 students and a coach meet to discuss a patient case.
Cases are presented to students in an authentic way; the presenting symptoms (those the patient reports) are first
presented to students, and as the students feel they need more information about a patient, they ask for it.   A
patient record holds all such information and is indexed by questions that traditionally come up in a medical
consultation. Problem solving begins with an attempt to interpret what is wrong with the patient; it continues
with an attempt to manage the patient's care.  Students keep track, on a set of white boards, of facts they know,
hypotheses they have about what might be wrong, ideas about treatment, and issues they do not yet understand
and need to learn more about (learning issues).  They follow a methodology of first, writing down what they
know, then generating hypotheses, then identifying the things they still need to find out about the patient and
the issues they need to learn more about. After considering the case with their naive knowledge, students divide
up the learning issues they have generated among  the   group and research  them.   When  they get back together,
they return to their problem-solving activity, this time using what they have learned through research to move
farther forward in their solutions. They reconsider their hypotheses and/or generate new hypotheses in light of
their new learning. This cycle continues until students are satisfied that they    have solved the problem.  They

                                                                                                                189
are then presented with the expert opinion on the problem and discuss its pros and cons if different than their
conclusion.

3.   Case-Based Reasoning:                A Cognitive  and     Computational           Model   of     Learning
from   Problem-Solving        Activity
The term case-based reasoning refers to reasoning based on previous experience.       It might mean solving a new
problem by adapting an old solution or merging pieces of several old solutions, interpreting a new situation in
light of similar situations, or projecting the effects of a new situation by examining the effects of a similar old
situation. In short, case-based reasoning means using the lessons learned in old situations to understand or
navigate new ones.   The basic premise underlying CBR is the preference to reason using the most specific and
most cohesive applicable knowledge available.    Inferences made using specific knowledge are relatively simple
to make.   Inferences made using cohesive knowledge structures, i.e., those that tie together several aspects of a
situation, are relatively efficient. Cases, which describe situations, have both of these properties. In addition,
they record what is possible, providing a reasoner with more probability of moving forward in a workable way
than is provided by using general knowledge that is merely plausible.     Furthermore, reasoning based on previous
experience seems natural in people; an understanding of how it is done well and effectively can provide
guidelines for helping people to effectively use this natural reasoning process.

A good example of case-based reasoning comes from architecture.     An architect is designing an office building
with a long naturally lit atrium in the middle and a circular row of offices surrounding it. She wants the office
to get as much light as possible so daytime energy consumption can be minimized.       She remembers the design
of a library that   has no atrium     but where the designer solved       the problem of bringing in  sunlight by
constructing exterior walls of glass.   She realizes that this solution can be used in the current building -- the
office space can be separated from the atrium by a circular glass wall. But upon further thought, she remembers
the problems that a courthouse had, in which a glass wall was used in a row of offices with heavy public traffic.
While the offices were well lit, the constant presence of the public interfered with the privacy and work of the
office workers.    The library did not have this problem because the glass wall faced a wooded area.   While the
first case provides a means of dealing with her new design, the second case, and its difference from the first,
alerts her to a potential problem with that solution.  Comparing these two cases with the current one, she
realizes that the potential for the problem exists, but to a lesser degree. While the atrium is not deserted like the
woods, it is not a heavily-trafficked area either. She decides to use the first solution but modifies it slightly by
using translucent glass bricks instead of clear plate glass for the wall.

While originally derived to explain reasoning and problem solving, the cognitive model underlying case-based
reasoning also provides an explanation of the role memory plays in reasoning -- how memory is accessed during
reasoning and how reasoning contributes to changes in the content and organization of memory.         Thus, CBR
addresses the ways experiences are recalled to be used in reasoning, the use of old experiences in reasoning, and
the ways in which new experiences are analyzed, indexed, and stored in memory.

Learning, in the CBR paradigm, means extending one's knowledge by incorporating new experiences into
memory, by re-indexing old experiences to make them more accessible, and by abstracting out generalizations
from experiences. Thus, a major issue case-based reasoning addresses is the indexing problem: identifying old
situations that are relevant to a new one. Two sets of procedures allow such recognition to happen:     (1) those
that operate when cases or experiences are encoded and inserted into long-term memory and (2) those that operate
at retrieval time.  At insertion time, a reasoner interprets a situation and identifies at least some of the lessons
it can teach and when those lessons might most productively be applied.         The case is labeled according to its
applicability conditions, i.e., the circumstances in which it ought to be retrieved.     The most discriminating
labels on a case will be derived by a reasoner that has taken the time and effort, and that has the background
knowledge, to carefully analyze a case's potential applicability. At retrieval time, a reasoner uses his/her current
goals and understanding of the new situation as a probe into memory, looking for cases that are usefully similar
to the new one.    The extent to which a reasoner is willing or able to interpret the new situation determines the
quality of the probe into memory.     An uninterpreted situation is likely to yield poorer access to the contents of
memory than is one that is more embellished.     The more creative a reasoner is at interpreting a situation, the
more likely he is to find relevant knowledge and experience to use in reasoning about it.

190
CBR gives failure a central role in promoting learning. During reasoning, when the reasoner's expectations fail,
it is alerted that its knowledge or reasoning is deficient, and a need to learn arises. Similarly, an unsuccessful
outcome or solution warns the reasoner of a deficiency and therefore a need to learn.    Failure at applying an old
case in a new situation triggers explanation that might result in reinterpreting (reindexing) old situations and/or
discovering new kinds of interpretations (indexes).    Crucial to interpreting failure is useful feedback from the
world. A reasoner that is connected to the world will be able to evaluate its solutions with respect to what
results from them, allowing indexing that discriminates usability of old cases   and allowing good judgments
later about reuse.

4.  CBR and PBL:             A Synthesis
PBL and CBR have much in common.          Both point toward a constructivist mode of education, in which one
learns by extracting wisdom from one's experiences. Each focuses on different but complementary aspects of the
experience.   The  methodology   of  PBL asks  students to  solve problems  and then    reflect on what  they have
learned from the experience.   The problems students solve serve two purposes:    they become cases for use in
later reasoning and they are vehicles for learning.    Case-based reasoning suggests that learning well from
experience requires assessing what lessons an experience teaches and predicting the circumstances when those
lessons might be appropriately applied, adding to PBL's call for reflection specificity about what particular
things to reflect on.  CBR also makes suggestions about the kinds of problem solving experiences a learner
should have.   CBR suggests furthermore the importance of acquiring feedback on decisions made, in order to be
able to identify the holes in one's knowledge.
        Overall, there are many areas where CBR and PBL together make more concrete suggestions about
educational   practice than does either one  alone:   identifying the qualities of good problems, the kinds of
materials and resources that ought to be made available to students as they are generating learning issues,
qualities of the environment in which problems are solved, managing the complexity of solving hard problems,
encouraging the kinds of reflection that promote transfer, facilitating cognitive flexibility, and sequencing the
curriculum.

4.1  What     makes    for a good    problem?

Experiences with medical PBL have led to a number of guidelines about what makes for good problems.             In
order to learn real-world reasoning skills, problems are purposely complex, ill-structured, and open-ended,
lending themselves to several interpretations and/or solutions, and painting a cohesive, holistic view of an issue
or situation. This is for several pragmatic reasons, most important in order for students to learn skills and facts
in situations of realistic complexity.  It is important, also, that problems be realistic, that they resonate with
the experiences  and knowledge of students, and that they are problems the students want to solve.       This is to
insure that students will become engaged in the activity and will be motivated to learn, and will be capable of
getting started based on what they already know.    Also important is that problems are complex enough to have
several interrelated parts, all important to a good solution.  This is necessary so that the learning issues that
students generate are related enough so that they have background, having researched one issue, to understand the
explanations of fellow students when they report about other learning issues, and so that, having researched a
single learning issue, they have an increased understanding of the problem as a whole.      And problems should
promote conjecture, argumentation, and peer criticism, by lending themselves to multiple interpretations or
solutions, sometimes    depending on   which   of a variety of conflicting perspectives   students  take on.  The
intuition here is that collaboration and collaborative learning will work best if students have something to work
out together and if they have an authentic need to ask each other to justify their points of view.

Student roles and goals should be made clear in a problem as well.    They might be asked to act as physicians
and come up with a solution to a problem, as medical students are asked to do, or they may be asked to act as
scientists, engineers, or consultants of some kind to create a product or performance (e.g., Barrows & Kelson,
1995; Boud & Felletti, 1991; Ram & Hmelo, 1995), e.g., design an experiment to evaluate some evidence or
produce a marketing plan.

An added benefit, if problems fit the criteria listed, is that, in general, they will require students to integrate
knowledge     from  across  multiple disciplines.   In medical  problems,   students    may  deal   with anatomy,
physiology, and pharmacology in a single case; a chemistry problem might elicit consideration of biology at the

                                                                                                                 191
same time students are learning chemistry; a design problem might integrate mathematics, life science, and earth
science.

CBR adds several things to this already well-articulated list of descriptors, based on its finding that failure is a
powerful motivator of learning and that connections with the world that afford feedback are critical to learning.
These two findings suggest several things about good problems.     (1)   The most effective problems for learning
will be those where students can acquire feedback along the way that allows them to recognize the holes and
misconceptions in their knowledge, refine their knowledge and reasoning strategies, and evaluate the goodness of
their knowledge and reasoning strategies.  (2)   Problems should present difficulties for students, to give them an
opportunity to see where the real complexity in situations or domains lies.     (3)  There is much to learn from
situations where problems are not solved correctly or well.    Students do not always have to be successful at
solving problems, as long as they are learning from the experience.      These statements also make a suggestion
about the products of problem solving experiences.    It is important for the product or performance asked for in a
problem to be something that provides the kinds of feedback that allow students to identify issues that need to
be addressed or identify holes in their knowledge or reasoning. Of course, if students fail in negative ways, they
will give up and lose confidence.   It is important, therefore, that difficulties and failures be orchestrated in gentle
ways and that students understand their role in learning.

4.2  Materials   and     resources

PBL tells us that it is important that resources used during early inquiry into a problem supply authentic
information about the problem situation and make that information available in an authentic way.      The patient
case is used for medicine, where patient signs and symptoms and the results of tests are indexed by typical
questions asked during a medical examination. For an engineering or design problem, the kinds of materials that
would typically be available to a practicing engineer or designer working on the problem need to be made
available to learners.

But PBL   does not     provide all the guidance  that might be needed    to identify important issues or relevant
subgoals.  Nor does it identify materials and resources that will help students to solve a problem.   Case-based
reasoning provides guidelines on these things.    Cases recalled during everyday reasoning can serve several
purposes.  They can point out issues to focus on, suggest solutions to problems, warn of potential pitfalls,
support projection of the effects of a chosen solution, and so on. While a person working alone has only his or
her own experiences to use as cases to guide reasoning, when working with others, the range of experiences of
those in the group can all contribute to reasoning about a situation.  The case-based reasoning community has
turned this observation into a guideline for using case-based reasoning to help people solve problems:      case
based design aids (Domeshek, Kolodner & Zimring, 1994) and other kinds of case libraries (Bell et al., 1993,
Kass et al, 1993) store the cases or experiences of others (often experts) for problem solvers to peruse while
reasoning. Human reasoners can use such systems to augment their own memories.           Had the architect in the
example above not known of examples of buildings with good daylight lighting, she would probably have
looked in architectural magazines or files to find such examples and reasoned with them as if they were her own
experiences.  This is typical of the way expert designers get started solving problems; case libraries make such
examples readily available.

Case-based reasoning suggests making case libraries available to learners as they are solving hard problems.
PBL suggests that the cases in the case library be indexed in ways that will promote identifying issues that need
to be addressed to come up with a good problem solution (learning issues) and that will suggest potential
solutions or parts of solutions or ways of addressing issues.  Case-based reasoning suggests that,  in addition, it
is important to include cases that can help with projecting effects of potential solutions and to index cases to
facilitate such reasoning.

4.3   Managing     complexity      and   promoting     successful  problem     solving

The PBL approach asks students to solve very hard problems.        But the methodology also provides ways of
managing the complexity and helping students to be successful.     Complexity is managed in a variety of ways.
(1)  Students work     together in collaborative groups,  pooling  their expertise,  experience, ideas, and time.
Students can build on each others' strengths.   Working in groups also promotes learning how to articulate and

192
justify; one cannot work successfully in groups without being able to understand others and to make oneself
clear to others.  (2)  Coaches are trained to help students manage the complexity of problems.    They help them
to manage their collaborations well, to stay on track in solving problems, and to reflect on their experiences at
critical points. Particularly critical to promoting successful problem solving is asking for reflective summaries
at times when they feel that it is time to bring together all the disparate pieces of the deliberations. Also critical
is helping students draw the connections between learning issues they have identified and the ways in which
those learning issues will help them accomplish their problem solving goals.       (3)  The white boards and the
methodology for problem solving that students are taught help them organize       their deliberations.   White board
columns help them keep track of what they know, ideas they have had, and what they still need to do and learn.
(4) Students are expected to solve problems only to the level of detail they are prepared to deal with at the time.
Thus, they may revisit the same problem early and late in the curriculum and come up with very different
solutions.

To this CBR adds several suggestions.     (1) Students should learn to carry out case-based reasoning well.   It is a
natural process, but one that is often done poorly.  A major difficulty lies in realizing that suggestions made by
cases must be verified. Other difficulties are in recognizing what to focus on, carrying out adaptations, and
determining which of several recalled cases might be most applicable.       Using CBR well can be learned, we
believe, by carrying it out and reflecting on its use, just as PBL does to facilitate learning other cognitive skills.
(2) Several kinds of tools to help manage the complexity should be made available to students as they are
deliberating:    on-line libraries that provide cases of similar situations which help students generate and test
issues and ideas, tools for comparing and contrasting cases to each other, and tools for articulating what is
important.

4.4   Reflection

Reflection is a major part of PBL activity, and several kinds of reflection are built into its practice.     (1) At
several points in the case, the students pause to reflect on the data they have collected so far, to generate
questions about the data, and to hypothesize about underlying causal mechanisms for the patient's problems.
The coach pushes students to reflect in this way when they are having difficulty moving on, in order to bring
students back into the discussion who have not been participating, when much has been done and a summary
seems in   order, and  when students   believe  they  are at a transition point.  This reflection helps students
summarize, helps them recognize where they still need to concentrate efforts, and helps them develop causal
models of   mechanisms underlying the explanations they are constructing.         (2) Before leaving to research
learning issues, students discuss how they might go about doing the research and the kinds of resources they
might use. When they return, before they go back to solving the problem, they discuss their experiences with
those resources.  (3)  At the conclusion of solving each problem, the facilitator helps the students to reflect on
the experience to abstract the lessons they learned.   Focus here is on concepts learned, their participation as
collaborators and problem solvers and how they might improve, and reasoning used to solve problems, with
some additional summary, perhaps, of resource access and use.        They might also reflect here on why their
solution was different than that of the expert.  Reflection helps learners identify what they are learning, turn
experiences into cases, and extract causal models from what they are learning; it is used to promote transfer and
cognitive flexibility.

Case-based    reasoning  makes suggestions     about accomplishing   several of   these goals.  First, it provides
guidelines about what makes a good case and therefore how to help students turn their experiences into cases that
will be useful to them in later problem solving. The extent to which an old situation was interpreted determines
the extent to which it can be useful. (1)  With only a description of a problem situation and its solution, an old
solution can be repeated. (2)  Knowledge of whether the solution succeeded when applied gives the reasoner a
basis for deciding whether or not to reuse an old situation.     (3) If, in addition, the reasoner knows what
happened as a result of applying the solution, it    can make more reasoned judgments      (e.g., does that result
make sense in my new situation?).     (4) If, in addition, factors responsible for the result (success or failure) are
known, the reasoner can make even more reasoned judgments (e.g., are the aspects responsible for failure in the
old situation present in the new one?  If not, the same failure might not recur). CBR's analysis of the quality of
cases tells us about the quality of the feedback students need on their decisions and about the depth of the
reasoning they should do as they are analyzing each of their experiences.

                                                                                                                  193
CBR also makes recommendations about the how to effectively index experiences, especially to promote
transfer. Transfer refers to the ability to use knowledge in situations other than those in which it is learned.
PBL aims for students to be able to successfully use knowledge acquired during problem solving and to be able
to use the complex skills acquired during problem solving in a variety of circumstances. The transfer literature
(e.g., Salomon & Perkins, 1989) tells us that transfer requires looking forward at the time of an experience or at
the time knowledge is acquired to consider the circumstances in which it might prove useful and looking
backward when solving a new problem to consider whether such an experience has been encountered before.
CBR's computational explanation of looking forward and backward provides more concrete suggestions about
how to look backwards and forward.    Looking forward, it suggests, should include identifying what lessons an
experience teaches and predicting the circumstances when those lessons might be appropriately applied
(Kolodner, 1993). Looking backward involves incrementally making plausible elaborations on a new situation;
when such elaboration is not fruitful, attempting to reassess the situation from a different point of view and re
represent it; and when that is not fruitful, using more complicated search strategies to search for related types of
situations.

Case-based reasoning also makes suggestions about promoting cognitive flexibility. Cognitive flexibility refers
to knowing a concept in its full complexity so as to be able to effectively use it in novel situations. Since a
single experience with a concept shows only one way it can be used, cognitive flexibility theory (Spiro, et al,
1988) suggests that concepts be revisited from several points of view. CBR suggests that knowledge will be
more accessible, flexible, deeply learned, and accurate if learners have the opportunity to encounter (first hand or
by report) multiple situations in which the knowledge is used and multiple ways in which similar situations are
addressed, and if students have the opportunity to reuse and try out knowledge gained through experiences.
Making case libraries available to learners not only can help them generate ideas and solutions, it can also
promote flexibility. Since developing flexibility requires recognizing that a concept used earlier is applicable in
a new problem, CBR suggests that problems be written in such a way that they promote reminding of earlier
problems in which the same concept was used and that coaches help students notice that concepts are being
reused and abstract from the range of ways in which the concept is encountered.

4.5  Sequencing      the  curriculum

When PBL is used most effectively, it provides the curriculum (Barrows, 1985).        Thus, it is important that
problems cover the material that the curriculum needs to cover.   As the discussion above points out, for
purposes of developing an authentic understanding of concepts, flexibility, and transfer, problems that form a
curriculum should be chosen so that key concepts are visited over a number of cases. Case-based reasoning adds
to that a suggestion about what coverage means (Kolodner, 1993).  Providing coverage in a problem solving
domain means that students should encounter typical problems in the domain, typical solutions, typical
situations in which each problem and solution occur, typical reasoning pitfalls, and several important atypical
situations as well.

5.  Implications

Merging PBL and CBR has several implications.       First, it suggests ways to refine PBL to aim toward better
learning.   Second, this analysis plus analysis of why PBL works (e.g., Hmelo,       1995) can contribute to an
understanding of how to move PBL to new environments. PBL was developed for professional education, where
students are mature reasoners already, and where solving problems is the entire curriculum. Changes in practice
are needed if students are doing PBL as only one course, if students are less mature reasoners, and if there is no
homogeneity among students in terms of their life goals and interests.  To move PBL to such environments,
there's a need to understand the cognition behind its essential features. Third, the combination of PBL and CBR
makes several suggestions about the design of software to facilitate learning from problem solving activity.
The analysis we've done suggests several functions the software should have.    (1) It needs an environment for
keeping track of problem solving deliberations.   PBL suggests that this be done on white boards.    Electronic
white boards have the added advantage of allowing connections to be marked between items in the different
columns, and, in general, allowing connections to be made between white board entries and their justifications
and other products of deliberations. (2) Case libraries should be available in the environment. (3) The software
environment might provide the same kinds of scaffolding of problem solving that coaches support.         This is
especially important for situations in which facilitators are not available for individual work groups.   (4) It

194
might also provide scaffolding of the kinds of reflective activity that encourage transfer.             Looking forward, for
example, might be facilitated by asking students to create electronic cases based on their experiences to help
others solve later problems. We are aiming toward implementing these principles in McBAGEL (Narayanan, et
al, 1995), our experimental software environment.            We are piloting the environment, along with refined PBL
practices and problems we have developed, in several middle school and undergraduate classes in winter and
spring, 1996.

6.     References

Barrows, H. S. (1985). How to design a problem-based curriculum for the preclinical years. NY: Springer.
Barrows, H., & Kelson, A. C. (1995). Problem-based learning in secondary education and the problem-based learning
 institute (Monograph 1). Springfield IL: Problem-Based Learning Institute.
Bell, B., Bareiss, R., & Beckwith, R. (1993). Sickle cell counselor: A prototype goal-based scenario for instruction in
 a museum environment. The Journal of the Learning Sciences,            3(4), 347-386.
Blumenfeld, P., Soloway, E., Marx, R., Krajcik, J., Guzdial, M., & Palincsar A.(1991) Motivation Project-based
 Leaming:      Sustaining the Doing,  Supporting     the Learning. Educational    Psychologist, vol. 26 (3&4), pp.  369-398.
Cognition    and   Technology   Group     at Vanderbilt.  (1993).  Anchored   instruction  and  situated  cognition  revisited.
 Educational      Technology, 33(3),  52-70.
Domeshek, E. A.., Kolodner, J. L., & Zimring, C. M.., (1994).         The design of a tool kit for case based design aids.  In
 Gero,    J.S. & Sudweeks, F.     (Eds.), Artificial Intelligence in Design  '94, Kluwer  Academic   Publishers, Netherlands,
 pp. 109-- 126.
Hmelo, C. E. (1995). Problem-based learning: Development of knowledge and reasoning strategies. In Proceedings of
  the Seventeenth    Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.       Hillsdale NJ: Erlbaum.
Kass, A., Burke, R., Blevis, E., & Williamson, M. (1993). Constructing learning environments for complex social
 skills. The Journal of the Learning Sciences,        3(4), 387-428.
Kolodner, J. (1993). Case-Based reasoning. San Mateo CA: Morgan Kaufmann.
Linn,  M. C.,  &   Songer, N.  B.    (1988). Curriculum   reformulation:   Incorporating technology  into science   instruction.
 Paper presented at the American Educational Research Association Annual Meeting, New Orleans.
Narayanan,     N.  H., Hmelo,     C. E.,  Petrushin,  V.,  Newstetter,  W.    C., Guzdial, M.,   &   Kolodner,   J. L. (1995).
 Computational       support  for  collaborative   learning through   generative   problem solving.  In  J. L. Schnase  (Ed.),
 Proceedings of CSCL 95: The First International Conference on Computer Support for Collaborative Leaming, (pp.
 247-254). Hillsdale NJ: Erlbaum.
Norman,   G.   R., &   Schmidt,   H. G..  (1992).    The psychological  basis of  problem-based   learning:  A  review  of the
 evidence.     Academic   Medicine,  67,  557-565.
Ram,   P. &    Hmelo,  C. (1995,   December).     The PEBBLES      project: PBL   in chemistry.  Presented  at Conference  on
 Supporting project and problem-based learning. Atlanta, GA.
Salomon, G. & Perkins, D. N. (1989). Rocky roads to transfer: Rethinking mechanisms of a neglected phenomenon.
 Educational Psychologist, 24, 113-142.
Schank,   R.   (1982). Dynamic    Memory:     A Theory   of Learning    in  Computers  and   People.   New  York:   Cambridge
 University Press.
Schank, R., Fano, A., Bell, B. & Jona, M. (1993). The design of goal-based scenarios. The Journal of the Learning
 Sciences,     3(4), 305--346.
Spiro, R.  J., Coulsen,   R.  L., Feltovich,   P. J., &  Anderson,   D. K.  (1988).  Cognitive  flexibility theory:  Advanced
 knowledge acquisition in ill-structured domains. In Proceedings of the Tenth Annual Conference of the Cognitive
 Science Society.      Hillsdale, NJ:Erlbaum.
Williams,  S.  M.  (1993).    Putting  case   based   learning into  context: Examples   from   legal, business, and   medical
 education. Journal of the Leaming Sciences, 2, 367-427.

Acknowledgments

This work was supported by the EduTech Institute through a grant from the Woodruff Foundation.

                                                                                                                                 195
