                  Design       Choices       for     Learning-by-Doing                   Software:
                                        When to Choose Advise

                                  Michael Korcuska, Alex Kass & Menachem Y. Jona
                          The Institute for the Learning Sciences/Northwestern University
                                            {korcuska,kass,jona }@ils.nwu.edu

                Abstract: While   there is growing  awareness  of the  value of developing   computer-based
               learning-by-doing   environments,    there is still a  need   to analyze  the   strengths  and
               weaknesses of particular architectures. This paper examines some of the common design
               issues faced when building learning-by-doing environments and analyzes the relationship
               between those   design issues and the key features of learning   architectures, especially an
               architecture we are currently developing called Advise. We also discuss the circumstances
               under which Advise is appropriate and when other architectures would be a better choice.
1.   Introduction
We believe that for learning-environment design and development to make more rapid progress, it is important
for  educational   researchers to stop  focusing   primarily  on   such  abstract questions    as   whether to   pursue   an
approach like learning-by-doing, and more on how to pursue the particular approach they advocate. For instance,
even if one accepts the basic philosophy - as we do - that some sort of coached learning-by-doing environment
is the most effective way to teach, numerous design alternatives for teaching any particular subject area remain
open.     The real question for  advocates   of learning-by-doing   is  "Learning  what    by  doing     what?".  Our own
experience building   computer-based learning-by-doing environments (e.g.          Bareiss &   Beckwith,    1993;  Bell   &
Bareiss, 1993; Kass, Dooley, & Luksa, 1993; Schank, 1992) as well as the experiences of others doing similar
work (e.g.    Anderson, 1993;    Bransford,  1990;  Lesgold, Lajoie, Bunzo, &      Eggan,  1988;    Soloway,   Guzdial,   &
Hay, 1994) have taught us that many decisions related to the structure of learning-by-doing environments that
have a major impact on the effectiveness ofthe final product. Mapping a set of pedagogical goals and practical
considerations into an appropriate design is a complex process. That process, which is relatively unexplored in
the literature, is the central topic of this paper.
1.1   Advise:      A  Sample     architecture
In   this paper we'll use a particular  learning-by-doing    architecture, called  Advise,   with   which  we're  currently
experimenting to illustrate some issues that relate to choosing and implementing appropriate learning-by-doing
environments. Advise is a computer-based learning architecture which places students in the role of advisor to
an important    decision-maker,   such as  the President of the    United  States. Students    are  given the  mission    of
evaluating    the  effectiveness  of several courses  of   action,    providing   evidence   for   their evaluations,   and
recommending one of the options. To help complete the task, students are given a large hypermedia reference
library of information and expert opinions about the issue, a skeletal report, and a panel of opinionated experts
who represent conflicting perspectives about the issue. Upon submitting the report for review, students receive a
critique which focuses on    the  quality of the evidence he   used   to support   his  conclusions.     Students can then
revise and resubmit the report.
We're currently using the Advise architecture to create applications designed to teach topics in foreign policy,
earth science, and statistics. For example, the foreign-policy application is based around a crisis situation in a
fictional country we call Krasnovia, which is modeled after events in the former Yugoslavia. The structure of the
learning environment is as .follows:
    The student   gets an  emergency phone call from      the White    House,    asking him    to  come  down    on  the
     double to help with an emerging crisis.
    On the   way to  the White House the     student watches a    new   report  explaining    that the  fighting in  the
     Krasnovian capital has intensified and there is new pressure on the US to respond.
    At the White House, the President tells the student that he needs help because his knowledgeable advisors
     are providing mutually contradictory advice. He asks the student to evaluate the possible options mi
     recommend one.

196
    The student then  must   evaluate each of the  options-major      military   action, diplomacy,    and economic
     embargo-and decide how well each one meets a set of objectives the President provides.
    The   student uses  information in    a hypermedia   reference  library  to    support his   opinions,   and  the
    President's advisors critique the student's reasoning and make sure he considers all sides of the issue.A plausible argument can be made for several of the options. When the student decides on an optionaoo
     recommends it to the President, the President will be satisfied only if the student has provided enough
     evidence for his position.
It is important to note that more than one of the options for solving the problem can be defended using the
evidence   in the  hypermedia reference library.   The advisors play   an  important      role in this   part of Advise
applications. Students can ask them specific questions about their opinions of particular plans, and then each
advisor can critique the report and offer advice about how to improve it. This means that students can't succeed at
the reporting task simply by finding a set of opinions that no one disagrees with. They must instead concentrate
on ensuring that good support is provided for opinions that are included in the report. Another important feature
of Advise   applications is  that since they  deal solely with  proposal   formation      and  analysis  they avoid  the
complications associated with intricate simulation.
In   this paper we'll examine   some    of the important     design issues    faced when   building  learning-by-doing
environments;    analyze the  relationship   between   those design    issues and   the   key  features  of   the Advise
architecture; and discuss how to decide when that architecture is appropriate.
2.   Learn what by doing what?
Designing a learning-by-doing environment is not simply a matter of straightforwardly inspecting the teaching
objectives and then creating an environment which employs the target skills. For one thing, at the outset of the
design process, it is frequently unclear what the teaching objectives related to a particular subject matter should
be. The first question that must be answered is: Learn what by doing what? For instance, if one starts with the
goal  of teaching  students about foreign  policy, the first question  one    has to  ask  is, teach them     what about
foreign   policy? The mechanisms    by which    foreign  policy is   formulated?     The  mechanisms     by   which  it's
implemented? The trends in its     recent  evolution?  Or,   perhaps,  the    rationale behind    recent foreign   policy
decisions?
Only after specifically defining what one wants students to learn does it make sense to start thinking about what
kind of activity they should engage in. Perhaps the clearest way to think about the structure of different learn-by
doing architectures is in terms of different possible roles that students could take on. Here are some possible
roles that might be relevant to teaching foreign policy:
    Advisor    -  Students  advise a decision maker about    what course     of action to  take. In the  US   foreign
     policy example, they might be assistants to the President and be asked to recommend policy options.
    Reporter - Students create an explanation of some event or situation. As a reporter, students might
     create a story about the results of US foreign policy in Vietnam.
    High-level Decision Maker - Students make important decisions and control action in the learning
     environment-they primarily focus on what to do and why. Secretary of State is an example of this role
     that would be used to teach about foreign policy.
    Low-level     Functionary     - Students    are given   tasks  to execute    and are primarily  concerned    with
     executing those tasks in the current environment. The role of a diplomat stationed in Saigon would be a
     foreign-policy-related example of this.
This list is intended to give a sense of some of the possibilities for structuring a learn-by-doing environment
that would teach about a topic like foreign policy. There are many possible roles, some of which don't easily
map onto foreign policy.
Deciding which role is best suited to a particular learning situation requires an analysis of the pedagogical
opportunities and limitations of each role. Furthermore, the decision about what role students will play is only
one part of designing the activity that students will be given - it's just the beginning of deciding what students
will do in the learning environment (Schank, Fano, Bell, & Jona, 1994). For example, once one has decided that
the best idea for a particular subject area is to put students in the role of a reporter, there's a whole range of
questions that follow:
  What should students be assigned to report about? Should they be asked to report on the causes of a
     particular situation? The likely effects? The opinions of various people involved?

                                                                                                                       197
    What type    of scaffolding should  students receive? Should    they  be given    a partially completed   task aoo
     asked to finish it? Should they be given an incorrect solution and asked to correct it? Or should they have
     to start from scratch?
    What kind of coaching should students receive?        Should the coaching occur whenever students make an
     error? Only when they ask for it? Or only after the effects of an error become apparent?
One of our highest priority research goals is to begin to form a framework for analyzing some of the factors that
should influence the choice learning-by-doing architectures.
3.   Factors      that   Influence    the     Choice   of    Learning      Architecture
One way to approach the issue of how to make design choices is by examining the question: Why isn't the most
straightforward design always the best? The most straightforward learning-by-doing approach would seem to be
to create a simulated environment that     allows   students  to execute the    skills   one wants  to  teach. In  foreign
policy, for example,     the most  straightforward learning-by-doing design      might    be   to  have  students execute
foreign policy by, say, playing the role of the Secretary of State. Why might this not always be the best choice?
There are both pedagogical and practical reasons why this might not be the best choice. Five common factors
that influence the choice of the particular learning-by-doing architecture are:
  1.  The real-world domain might be too hard for students to understand.
  2.  The domain might be too difficult to simulate.
  3.  The most obvious choices might focus attention on irrelevant issues.
  4.  The level of abstraction which is required might not match the pedagogical goals.
  5.  There might be a need to simplify the task so that coaching becomes tractable.
  6.  The obvious role might not be motivating to the majority of students
Next we  examine     these issues and discuss some    strategies for dealing with   them,    using examples drawn   from
teaching foreign policy.
3.1  Strategies      for  simplifying    domains    that   are   difficult   to understand
Many domains are difficult to understand, and many students will find it impossible to successfully complete
realistic tasks in learning-by-doing  environments    which preserve significant real-world       complexity.  The  issues
that the Secretary of State must face when formulating           foreign policy   are quite    complex    and contain   an
overwhelming amount of detail. Making foreign policy decisions might be daunting or discouraging to many
students. There are several choices open to designers in this situation, including the following:
  1.  Find      a  "toy"   example.    This  strategy  involves   finding  a  situation  that  is  simple and  familiar
      enough that students will not find it overwhelming. One way to do this is to find a "close to home"
      situation that is similar to real-world situations. Instead of using a real diplomatic situation involving
      the US,     Israel and Syria,  for example,   a designer   might   choose  an example       from a  context more
      familiar to students like a dispute between the basketball team and the volleyball team about who gets
      to use the gym.
  2.  Break     the  real  domain    into  small    chunks.    This strategy involves breaking down the domain
      into small chunks and addressing each piece with a separate learning environment. Instead of dealing
      with all the issues that impact US foreign policy students might be asked to work in a scenario which
      only involved economic or trade policy, and ignored political and security issues.
  3.  Limit     the  scope    of  the job.    This  strategy  involves   giving  students    a constrained job  in  the
      learning-by-doing environment. Unlike the previous strategy students encounter the full complexity of
      the domain but do so in a limited and well-defined manner. Instead of being responsible for all aspects
      of US     foreign  policy (including collecting information,   setting  goals and   formulating    and  executing
      plans) they might only be responsible for one aspect, say formulating plans.
  4.  Provide      scaffolding.   If the task is  too complicated, you can provide assistance for students. You
      might,    for example, provide a   draft of a report to modify   instead of having     students  create one from
      scratch. The priorities and courses of action are pre-determined so that students does not need to reason
      at the very highest levels of abstraction.

198
What Advise Does: Advise applications deal with difficult to understand domains by limiting the scope of
the job-students are not asked to invent or execute options, but to evaluate how well the options achieve a
predefined  set of priorities. The   options and  priorities   are chosen  so  students   will   encounter the    complex
interactions and tradeoffs that may be the defining characteristic of the domain.
Each of these strategies has various attributes which make it more or less appropriate depending on the goals of
the learning environment. The first two strategies, finding a toy example, and breaking down the domain, are
less likely to engage students in complex interactions and tradeoffs between important factors of full-fledged
problems in the domain. Breaking the domain into chunks isolates students from such interactions-that is how
it makes the    situation easier to  understand.  While  the   "toy example"   strategy  allows   students to  encounter
tradeoffs (between the needs of each team), these tradeoffs may not be similar to those faced in the real-world
domain (between economic and political concerns). It also creates a need for students to transfer from the toy
problem to the intended real-world domain of foreign         policy.    The  third strategy,   limiting  the job,   better
preserves the   actual features of a domain-but at a     cost.  One   of these costs  if flexibility; restricting the job
gives  students fewer options.   Thus,  if the task is   to formulate   plans, students   might   not   participate in   the
execution of those plans; if they execute the plans then they miss out on their development. This can reduce the
level of excitement or engagement with the task.
3.2   Strategies   for    simplifying   domains     that    are hard    to   simulate
Another reason for simplifying a domain is because it is difficult or expensive to accurately simulate. There are
several strategies for dealing with this situation:
   1.  Build    a state-based    pseudo-simulation.       Instead   of trying  to  construct an  actual simulation of
       the  effects of foreign policy on the   world,  a set of linked,  pre-defined  states can  be  constructed.  The
       system knows that when a user performs an action at a certain state that it should present him with a
       pre-determined new situation. For example when a user decides to ignore Yugoslavia and focus most of
       his attention on Iraq, he is soon confronted with a crisis in Yugoslavia.
   2.  A void   simulating     the  most complex      activities.  Some    aspect  of the domain      may  be  easier to
       simulate than others. The difficult aspects can either be treated separately or can be partially connected
       to the simulation. It might be possible to simulate the economic effects of foreign policy, for example,
       without    being   able to   capture  the  political  effects.   Furthermore,  when     designing   a   learning
       environment, one often has a choice about which activities to include. An activity that is less directly
       related to the topic of the learning environment may nevertheless be a good choice if it is relatively
       easy to simulate.
   3.  Place    students   in  an    advisory    role. One reason for creating a simulation is to        give students
       control over what happens. When you can't accurately simulate the domain you can, instead, reduce the
       amount of control students have. Placing them in an advisory role instead ofa decision-making role is
       one way to do this because the decision-maker will ultimately take actions that effect the simulated
       world. If the decision-maker's actions are to those you know how to simulate, then students are free to
       explore a range ofactions-even many that can't be simulated. Taken to an extreme there may be no
       need for a simulation at all and the job is only to give advice.
   4. Avoid  simulation    entirely.   Sometimes    simulation     will be so  difficult that it is better not to   even
       try. Our   models   of  human    psychology  are  currently    rather primitive,   for  example,   and  creating
       simulations of diplomats and politicians is unlikely to lead to an effective learning environment
What Advise does: Advise applications deal with domains that are difficult to simulate by placing students
in an advisory role and doing no simulation. Students' advice is accepted by the decision-maker who then puts
the plan into   action. The results  of the  plan can  be   presented   very simply   by  having    one ending scenario,
usually in video, for each course of action. Alternatively the final results can be omitted and the decision maker
can compliment students on a job well done and assure them that even if the situation turns out badly he can at
least feel good about having made a reasoned decision.
Again, each of these strategies has strengths and weaknesses. The second strategy, simulating a subset of the
domain, is  effective because it   maintains the  strengths  of simulations,   namely,   students   have a great    deal of
control, can experiment with a wide range ofdecisions and can see the effects of their actions. On the other hand
it is often the case that the most interesting aspects of the domain, the ones you wanted to teach in the first
place, are precisely those that are hardest to simulate. A state-based simulation, on the other hand, can allow
students to engage in those aspects of a domain that can't be mathematically modeled. The difficulty with this
strategy is that the range of options given to students are severely restricted-usually only a small list of

                                                                                                                         199
 alternatives can be supported without creating unmanageable branching. Finally, placing students in an advisory
 role can allow you to build a simpler situation. The drawback of this strategy is that the decision-maker must
 reject the advice when the system can't simulate the effects of that actions, which can be frustrating.
 3. 3 Strategies    to   control    the   focus    of   attention
 One of  the major   advantages of    learning-by-doing   is  the motivational   effect that comes   with    giving    students
 real-world problems    to  solve. This  can paradoxically create a    problem   if there are learning    goals  that, from   a
 student's perspective, don't seem to be    directly  related to the  learning-by-doing   situation. Students    might    be  so
 focused  on performing     the  real-world task   that  they ignore  important    aspects  of  the  learning   environment.
 Students  given   the role of  President,  for example,  would focus on    trying    to make   the  correct   foreign  policy
 decision, that is, the foreign policy   decision that    causes  the simulation    to  behave   in  the  best  way.   This   is
 especially dangerous when the simulation is not perfectly accurate-it can lead to students becoming experts on
 running the simulation instead of learning about the subject area. But even if we have a high-fidelity simulation
 we could simply more interested in having students learn about the range of possible options than in helping
 them make "correct" foreign policy decisions (if there are such a thing). Again, there are several strategies to
 focus students' attention of different aspects of a task:
   1.    Manipulate the role. Placing students in a high-level decision making role will focus students on
         making correct decisions. An advising role, on the other hand, can be used to focus attention on the
         analysis that leads up to making a decision instead of the decision itself.
   2.    Manipulate     the    simulation.      If you   want to  focus students on      analysis  skills rather   than    on
         decision-making procedures, you can cause the simulation to behave badly whenever students do a poor
         job of analysis-regardless of the decisions they make.
   3.    Modify    the  task. Instead of simply allowing students to         execute the    actions  that  the   simulation
         allows, they can also be asked to justify their actions with some analysis.
 What    Advise     does:   Advise    applications   control  the focus  of attention    by  using  the   advising   role. The
 advising role focuses more attention on the reasons for making a specific decision and less on the decision itself.
 The goal of   Advise  applications   is to help   students  learn to consider many     possible  alternatives and   to   bring
 appropriate evidence to bear on the situation. Because advice is effective only to the extent that good reasons are
 provided  for following    that advice,  the  role  of  the advisor  focuses  attention  on    providing  quality   evidence
 supporting their evaluations.
 All  of these strategies  are designed to  move    the  focus of attention  from   the  final  goal of   the  learn-by-doing
 environment and onto the (possibly more mundane) activities that are more directly related to the pedagogical
 goals. The strategy of using the advising role suffers from the same disadvantages as in the previous instance,
 namely, it potentially reduces the feeling of engagement with the learning (see (Malone, 1981) for example).
 Manipulating the      simulation  is problematic     for two    reasons. First,   it might    be  difficult  to control     the
 simulation  so    precisely. Second,  students    who   use  the  simulation  over     time may     feel that   the   learning
 environment    is being   unfair. Modifying    the  task   works  well  in many    cases   but potentially    faces practical
 problems-it can be quite difficult to analyze justifications.
 3.4  Strategies    for    controlling     the  level    of  abstraction
 Sometimes the obvious learn-by-doing scenario will be at the wrong level of abstraction given the pedagogical
 goals. There are a wide variety of aspects to foreign policy ranging from the formulation of overall goals, to
 deciding how to    achieve  those  goals   in  different   regions,  to  crafting  the  correct  diplomatic    language     for
 communicating in particular countries. The design choices appropriate for teaching about policy formation are
 unlikely to be the same as those for teaching about writing letters to foreign dignitaries from Japan.
  1.     Manipulate     the    role. Adjusting the role is a simple way to control what level of abstraction
         students will  be  dealing with.   The    roles of   high-level  decision  and   low-level  functionary     clearly
         emphasize different levels of abstraction.
  2.     Provide    insulation.    If the  role you'd   like to  give students   naturally  includes  some     activities  at
         inappropriate levels of abstraction then you can provide assistance which will help students with those
         activities. Creating reports involves deciding what to say, and also how to say it. If you don't want to
         worry about   teaching writing,   you  might    insulate them    from those    details by  ask   them   to  tell  an
         assistant what to write, rather than writing it themselves.

200
What Advise does: Advise applications use the "assistant" technique to provide insulation from the writing
task, and keep students at a relatively high level of abstraction. The advising task itself helps focus students on
the analysis issues by avoiding execution-related issues, and by providing the plans and goals
3.5   Strategies   to  make     coaching   tractable
The wider the range of actions and the more free-form the      task, the  more difficult  it is  to provide  automated
coaching and critiquing. Simulations can often be difficult to coach students through, because it is difficult to
know  why   they  performed  a particular action in a complex   simulated    world. It is   also the case   that   certain
simulation architectures, such as purely numerical simulations, make it difficult to trace the path from causes to
effects (Forbus, 1994). The following strategies can help provide reliable coaching:
  1.  Add    structure   to    the task.   Restricting   the flexibility  students  have  can    facilitate coaching.
      Reducing    the number   of actions students  can take makes   it easier to decide  which   action    caused the
      problem they are facing. Furthermore, structured tasks make it much easier to know what students are
      doing and why-both crucial ingredients in delivering assistance.
 2.   Build    a  self-explanatory   simulator.      Qualitative reasoning h as demonstrated the ability of self
      explanatory simulations, which are combinations of quantitative and qualitative simulations, to provide
      the kind of explanations that are useful for coaching (Forbus, 1994).
 3.   Require     students   to explain   actions.  Instead  of simply    allowing  students  to execute actions    in
      the simulation, they can also be asked to explain why they are doing what they are doing. Coaching
      can be based on the relationship between their explanations and actions.
 4. Avoid simulation. Sometimes providing coaching in the context of a simulation will be so difficult
      that it is better not to even try. Figuring out what students are doing and why can be so difficult in
      some circumstances that coaching will be impossible.
What   Advise    does: Advise   applications provide  a highly  structured  task  and do no  simulation.    The task   is
structured around priorities and options that the system understands. The system therefore knows what students
are  trying to accomplish    and why.   The  lack   of simulation    also   makes  identifying   appropriate  coaching
opportunities that much easier.
The advantages of self-explanatory simulators are compelling-they provide qualitative explanations that are
useful for coaching and tutoring without sacraficing the dynamic interaction     of a mathematical    simulation.   The
main disadvantage is that they are very difficult to build. Finally, the last strategy, avoiding simulation, doesn't
say  much   about what the  learning environment    should  be like  instead. Another   drawback    of not   building  a
simulation is that students don't get to see the results of their actions in as direct a way as a simulation affords.
3. 6 Strategies    for  increasing    motivation
Motivation is a huge problem in education. Using goal-based scenarios instead of drill-and-practice or lecture
courses goes a long way to solving the problems of motivation. It is crucial, though, that students adopt the
goal that is the central focus of a many learning-by-doing environments. The following strategies can be used to
increase motivation:
 1. Change     the    role. Some roles are inherently more interesting than others. Choose these roles when
      they are compatible with the learning goals, even if it requires stretching the realism of the situation. It
      is more interesting to play the role of President than it is to be an ambassador.
 2. Magnify       importance    of  the   problem.    Often the importance of the     problem can     be    magnified.
      This  is usually done  by  increasing the cost  of failure. In foreign  policy   this  means   transforming   a
      scenario in which the problem is a minor land dispute into one which puts civilian lives at stake.
 3. Introduce a "meta-problem". Introducing a "meta-problem" is just a particular way of magnify the
      importance of the problem for domains. This strategy involves making the learner's task an important
      step in solving some larger problem.
 4.  Add    style/humor.     Impressive   graphics, stylish  video   and  a good  sense  of  humor   are    useful for
      grabbing a learner's interest. They will not be sufficient to sustain interest, however, and this strategy
      is useful primarily in conjunction with one of the others.
 5.  Use    collaboration/competition.        Working    with   or  against  others can   be  very   motivating    for
      certain learners. Creating collaborative or competitive learning environments creates a whole new class

                                                                                                                       201
      of design   problems     which  have     received even   less   attention  in   the  research    community     than
      individualized learning-by-doing environments.
What   Advise    does:   Advise  applications   place learners  in the role of advisor instead of decision-maker.      For
many, if not most, learners an advisory role will be less enticing than the role of decision maker, even if the
analysis task itself is interesting. Advise    applications address this  by   drawing students    into the   role with    an
exciting introdction which emphasises the importance of the problem, and the importance of their role.
3. 7 Review:    Key     features   of the   Advise      Architecture
To summarize, here are the important features of the Advise architecture:
    In the role of advisor students do not need to make or execute the decision themselves.
    The scope of the job is limited to  evaluating a predefined set    of potential   courses of action.    Students cb
     not need to generate options.
    Students are given the priorities the plans should satisfy. They do not need to define the important goals.
    Students do not need to write the text of the report themselves.
    More than one plan can be justified with the evidence from the database. Students are not coached on            their
     choice of plans, only on the effectiveness of their support.
    A panel of advisors offers advice and critiques which reflect a variety of opinions on the issue.
    No complex simulation required.
4.   When Advise Is an Appropriate Architecture
We believe this set of features is useful in certain circumstances, as follows:
    You  need to simplify   a hard   to understand   domains   but   don't want   to  break  the  domain    into  small,
     independent chunks because the important issues relate to the interactions and tradeoffs between those
     chunks. It was clear to us when set out to teach about foreign policy that one of the central points we
     wanted to make   was   about the tradeoffs between domestic and        international  political   concerns,  so that
     separating the two would not be appropriate.
    When watching a simulation unfold      is not crucial to  learning because real-time dynamics and long-term
     effect are not the highest priority teaching goals.
    When decisions you want to teach about are not appropriate for simulation because there is not agreement
     about the effects of certain actions. You might want to use a process other than simulation to teach about
     Kennedy's decision process in the Cuban Missile Crisis Historical since you don't know what would have
     happened if Kennedy had allowed the missiles to remain in Cuba.
    When   a central teaching point  is that  there is more   than   one side  to  an issue.  The     panel of  advisors
     focuses attention sharply on the opposing points of view. Because students know their conclusions are
     being  reviewed, Advise   emphasizes    the evidence   students   have  for their conclusions,     rather  than  the
     conclusions themselves. The advisors are designed with differing viewpoints and can intervene if students
     ignore an important point on one side of the issue.
    You  want students  to  focus on analysis rather   than   execution.   In subject areas  like foreign   policy,  the
     most   important thing  for students to    learn   the justification   and  criticism typically    associated   with
     different policy options. The role of advisor facilitates this by focusing more attention on the reasons for
     making a specific decision and less on the mechanism for carrying the decision out.
    You  want students to   operate  at an intermediate level   of   abstraction. The  predesigned     goals  and plans
     insulate students from the highest levels of abstraction. The virtual assistant and the advising role help
     avoid details like writing and execution.
Just as important as understanding when to use Advise       is understanding when     not  to use  it. Advise is   unlikely
to be appropriate if your teaching goals include the following:
    When the dynamic aspects of the domain are crucial. Simulations are really the only way to           help students
     learn about domains where cause-and-effect are well understood and immediate feedback from the learning
     environment will help students understand the important relationships. Much of engineering and physics
     have these attributes.
    When there are procedural skills    to be  taught. Advise  is  not  about  the execution  of    already  formulated
     plans. Some  example   procedural   skill are learning  how   to be  a 411  information   operator  for   the phone
     company or solving algAdvisea problems. Architectures which are appropriate for these kinds of skills
     including John Anderson's tutors (Anderson, 1993).

202
   When there is a correct answer. Advise is not appropriate if there is a particular decision making procedure
    you want to teach which points to a relatively narrow range of correct solutions. More than one solution
    in an Advise application should be supportable and the advisors are designed to emphasize that there are
    multiple valid points of view.
   When it   is  important   for students to   see the effects of   their decisions played out       over time.  Very little
    time passes in an Advise application, in part because there is no simulation. If the long-term effects of
    decisions are important then a simulation-based learning architecture is more appropriate.
5.  Conclusion
Designing a compelling computer-based learning-by-doing architecture for a given set of teaching goals is a very
difficult, and poorly understood undertaking. In this paper we have explored some of the design issues that must
be  confronted   when   mapping    a    set of  teaching     goals and   practical    considerations  to a   learning-by-doing
architecture. To illustrate how these issues manifest themselves in the design of an actual system, we described
our development of the Advise architecture and its use in teaching about foreign policy.
To build more creative and engaging computer-based learning-by-doing systems, designers must often go beyond
taking  the most      straightforward   approach.  Through     our work    in  designing   the Advise    architecture  we  have
identified five factors that  affect  the choice and design of a     learning-by-doing     architecture  and   a  set of design
strategies  that can   be used to   address each   of    these  five factors.   An    awareness    of these   factors  can help
practitioners designing their own learning-by-doing architectures by alerting them early on to the sorts of issues
that they are likely to face. Moreover, we hope that the specific design strategies we have identified will provide
system designers with feel for the range of potential solutions that are available to them.
References
[Anderson, 1993) Anderson, J. (1993). Rules of the mind. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
[Bareiss & Beckwith,    1993)   Bareiss, R., & Beckwith, R. (1993).       Advise the    president:    A hypermedia    system fo r
    teaching  contemporary      American  history. Presented   at American     Educational Research Association,      . Atlanta,
    GA.
[Bell & Bareiss,  1993)   Bell,  B. L., & Bareiss,    R. (1993).   Sickle  Cell Counselor:   Using    Goal-Based   Scenarios  to
    Motivate the Exploration o f Knowledge in a Museum Context. In Proceeedings of the World Conference on AI i n
    Education,   . Edinburgh:   Association for the Advancement of Computers in Education.
[Bransford 1990] Bransford, J. D., et al (1990). Anchored instruction: why we need it and how technology can help. In
    R. Spiro &   D. Nix  (Eds.), Cognition,   Education, and   Multimedia:    Exploring  Ideas in  High Technology    Hillsdale,
    N.J: Lawrence Erlbaum.
[Forbus, 1994)   Forbus,  K.  D.  (1994).   Self-explanatory   simulators:     making   computers   partners  in  the modeling
    process. Mathematics and computers in simulation(36), 91-101.
[Kass, Dooley & Luksa, 1993)      Kass,   A., Dooley,    S., & Luksa,   F.    (1993). The Broadcast News     Project  (Technical
    Report No. 40). Institute for the Learning Sciences.
[Lesgold, Lajoie,  Bunzo & Eggan,       1988] Lesgold,   A., Lajoie, S.,  Bunzo, M.,    & Eggan,   G.  (1988).   SHERLOCK:    A
    coached practice environment       for an electronics troubleshooting      job. In J. Larkin,  R. Chabay,     & C.   Scheftic
    (Eds.), Computer assisted instruction and intelligent tutoring systems: Establishing communication NJ: Lawrence
    Erlbaum Associates.
[Malone,   1981) Malone,   T.   (1981). Toward a theory      of intrinsically motivating  instruction.  Cognitive   Science,  4,
    333-369.
[Schank,   1992)  Schank,  R.   (1992).   Goal-Based scenarios     (Technical Report    No. 36).   Institute  for the  Learning
    Sciences.
[Schank, Fano,   Bell  & Jona,   1994)  Schank,  R.,  Fano,   A., Bell, B.,   & Jona,  M. (1994).  The Design     of Goal-Based
    Scenarios. The Journal of the Leaming Sciences, 3(4), 305-345.
[Soloway,   Guzdial & Hay,    1994)   Soloway,    E., Guzdial,  M.,  &   Hay,   K. E.  (1994). Learner-Centered    Design:   The
    Challenge for HCI in the 21st Century. Interaction, 1(2), 36-48.
Acknolwedgments
The Advise project is sponsored by      the ARPA CAETI program,      contract   #N-66001-95-C-8617,      monitored    by NRAD.
ILS was established in 1989   with the support  of Andersen Consulting      and recieves  additional  support  from   Ameritech,
an Institute partner. Thanks to the many members of the Advise team as well as our reviewers, especially for comments
on issues of motivation.

                                                                                                                              203
