           MaxwellWorld:                    Learning            Complex          Scientific         Concepts
                                via      Immersion              in   Virtual        Reality

 Chris Dede                                 Marilyn C. Salzman                       R. Bowen Loftin
 Graduate School of Education                 Psychology Department                  Mail Code PT4
 GeorgeMason University                       GeorgeMason University                 NASA/Johnson Space Center
 Fairfax, VA 22030                            Fairfax, VA 22030                      Houston, Texas 77058
 (703) 993-2019                               (703) 352-8375                         (713) 483-8070
 Cdede@grnu.edu                             Msalzman@grnu.edu                        Bowen @gothamcity.jsc.nasa.gov

               Abstract:       Subjects    such  as   electrostatics are difficult  to  teach  in part  because
               learners   cannot  draw     analogies   to   personal  experiences    that  provide    metaphors.
             MaxwellWorld has been designed to allow students to explore electrostatic forces and
               fields,   learn about   the  concept   of  electric potential,   and  "discover"   the nature   of
               electric flux.  In formative assessments ofMaxwellWorld's usability and learnability,
               students enjoyed learning about electric fields and cited the 3-D representations, the
               interactivity, the ability to navigate to multiple perspectives, and the use of color as
               characteristics that were important to their learning experience.           Pre- and post-lesson
               evaluations     show  that   students  had   a greater understanding     of the   distribution  of
               forces in an electric field, as well as representations such as test charge traces and field
               lines.    Our   studies also   indicate that the three-dimensional    nature   of VR   aids with
               learning and that the virtual reality experience is more motivating for students than a
              comparable 2-D rnicroworld.

 Exemplary pedagogy in science education is based on two principles.             First, instruction   should  develop learners'
 abilities to intuitively understand how the natural world functions before inculcating the formal representations
 and reasoning skills that scientists use.       In   other words,   fostering  in  students  the capability   to qualitatively
 predict the behavior of the universe is initially more important than teaching them to manipulate quantitative
 formulas.   Second,     instruction   should help    learners evolve    their existing   mental  models    to   more accurate
 conceptions of reality.   Students    are not  empty   vessels  to  be  filled with theories;   they have firmly   held, often
 erroneous beliefs about how reality operates.         Guided inquiry experiences that reveal the shortcomings of their
 current conceptual frameworks can help wean students from these erroneous beliefs.
 To date, uses of   information   technology     to   apply these  two  pedagogical    principles have  centered   on creating
 computational     tools and two-dimensional     virtual    representations that students   can   manipulate   to complement
 their memory      and intelligence  in  constructing     more  accurate  mental     models.     However,    high-performance
 computing and communications capabilities create a new possibility [Dede 1995].                 Like Alice walking through
 the looking glass, learners can immerse themselves in distributed, synthetic environments, becoming "avatars"
 (computer-graphics      representations   that serve as    personas  of human     participants  in the virtual   world)  who
 collaborate and   learn-by-doing,   using    virtual artifacts to  construct   knowledge.     The key features that virtual
 reality adds are:
    immersion:        Learners develop     the  subjective   impression    that   they   are participating   in  a "world"
     comprehensive and realistic enough to induce the willing suspension of disbelief.                 Also, inside a head
     mounted display      the  learner's   is   focused  only   on  the  virtual   environment    without  the    distractions
     presented in many other types of educational environments.
    telepresence:     Geographically remote learners can experience a simultaneous sense of           presence in  a shared
     virtual environment.
    multisensory stimulation:      Via high-end VR interfaces,       students can interpret visual,    auditory and haptic
     displays to gather information while using their proprioceptive system to navigate and control objects in
     the synthetic environment, potentially deepening learning and recall.
    motivation:    Learners are intrigued by interactions with well        designed immersive environments,        inducing
     them to spend more time and concentration on a task [Bricken & Byrne 1993].

22
   multiple representations and three-dimensional frames of reference:        Spatial metaphors can enhance the
    meaningfulness of data and provide qualitative insights [Erickson 1993).
Evolving   beyond    technology-mediated     interactions   between   students    and      phenomena    to   technological
instantiation of  learners themselves    and  reality itself  shifts the    focus    of  constructivist   education:   from
peripherally  enhancing how   a student  interprets a typical   interaction  with    the   external world  to  "magically"
shaping the fundamental nature of how learners experience their physical and social context.
The virtual reality interface has the potential to complement existing approaches to science instruction through
creating immersive inquiry environments for learners' knowledge construction. By themselves becoming part of
a phenomenon (e.g., a student becomes a point-mass undergoing collisions in a frictionless artificial reality),
learners gain direct experiential intuitions about how the natural world operates. In particular, good instructional
design can make those     aspects of virtual  environments    that  are useful    in understanding     scientific principles
salient to learners' senses.   As  one  illustration, in  two-dimensional      Newtonian    microworlds    students    often
ignore objects' velocities, instead focusing on position.   In a virtual reality environment, learners themselves        are
moving,    centering attention  on   velocity  as a   variable.  Designers     can   heighten    this  saliency   by   using
multisensory cues to convey multiple, simultaneous representations of relative speeds.              Transducing data and
abstract concepts (e.g., acceleration) into multisensory representations is also a powerful means of enhancing
understanding.   Under  these  conditions, learners   may   be  willing  to  displace    previous   misconceptions     with
alternative, more accurate mental models.

The     Virtual   Worlds       of  ScienceSpace
Since February,   1994, our  project team  has  worked    collaboratively   to build    "ScienceSpace,"    a  collection of
virtual worlds designed to  explore  the potential  utility of  physical immersion      and  multisensory    perception  to
enhance science education    [Dede, Salzman,   &   Loftin   1996].   ScienceSpace       now  consists   of three  worlds
NewtonWorld,   MaxweI!World,      and PaulingWorld-in       various  states of maturity.     NewtonWorld provides an
environment   for investigating   the kinematics    and   dynamics   of  one-dimensional      motion.      MaxwellWorld
supports the exploration of electrostatics, leading up to the concept of Gauss' Law.          PaulingWorld enables the
study of molecular structures via a variety of representations, including quantum-level phenomena.                This paper
focuses on our design and early formative evaluation of MaxwellWorld.
All three worlds have been built using a polygonal geometry. Colored, shaded polygons and textures are used to
produce detailed objects.  These  objects  are linked  together  and    given  behaviors    through    the use    of NASA
developed software   that defines the  virtual worlds    and  connects   them     to underlying     physical  simulations.
Interactivity is achieved through the linkage of external devices (e.g., a head-mounted display) using this same
software.  Finally, graphics rendering, collision detection, and lighting models are provided by other NASA
developed software.  The key   hardware items  used are a    high-performance graphics      workstation    with   two video
output channels; a color, stereoscopic head-mounted display; a high-quality sound system; a magnetic tracking
system for the head and both hands; and, in some cases, a haptic display.                  Interaction in  these  worlds is
principally carried out with a Polhemus 3BallTM, a three-dimensional mouse.

Description    of    MaxwellWorld
MaxweIIWorld    allows  students  to  explore  electrostatic forces  and fields,     learn about  the  concept    of electric
potential, and "discover" the nature of electric flux.       The fieldspace    in this   virtual world    occupies   a cube
approximately one meter on a side with Cartesian axes displayed for convenient reference.           The small size of    the
world produces large  parallax when viewed from       nearby,   making  its  three-dimensional      nature quite  apparent.
Menus and a virtual hand are used for interaction in this world. Figures 1-3 present images of MaxweIIWorld.

  Figure { User exploring a field              Figure 2. A dipole.             Figure 3. A Gaussian surface.

                                                                                                                         23
 The menus in MaxwellWorld are attached to the left wrist just as a wristwatch would be (for left-handed users,
 the menu location can be on the right hand).     This allows the menus to       be removed from     the field of view,    but
 keeps them immediately accessible, since users always know where their hands are located.                 The virtual hand
 points  to menu items,    and the  3Ball  button is  depressed to   execute a selection  Gust  as   in  a two-dimensional
 interface the user manipulates the cursor by moving a mouse).          For example, navigation in MaxwellWorld is
 accomplished by selecting the navigation mode via the menu, pointing the virtual hand in the desired direction,
 and depressing the 3Ball button.
 Using their virtual hand, students can place both positive and negative charges of various relative magnitudes
 into the world.    Once a  charge configuration   is established,   the force on  a  positive  test charge,     electric field
 lines, potentials, surfaces of equipotential, and lines of electric flux through surfaces can all be instantiated,
 easily observed, and controlled interactively.   For example, a small, positive test charge can be attached to            the
 tip of the virtual hand. A force meter associated with the charge then depicts both the magnitude and direction of
 the force of the test charge (and, hence, the electric field) at any point in the workspace.    A   series of   test charges
 can be "dropped" and used to visualize the nature of the electric field throughout a region.
 In a like manner, an electric field line can be attached to the virtual hand.     A student can then move his or her
 hand to any point in the workspace and see the line of force extending through that point.             MaxwellWorld can
 also display many electric field lines to give students a view of the field produced by a charge configuration.             In
 another mode of    operation, the  tip of the virtual  hand  becomes   an   electric "potential"  meter   that,  through    a
 simple color map and a "=" or "-" sign on the finger tip, allows students to explore the distribution of potential
 in the world. Via the production of equipotential surfaces.       By default, the surfaces are colored to indicate the
 magnitude of the potential across the surface; however, the student can also choose to view the electric forces as
they vary across the surface.
 Via the production   of a "Gaussian" surface, the flux of the electric field through that surface can be visually
measured.    Gaussian surfaces can be placed anywhere in      the  workspace   by  using  the virtual   hand to   anchor   the
sphere; the radius (small, medium, large) is selected from the menu.             This representation enables students to
explore flux through a variety of surfaces when placed at various points in the field.

Conducting          Research       on     ScienceSpace
 Conventional   human     subjects protocols  are inadequate  for  assessing   the usability  and  learnability   of   virtual
 worlds. Although infrequent, potential side effects such as "simulator sickness" mandate the inclusion of special
questions   and  protections   to  ensure  users' comfort.       Moreover,   because   each   person     evolves    a  unique
psychomotor approach to interacting with the physical context, individuals appear to have much more varied
responses to 3-D, multimodal interfaces than to the standard 2-D graphical user interface with menus, windows,
and mouse.    Evaluating   the   multisensory  dimensions     of an  immersive    virtual world    also  adds an  additional
dimension of complexity to the assessment process.
As a result, we have developed elaborate, customized assessment methodologies for evaluating the usability and
learnability of our ScienceSpace Worlds [Salzman, Dede, & Loftin 1995].              In addition, we are videotaping the
hours of time we spend with each subject and studying these records for additional insights.               Portions    of  our
protocols center on calibrating and customizing the virtual world's interface to that particular learner.
Learner-centered formative evaluations are aimed at gathering qualitative insights that guide the refinement of the
user interface  [Soloway   et al   1994].  We have identified four    important    dimensions   along    which   to   evaluate
educational technologies:
   Usability.   To  assess   the  user interface by  measuring    performance    on  usability  tasks,    error rates and
    subjective ratings for ease of use.
   Learning.    To  determine whether     students  progress through  learning    tasks  within   the  environment    and
    demonstrate that their learning can be applied to other domain-specific problems.
   Usability   vs. learning.    To begin  to  understand the  relationship  between     usability and   learning   and   to
    identify  when   the  two  goals may    conflict.   It is this   interaction that creates  the need    to distinguish
    learner-centered design from user-centered design.
   Educational utility.    To   demonstrate that   the system    is a better  (or worse)   teaching     tool than    other
    pedagogical strategies,    comparing   the quality  and efficiency of  learning   among    different   alternatives   of
    varying cost and complexity.

24
To date, we have perfonned two formative evaluations of MaxwellWorld.                  This careful evaluation strategy is
generating data from which we are gaining a picture of how immersion can enhance learning, as well as how
virtual reality's usability can be enhanced.       Beyond our own work, the strategies underlying these assessment
methodologies and instruments are generalizable to a wide range of synthetic environments and virtual worlds.

MaxwellWorld:            Initial     Formative      Evaluation
In Summer, 1995, we assessed our initial version of MaxwellWorld as a tool for I) remediating misconceptions
about electric fields, and 2) teaching concepts with which students are unfamiliar.                During   the   sessions,  we
administered one to three lessons centering on the construction and exploration of electric fields (electric force,
superposition,  test    charges,  field lines), electric potential  (potential   and   kinetic  energy, potential     difference,
work, potential vs. force), and the concept of flux through open and closed surfaces, leading up to Gauss's Law.
Our  observations during the sessions,      students'   predictions and comments,      usability   questionnaires,    interview
feedback, and pre- and post-test     knowledge assessments      helped us    to  determine   whether   this  early version    of
MaxwellWorld aided students in remediating any of their pre-existing misconceptions and in learning concepts
with  which    they were    unfamiliar.    Additionally,  these  experiences     aided us  in  developing   modifications     to
MaxwellWorld to enhance learning outcomes.
The  findings  below    are based  on   14 high    school  students and    4 college   students   who   participated   in these
evaluations.   Thirteen of   the  14 high  school   students had recently    completed     their senior year;   l  student   had
recently completed his junior year.     All students had completed       1 course  in  high  school physics.      Each session
lasted for approximately 2 hours. Students were scheduled on consecutive days for the first two sessions, while
the third session was conducted approximately 2 weeks later.
All of the students enjoyed learning about electric fields in MaxwellWorld.               When asked about their general
reactions to MaxwellWorld, a majority of the students commented that they felt it was a more effective way to
learn about    electric fields  than either  textbooks    or   lectures.   Students    cited  the  3-D  representations,     the
interactivity, the  ability    to navigate  to   multiple   perspectives,    and   the use   of  color  as  characteristics   of
MaxwellWorld that were important to their learning experiences.
Pre-  and post-lesson   evaluations  show   that   lessons  in MW helped students        deepen  their  understanding     of the
distribution of forces in an electric field, as well as representations such as test charge traces and field lines.
Manipulating   the   field  in  3-D  appeared   to play  an  important     role in  their learning.    For  example,    several
students who were unable to describe the distribution of forces in any electric field prior to using MaxwellWorld
gave clear descriptions during the post-test interviews and demonstrations.            Also, manipulating field lines and
traces in three-dimensions appeared to help students visualize the distribution of force.           As an illustration, one
student expected field lines to 톜adiate from a single charge along a flat plane and was surprised to see that they
radiated in three dimensions.     Another student expected to see field lines cross, but found this could not occur.
Although the initial instantiation of MaxwellWorld helped students qualitatively understand 3-D superposition,
students had difficulty applying superposition when solving post-test problems.            Students appear ed to understand
the concept of superposition      during the    lessons and particularly   enjoyed    the demonstrations     of superposition
(moving  the   source   charges   dynamically changes the traces and field lines),       often   alluding to this    during  the
post-testing.    However,      many     of them     exhibited   difficulties    in  applying     superposition    to  post-test
demonstrations and sketches.
Even  in this  early    version   of MaxwellWorld, expanding traditional           representations to   include   l)  the third
dimension; 2) the ability to manipulate representations; and 3) two color schemes to measure and distinguish the
magnitude of the force on a킺 the potential experienced by test charges, field lines, and equipotential surfaces
helped students deepen their understanding of physics concepts.            The   post-test  outcomes   showed that     students
were able to learn about flux through open and closed surfaces using MaxwellWorld.                  All students performed
very well during post-testing, demonstrating an understanding of important and difficult-to-master concepts such
as Gauss's law, field vs. flux, and directional flux.
Although  only   four    of  the  students  used   MaxwellWorld     to     learn   about  electric  potential,    all of  them
demonstrated that they could visualize the distribution of potential for basic charge arrangements, interpret the
meaning of a distribution of potential, identify and interpret equipotential surfaces, relate potential difference and
work, and describe some of the differences between electric force and electric potential.              All were particularly
surprised to see I) 3-D representations of equipotential surfaces, particularly in the case of a bipole (two charges
of the same size and magnitude), and 2) the varying nature of forces over an equipotential surface.

                                                                                                                              25
 We observed significant individual differences in the students' abilities to work in the 3-D environment and with
 3-D controls, as well as their susceptibility to symptoms of simulator sickness (eye strain, headaches, dizziness,
 and nausea).   While    some students    learned to use the menus,     manipulate      objects, and navigate    very   rapidly,
 others required guidance throughout the sessions.     Most students experienced nothing more than slight            eyestrain;
 however,   two  students    experienced   moderate   dizziness   and   slight   nausea    during    the first   session,   and,
 consequently, did not return for the second session.      No   student complained      of  any  symptoms      during the   first
 30-45 minutes of the lesson, reinforcing our strategy of using multiple, short learning experiences.

 MaxwellWorld:            3-D   Representations            versus       2-D   Representations
 In January, 1996, we initiated an extended study designed to accomplish two goals: (1) compare learning and
 usability outcomes    from   MaxwellWorld      to those   from   a highly   regarded   and   widely used    two-dimensional
 microworld,   EM  FieldTM,   which   covers  similar  material,    and (2)  assess  the   usability and   learnability   of an
 enhanced version of MaxwellWorld with additional capabilities suggested by results from the initial formative
 evaluation above.    This study is still in progress, so only early results are reported in this paper.
 The portion of the study largely completed compares MaxwellWorld (MW) and EM Field (EMF) on the extent
 to which representational aspects of these simulations influence learning outcomes.             EM Field runs on standard
 desktop computers and presents learners with 2-D representations of electric fields and electric potential, using
 quantitative  values   to   indicate strength  [Trowbridge     &   Sherwood        1994].    To  make     the   two    learning
 environments comparable, we designed lessons to utilize only those features of MaxwellWorld for which EM
 Field had a counterpart.    Under these conditions limiting  the   functionality    of the VR    environment,    the primary
 differences between the simulations were representational dimensionality (EMF's 2-D vs. MW's 3-D) and type
 (EMF's    quantitative  vs.  MW's     qualitative).  The    second     phase    of the  study,   now    beginning,     utilizes
 MaxwellWorld's full range of capabilities (including multisensory input) to ascertain the value these features a:tl
 to the learning experience.    Through this  two-stage approach,     we hope     to separate the   relative contributions   of
 3-D representation vs. multisensory stimulation as instrumental to the usability and learning potential of virtual
 reality. This strategy also enables measuring retention over longer spans of time than we previously have done.
 14 high school students (12 males and 2 females) completed the first phase of this study.            All students have had
 I 1/2 years  of high    school physics   and were recruited from     a physics   class in  a local  high  school.    Students'
 performance in their science and math classes was varied; their grades ranged from A through C (As and Bs were
 the norm).   Although students were      advanced in their knowledge of      physics   relative to  the typical  high  school
 population,  most  remembered     little about electric fields   and   electric potential  upon   joining   this study-this
 confirms  the limits  of  conventional approaches    to   teaching this   type  of  scientific  material.   Both    groups  of
 students  participated   in two,     two-hour  learning   experiences,     with    the lesson    in  each   session    lasting
 approximately one hour.      Using comparable capabilities of EM Field and a limited version of MaxwellWorld
 (abbreviated MWL     to distinguish  this from  the  full version  of  MaxwellWorld),      the  lessons  focused    on electric
 fields and electric potential, mirroring concepts covered in the initial formative evaluation.
 Our preliminary outcomes from Stage One of the study support the following findings:
    Students in both the EMF and MWL groups demonstrated a better overall understanding of the topics on
     the post-test than on the pre-test.   However, students with a moderate knowledge of electrostatics at pre
     test benefited less than students demonstrating little or no knowledge at pre-test. In addition, the more
     advanced students who had misconceptions appeared to have a difficult time overcoming them despite
     experiences   in the  virtual  worlds.   This   suggests that    these  types   of virtual  experiences     should be
     integrated with initial instruction to avoid forming misconceptions difficult to remediate later.
    Conceptual learning     substantially  improved   for both     groups.   After   the  lessons,  the  MW L    students
     provided slightly better and more complete definitions of phenomena than the EMF students.                   On the
     post-test, both groups performed substantially better on 2-D dimensional sketches as a result of their
     learning experiences.    The   MWL    subjects  did slightly   better on  2-D   sketches  of the   electric field, but
     slightly less well on 2-D sketches of electric potential.
    During    the post-test,   the   MWL   group    was   better than   the  EMF       group at  describing     the three
     dimensional nature of electric fields, potential, and their respective representations.         Despite the inherent
     three-dimensionality    of the   demonstration   exercises   (as   well as  our  use  of the   terms  "surface"    and
     "plane" in  the  lessons), EMF    students  typically  restricted answers to     a single   plane;  drew lines  when
     describing equipotential surfaces; and used terms such as "circle," "oval," and "line."            In fact, only one
     of the seven students in the EMF group described the phenomena in a three-dimensional manner.                       In

26
        contrast,  MWL     students described   the  space,  using  3-D    gestures  and  phrases   such   as "sphere,"  and
        "plane" when referring to equipotential surfaces.
       OveraU, students described MWL as easy to use, interesting, and informative.           They especially liked the
        three-dimensional    representations,  the  ability to see  phenomena       from multiple   perspectives,   and  the
        interactivity of the system.  Students described EMF as very easy         to use,  but  somewhat      boring.   They
        found the simplicity of its graphics both a strength and a weakness.
       Students   rated the   representations used  in  MW L  as   easier to  understand  than    representations  used  in
        EMF.   At the same time, student ratings and comments suggest that MWL was less easy to use than
        EMF.   Some learners had trouble using         the 3-Ball and virtual  hand,    and others felt the responsiveness
        of the MWL system was problematic at times.
       Students who used MWL were more motivated than students who used EMF.                    MWL was rated as more
        rewarding,  stimulating,    informative,     and   invigorating,  than  EMF.      Additionally,     MWL     students
        indicated that they found it easier to remain attentive throughout the sessions than EMF students.
      In terms of   simulator    sickness, several   MW L    participants experienced   slight   headache   and eyestrain
        during the first lesson.   Symptoms were less noticeable during the second lesson.          Interestingly, several
        students using EMF reported slight drowsiness during both lessons one and two and of slight headache
        during lesson one.
       Working with the students yielded insights into the nature of their misconceptions about electrostatic
        phenomena.     For   example,  learners  have    a  strong  tendency   to think   of charges    in an  electric field
        independently and have trouble describing the nature of superpositional fields and potential between sets
        of charges.   Experiences in both MWL and        EMF   clearly   helped students  to think  about   this issue,  but
        they stiII had some    difficulty understanding regions     between    sets of  charges.    In addition, field line
        representations    are notoriously   difficult to  comprehend.     Even   after  use of  EMF     or   MWL    several
        students continued to have misconceptions about the meaning of a field lines, although most learners
        gained a   greater understanding   of  this  representational  formalism.       Upon concluding the lessons in
       either system, how the electric field influences charged objects and the relationship between potential
        and force were also not completely understood by some students.             The second phase of our study will
        clarify which of these continuing misconceptions are remediated when the full power of the VR system
        is utilized, including features such as multisensory representation and the user experiencing phenomena
        from the perspective of a test charge.
   Although  the   subject  population is    smalI,  these  results suggest that    the three-dimensional   nature  of VR     aids
   with  learning  and  that   the virtual reality experience is    more    motivating   for  students  than   comparable     2-D
   microworlds.    Given that many capabilities of MaxwellWorld were suppressed            in  this study,    these finding are a
   promising indication ofVR's capabilities to enhance educational outcomes.

   Lessons     Learned         to  Date    on   Usability      and    Learnability
   Based on  lessons   learned   from aU   our  ScienceSpace     research   studies, we   are  developing     design  heuristics,
   assessment methodologies, and insights generalizable to a wide range of educational environments.                    A few of
   these are briefly discussed below.

   Challenges      in Current      Virtual     Reality     Interfaces
   We have identified the following usability issues characteristic of virtual reality interfaces:
       Limitations of the physical design and optics in today's head-mounted displays may cause discomfort
        for users. Since the visual display is an integral part of interaction and communication of information
        in these   learning  environments,     these limitations    are a current hindrance   to   usability  and learning.
       Delays in VR system response time can also be a factor with complex environments. Both of these
        problems are steadily improving as hardware technology advances.
      Immersion does present some challenges for lesson administration (for example, students in the head
        mounted display are not able to access written instructions or to complete written questions.) We have
        found that verbal interaction works well.

                                                                                                                               27
    Students exhibit noticeable individual differences in their interaction styles, abilities to interact with the
     3-D environment, and susceptibility to simulator sickness.
    To help learners utilize educational virtual worlds, calibrating the display and virtual controls for each
     individual is important.   Additionally, monitoring and systematically measuring simulator sickness is
     vital, as malaise signals interface problems and also can explain why a learner is having trouble with
     certain activities.
    Spreading lessons over multiple VR sessions appears to be more effective than covering many topics in
     a single session. For example, while students began to challenge their misconceptions during a single
     3-hour NewtonWorld session,       many had    trouble  synthesizing     their learning during post-testing.    We
     believe that factors such as fatigue and cognitive overhead in mastering the interface influenced these
     outcomes. In contrast, our MaxwellWorld evaluations were completed over multiple sessions, tackling
     fewer topics during each session, and dedicating less time per session to pre- or post-testing. Reviews
     and  post-tests demonstrated    that  students  were  better able    to retain  and  integrate information   over
     multiple lessons.
 In ourjudgment, none of these issues precludes developing compelling learning experiences in virtual reality.

 Learning    and   Knowledge      Representation
 Our goal is  to develop an     overarching  theory    of how  learning   difficult, abstract    material can  be   strongly
 enhanced by   multisensory     "immersion"    (based  on   3-D   representations;   multiple    perspectives;  frames    of
 reference; a multimodal interface; simultaneous visual, auditory, and haptic feedback; and types of interaction
 unavailable in the real world). Illustrative themes applicable across all the virtual worlds we have created are:
    Multisensory cues can engage learners, direct their attention to important behaviors and relationships,
     prevent interaction errors through feedback cues, and enhance perceived ease of use.
    The introduction of new representations and perspectives can help students gain insights for remediating
     misconceptions   formed    through traditional instruction   (e.g.,  many   representations  used    by physicists
     are misleading   for learners), as   well as  aiding  learners   in  developing    correct mental models.      Our
     research  indicates   that  qualitative   representations    (e.g.,  shadows       showing   kinetic    energy  in
     NewtonWorld)     can   increase   saliency   for  crucial   features    of both    phenomena      and   traditional
     representations.
    Three-dimensional representations      seem    to aid  learners   in understanding    phenomena      that pervade
     physical space.  Being immersed in a      3-D  environment is also motivating for learners.
    Learner motivation is high in virtual reality environments, even when novelty effects wear off.                The
     inclusion  of   interactivity;  constructivist    pedagogy;  and    challenge,  curiosity,  fantasy,  and  beauty
     [Malone & Lepper 1984] all seem to augment students' interest and involvement.
    Initial experiences  in  working     with students    and teachers   suggest    collaborative  learning   may  be
     achievable by having two or more students working together and taking turns "guiding the interaction,"
     "recording  observations,"   and   "experiencing     activities" in  the   virtual reality.  Extending    this  to
     collaboration   among   multiple   learners co-located    in a   shared synthetic    environment     may   further
     augment learning outcomes, as may features (such as a "Hall of Fame") that provide social recognition
     for learner achievements.
    In addition to  pre- and post-test   assessments  of  learning,   continuous    evaluation  of progress   through
     lessons are critical to diagnosing the strengths and weaknesses of the virtual worlds.            We have found
     talk-aloud protocols  employing    a  cycle  of prediction-observation-comparison      are   highly  effective for
     monitoring usability and learning.
 Based on these early results, we feel strongly encouraged on the potential utility of VR for facilitating certain
 types of learning   more  effectively    than any   other  pedagogical      modality.   Further   information,   including
 additional research studies, can be obtained from our website: http://www.virtual.gmu.edu

Next Steps in Our Research
 As a near-term research    initiative  in all  our  ScienceSpace      Worlds,  including MaxwellWorld,        we   plan  to
 experiment with collaborative learning among geographically remote users inhabiting a shared virtual context.

28
Collaboration    among   users'   "avatars"    in  shared   synthetic    environments    may     support   a  wider   range   of
pedagogical strategies     (e.g.,    peer  teaching,    Vygotskian       tutoring,  apprenticeship)   and    may    make    VR
environments    more   intriguing    to  students  who     are most     motivated   to learn   when   intellectual   content  is
contextualized in a social setting.     Important questions to     be answered are the value of providing learners with
graphically-generated bodies and the degree to which the fidelity of the graphical representation affects learning
and interaction  (here fidelity is   not   simply  visual  fidelity, but  also  the   matching  of  real body motions    to  the
animation of the graphical body).       We also    plan to investigate   the effectiveness of   group  learning  situations   in
which three students rotate roles among (1) using the headmounted display, (2) serving as external guide, and (3)
participating as a reflective observer.
In addition, we intend to  extend    our   explorations on     how   multisensory     immersion    influences  learning.    For
example, various sensory modalities can        provide similar,   mutually    confirming input     or can  extend   the amount
of information conveyed to the learner through each sensory channel conveying different data.                 Little is known
about how what level of redundancy in sensory input is optimal for learning and about how much information
users can process without sensory overload.          Moreover, each sense uniquely shapes the data it presents (e.g.,
perceived volume and directionality of sound is nonlinear, varies with the pitch of the input, and is idiosyncratic
to each person).   This    poses   complex     considerations in  deciding which      sensory   channel to   use in  presenting
information to learners.  Virtual reality provides a good research environment for exploring these design issues.

Conclusion
An overarching theme in all our ScienceSpace research is to develop a theory of how multisensory "immersion"
aids learning. In our virtual worlds, we can simultaneously provide learners with 3-D representations; multiple
perspectives/frames of reference; a multimodal interface; simultaneous visual, auditory, and haptic feedback; and
types of interaction   unavailable in    the  real world (e.g.,   seeing through      objects, flying like   Superman).    With
careful design, these capabilities all can synthesize to create a profound sense of motivation and concentration
conducive to mastering complex, abstract material. Studying this new type of learning experience to chart its
strengths and its limits is an important frontier for cognitive science research and constructivist pedagogy.

References
[Bricken & Byrne  1993]  Bricken,    M.    & Byrne,  C.  M. (1993).     Summer students  in virtual reality. In Wexelblat,   A.
 (Ed.), Virtual Reality: Applications and Exploration (pp. 199-218). New York: Academic Press, Inc.
[Dede, Salzman,  & Loftin  1996]     Dede, C., Salzman,    M.,  and Loftin,  B. (1996).  ScienceSpace:   Virtual  Realities  for
 Learning  Complex     and Abstract     Scientific Concepts.   Proceedings    of IEEE Virtual Reality    Annual International
 Symposium 1996 (pp. 246-253). New York: IEEE Press.
[Dede 1995] Dede, C. (1995). The evolution of constructivist learning environments: Immersion in distributed, virtual
 worlds. Educational Technology 35 (5), 46-52.
[Erickson 1993] Erickson, T. (1993).       Artificial realities as data visualization environments.   In Wexelblat,     A. (Ed.)
 Virtual Reality: Applications and Explorations (pp.       1-22). New York: Academic Press Professional.
[Malone & Lepper 1984]     Malone,      T. W., & Lepper,   M.  R. (1984)    Making learning fun:      a taxonomy    of intrinsic
 motivations for learning.   In Snow, R. E., & Farr, M. J. (eds.) Aptitude, learning and instruction.          Hillsdale, N.J.:
 Erlbaum.
[Soloway et al 1994]   Soloway, E., Guzdial, M. & Hay, K.E. Leamer-Centered Design. The Challenge for HCI in the
 21st Century.   Interactions, 1,  I ( April, 1994), 36-48.
[Trowbridge & Sherwood 1994]       Trowbridge, D., and Sherwood, B. 1994.          EMField. Raleigh,  NC:    Physics  Academic
 Software.

Acknowledgments
This work is supported by  NSF's   Applications of   Advanced   Technology     Program,  Grant RED-9353320,      and by    NASA
through  a grant (NAG 9-713)      and through   access   to equipment     and  computer  software.    The    authors gratefully
acknowledge the aid of Craig Calhoun, Jeff Hoblit, Pat Hyde, Deirdre McGlynn, Saba Rofchaei, and Chen Shui.

                                                                                                                             29
