                       Visualizations               in   Teaching         Chemistry

                   Juan Moran,National Center for Supercomputing Applications (NCSA),
                 University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign,USA,jrnoran@ncsa.uiuc.edu

     P. David Pearson,College of Education,Michigan State University,USA,ppearson@pilot.rnsu.edu

       Lisa A. Bievenue,NCSA,University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign,bievenue@ncsa.uiuc.edu

   Carole S. Chang,Chemistry Department,University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign,spaztic@uiuc.edu

Steven D. Nelson,Chemistry Department,Univ. of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign ,sdnelson@students.uiuc.edu

Spencer L. Pasero,Chemistry Department,Univ. of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign,s-pasero@students.uiuc.edu

            Abstract:  Acquisition and   mastery  of chemistry   concepts depend    on  an   interpretative
            framework that is microscopic and requires a three-dimensional dynamic representation.
            The Visualizations  in Chemistry     project created   a  computational   environment   where
            students can do simulations   of atomic  and molecular bonding     in order to develop a more
            intuitive understanding   of  quantum    chemistry.      Students  used a  high  performance
            computing  environment    to perform  calculations  and interactively  visualize the resulting
            images. In this paper, we report on one detailed  implementation    where 7 conceptual   areas
            were evaluated. The results showed improvements in students' visualizations of atoms and
            molecules, but it was not clear  if the students' initial models were replaced.  Suggestions
            for future implementation  include more attention    to   learning in the visual mode,  more
            chemistry background preparation, and use of an improved interface.

The Motivation
This project,Visualizations in Teaching Chemistry (ChernViz),grew out of the quest to discover ways to render
certain basic concepts of chemistry more vivid and visible to young learners.       Due to the microscopic nature of
chemistry,many of its basic constructs and processes are "invisible" to students. The project's original principal
investigator,Dr. Nora Sabelli,a professor of chemistry,pointed out the contrast between chemistry and physics
and biology education (Sabelli,1995):

      In physics and biology,mechanistic simulations have been used and studied extensively, whereas
      in chemistry we cannot draw on students' previous intuition to aid in their understanding.        We all
      learn over a  long time  the  intuitive   skills needed   to  count, measure, gauge      speed and    force,
      understand motion,birth,death and growth,among other concepts.            These  concepts  (and associated
      misconceptions) are macroscopic in nature and therefore observable; this is not true of many of the
      basic concepts of modem chemistry as it is taught now, even at the introductory level.          When we
      see chemical reactions (cooking,moving        cars,sun-burning,healing) we       do  not see what     we are
      taught in chemistry and therefore,often enough we do not see 'chemistry' at all.

Historically,chemistry educators have tried to render chemical structures and processes more visible through the
use of vivid, albeit excessively simple, visual metaphors such as the solar system serving as a model of the
structure of an atom. While marginally useful in early stages of learning, such metaphors eventually interfere
with a rich understanding   of basic  chemical   concepts.     More    recent  pedagogical   work  has suggested    that
computer-generated three-dimensional animations of certain basic processes,molecular bonding for example,are
capable of providing students with   this type   of  richer visualization (e.g., Sabelli, 1991).     It has also been

                                                                                                                     227
 suggested that such visualizations help students obtain a better grasp of the abstract aspects of chemistry, such
 as calculating algorithmically-based solutions to problems.

 Building on these more recent findings, the investigators of the project proposed a pedagogical approach that
 starts with a computational experiment     on an abstract concept, and then proceeds to present the model (the
 visualization) to interpret the experiment. The computational experiment approach allows, in contrast to theory
 and experimentation, students to explore how the "laws" of chemistry behave.           In a computational experiment
 students  can do  simulations which   visually  and dynamically      replicate the  behavior  of  a  complex    chemical
 process. An   example, prevalent in  this project, is   the numerical   solution    to the  Schrodinger  equation.    In a
 computational experiment, students learn by doing because they can manipulate their learning environment,
 testing different computations against models in an iterative fashion.

  In order to explore this pedagogy, the investigators proposed to develop tools that would allow both teachers
 and students  to  do the simulations  and    visualizations easily   and routinely   so  that the   students  develop    an
 intuitive understanding of the chemistry "laws" behind the models.

 Besides  computation  and visualization,  a third pivotal   piece in this approach is    access  to  a high-performance
 computing environment (e.g., a Cray supercomputer) to conduct the simulations and create the images in time
 frames (a few seconds of computing time) that make the manipulations feasible and at least theoretically useful
 from a pedagogical perspective.

 The  Substance       of  ChemViz:         Teaching      &   Learning       Abstract         Chemical     Concepts
 The ChemViz    (an abbreviation of the   term  "Visualization in   Chemistry")      project was  and continues   to  be  a
 curriculum materials development project wherein the computational approach to chemistry is used. The unique
 aspect of this approach   is the use  of  a  high  performance     computing      environment    to obtain   images   and
 animations of the atoms and molecules being studied.

 The project   members  believed  the  computational     approach  would   have    a revolutionary   impact   on the  high
 school  chemistry  curriculum.    This    approach would    allow    high  school      chemistry  students   to  use  the
 supercomputer as a laboratory for designing experiments which would answer their questions concerning such
 abstract concepts as electrons, atoms, molecules, and chemical bonding.        By generating images of the electron
 densities for various combinations    of atoms,   students would     be   able to   understand   in  concrete   terms the
 differences between equal and unequal sharing of electrons, bonding and anti-bonding orbitals, strong and weak
 bonds, and the energy differences ofatoms at appropriate and inappropriate bond distances and angles.           Virtually
 any concept involving chemical bonding could be explored using the computational tools.

 To give the reader some idea of the chemistry concepts involved in ChemViz, sections describing the popular
 models for teaching molecular bonding are presented here and are followed by a section more specifically related
 to ChemViz and its approach to bonding.

 Models    of  the atom

 Currently, chemical bonding is   taught   in a  variety of ways   at the  high    school level.   In   most  high school
 classrooms, the Bohr model of the atom is used to introduce students to the concept of energy levels.                This
 model is the picture that most non-scientists have of the atom:       a hard ball as the nucleus with tiny electrons
 whizzing around it in defined orbits. This   is an incorrect model,   but  it  is the first thing explained to   students
 because it is easy to understand and introduces the concept of quantization of energy. The Bohr model, however,
 cannot be used to explain bonding.

 At some later point, the Bohr model is replaced by the electron cloud, or Schri:idinger wave-mechanical, model in
 which electrons are no longer considered as being located at a given distance from the nucleus, but are instead
 described as having a finite probability of occupying certain regions around the nucleus.         High school students

228
are more successful at visualizing the Bohr model of the atom because it is more concrete.        The Schrodinger
wave-mechanical   model   is more   difficult for  high school  students   to visualize.  It  often  requires  some
understanding of probability, 3D geometry, wave-particle duality, and quantum mechanics.

Molecular     Bonding   Models

The models of chemical bonding are all based on the Schrodinger wave-mechanical model of the atom.             Two
common terms used in these models are valence electrons (or the electrons which occupy the outermost principle
energy level) and core electrons (or the electrons in an atom which are not in the outermost principle energy
level).

The simplest of the bonding models is localized electron/ionic bonding model.    It is  based on two concepts:    the
atoms in a molecule are at the lowest energy when the atom's outermost occupied principal energy level has
achieved a noble gas configuration. Thus, in forming molecules atoms interact with each other to share, gain or
lose enough electrons to achieve this.  Second, the atom tends to gain, lose, or share electrons according to a
property of   elements called electronegativity,  which is  a relative measure  of  the  atom's  ability   to attract
electrons shared in a bond to itself. This model is very good for predicting shapes of molecules, and for getting a
general idea of the bonding.  However, it cannot predict bond distances or energies, and cannot explain        some
phenomena such as paramagnetism.._

Molecular orbital theory addresses a problem with the localized electron model:      it  allows the electrons  to be
delocalized throughout the molecule (thus avoiding the problems of resonance). In molecular orbital theory, two
atomic orbitals overlap and split into two separate orbitals, one bonding and one anti-bonding.   Electrons which
are placed in the bonding orbital  contribute to  holding the molecule together,  while  those placed   in the anti
bonding orbital to destabilizing the molecule. This theory avoids the problems of resonance and can be used to
explain many phenomena, like paramagnetism.        However, it is unable to explain shapes,  and bond   lengths.     It
is also difficult to apply to a molecule with three or more atoms.

ChemViz uses the self-consistent field theory to calculate the orbitals and energies of molecules.       Given    the
positions of atoms and the mathematical representations of the atoms (called basis sets), it then calculates the
possible interactions of the electrons. Using this set of calculations, it recalculates, continuing until it gets two
sets of calculations which agree with each other ("self-consistent").  From the calculations, then, mathematical
descriptions of the molecule's orbitals and energy can be produced. This model is the most sophisticated of all
those discussed here.  Though it gives very accurate results, it has two major drawbacks.        First, to use  this
model, one needs a supercomputer to do the calculations. Second, the computer can only do calculations for the
positions you give it; there is no direct way of getting the best configuration for a molecule from only the types
of atoms in the molecule.

Description    of the  Interface,   Chemistry      Software   and   Related    Programs

For a student to obtain images to model the bonding process, a set of programs are used. First, the student uses
the interface program, Boogie, to set the desired parameters and create the input file which will be sent to the
Cray supercomputer.   Boogie   presents the   user with a  periodic table, from  which   the atoms   of interest  are
selected. The user then defines such parameters as the coordinate of the atoms, which will define the distance
between the atoms in angstroms and the bond angles, and     the charge on  the group of  atoms.  For example,     if a
student wanted to model the   water molecule,    he would determine the  positions  for  the oxygen  and   hydrogen
atoms, then use Boogie to create the input file and send it to the Cray.

The Cray supercomputer uses DISCO, a research-level chemistry program, to do the calculations based on the
input file from Boogie. The resulting output files are automatically returned to the student's personal computer.
In order to view  the output files as images,  the  student uses the   imaging  program   NCSA    Collage,    which
creates three-dimensional graphical images of the probability densities. The student can also analyze the output

                                                                                                                  229
 file containing     the  calculated energies  of the molecule   or molecules  modeled   using    the program   Graphical
 Analysis, by plotting a graph of energy vs. atom-atom distance.

 DISCO     is a  set of FORTRAN       programs that   determines the  molecular  orbitals, electron   density, dipole    and
 quadrupole   electric    moments,   and equilibrium  structures of  molecules   (or atoms),  ions    or  radicals.  These
 properties are determined by        the Direct SCf Optimization (thus the name DISCO) method              of solving    the
 Hartree-Fock    (quantum     mechanical) equations.  DISCO    also  contains a  program     that estimates   the   electron
 correlation energy from second order perturbation theory.

 Because the user is able to specify exactly how he wants the atoms placed and can create series of images to
 examine how the orientation of the atoms affects the bonding of the molecule, he cannot only view the electron
 densities of a molecule, but can also observe the changes in the electron densities of a group of atoms as they
 are moved, obtain energy values for each configuration in order to compare the relative stabilities, determine the
 equilibrium structure of the molecules by finding the conformation with the lowest energy, and determine the
 dipole and quadrupole electric moment.

 Major     Study       Questions
 Two major questions guided the evaluation, with a third embedded question.

        1. How does learning       change as a function of this new approach to teaching atomic and molecular
            bonding?
        2. How does teaching         change as result of using ChemViz materials in the classroom?

 Embedded within each of these two overarching questions is a third pervasive question:

       3.   Should high peiformance computing         be used in the  high  school  classroom for  improving    the
            teaching of chemistry?

 Such  an  advanced      computational   approach  requires substantial  support in  the technical    and  communication
 aspects, especially for the fieldtesters. What is the value added to students' learning and what are the benefits and
 costs to teachers in this effort to integrate advanced technology and chemistry education?

 A    ChemViz        Implementation
 This  is just   one <;>f the case studies of the ChemViz   project.  This case  study is  selected   as an   exemplar   and
 because it   is the more     detailed study. Each case study varied and  the common     findings  among    them    will be
 presented briefly at the end. What we want to do here is to give an idea of a specific implementation.
 David Bergandine teaches chemistry at the University High School in Urbana.           In  May,   1993,    an experimental
 study was    designed    to  observe any changes   in learning  that   would be   obtained  by   emphasizing     scientific
 visualization without requiring students to use the computer.       Available for this study were three classrooms of
 first year (sophomore) chemistry students, for a total of 47 students. Over the course of three weeks a series of
 lessons and activities were performed using the images and animations to teach atomic and molecular bonding.
 For  assessment purposes,      the students were given  a pre-test  before beginning    the unit  and   a post-test at  its
 conclusion.     For comparison purposes, the two tests shared seven common conceptual areas (denoted by a               *).
 The concepts tested were: Periodic table use, Understanding of the atom, *Atom visualization (through drawing),
 *Lewis  structure    drawing   (for  atoms),  *Understanding  of   the thermodynamics    of bonding,    *Lewis     structure
 drawing (for molecules), *Molecule visualization (through drawing), *Understanding of "He2", Understanding of
 a larger diatomic molecule (N2, 02, or F2), and *Understanding of a non-diatomic molecule (HF).

230
Res ults

The pre- and post-test analysis of the 7 common conceptual areas are summarized in Table 1 below.             Each of
the conceptual areas is then discussed in detail.

     Conceptual       Area                                                       Pre-test         Post-test

     Atom Visualization (see note 1)                                             5%               5%

     Lewis structure drawing (for atoms) (see note 2)                            87%              49%

     Thermodynamics of bonding                                                   33%              44%

     Lewis Structure Drawing (for molecules)                                     53%              68%

     Molecule Visualization (see note 1)                                         0%               18%

     Understanding of "He2" (see note 3)                                         0% (38%)         51%

     Understanding of a non-diatomic molecule (HF)                               4%               24%

     I. Defined as drawing an electron "cloud"
     2. The numbers may be misleading, as there was only    hydrogen   on the pre-test, and there were also helium
        and fluorine on the post-test.
     3. None of the students could produce the non-visualization answer on the pre-test, as they were not shown
        the pictures. The pre-test number in   parentheses  represents the percentage   of students who  gave the
        traditional answer.

Table 1: Percentages of Students who Demonstrated Proficiency in the Areas Tested on the Pre- and Post-tests

Atom     visualization

The results of the analysis of this section were overwhelmingly negative.         86% of the students drew atoms as
nuclei with electrons in circular orbits around them.      This is to  be  expected,  especially if the  students  have
discussed the Bohr model of the atom.     The discouraging fact is that seven of every   eight of those  students drew
atoms in exactly the same way after using ChemViz.          Only one of the thirty-eight students who began the
program with a drawing a circular electron orbit abandoned that view completely, and four of the students drew
both a picture of a circular orbit and a picture of an electron cloud.  Three students began the program drawing
electron clouds (one of  them also included a drawing  of   a   circular orbit), but only  one of   them  retained that
picture. Another drew only a circular orbit on the final exam, and the third drew very unusual dumbbell-shaped
orbits.

Lewis   structure     drawing  (for    atoms)

This quality was more difficult to analyze, due to the fact that the only element for which the students were to
draw a Lewis structure on the first exam was hydrogen.      Most of the students (87%) did do well at this,   but it is
a very simple task.    More enlightening is how the students who drew hydrogen correctly responded to the
symbols question on the post-test.     Of these thirty-nine students,  slightly  more than  half of those students   did
well in  drawing  all  three of the    requested elements   on  the    post-test  (hydrogen,   helium,  and fluorine).
Additionally, one in six did well on hydrogen and helium, but made mistakes on fluorine (normally putting all

                                                                                                                     231
 nine of its electrons in the valence shell). The remaining students     (slightly less than   one  in every three), drew
 either poor Lewis structures or none at all, even though the question was worded in a similar fashion.

 Understanding     of    the thermodynamics       of  bonding

 This was a very difficult area of knowledge to assess accurately for two reasons.           First, the  range of    minor
 misconceptions   that the  students had was wide, and very few    misconceptions     were held by     more  than two  or
 three students. Clouding the issue further, it was often difficult   to tell if a student who  answered the    questions
 poorly did so because they were confused about the topic, or because even though they understood what was
 supposed to be going on,    they had trouble putting their ideas into words.        For those reasons, then, responses
 were classed based on   evidence of  significant improvement across      the  exams  in   the student's  concept of   the
 thermodynamics of bonding.      Twenty-nine of the     forty-three students (67%) had significant        flaws   in their
 conceptions when they took the pre-test.      Nine of the twenty-nine (31 %) gave answers on          the post-test  that
 showed a good understanding of the thermodynamics of bonding.         The rest of the students showed varied stages
 of increased comprehension, from minor to none, and, unfortunately, there were even four students who seemed
 to regress.

 Lewis  structure     drawing    (for  molecules)

 Lewis structure  drawing   was an area in which  the students appeared     to   improve  significantly.  The post-test
 showed a 28% increase overall in students who were able to draw good structures, from just over half of the total
 students on the pre-test to better than two-thirds on the post-test.       Additionally, students  appeared to   rebound
 from common mistakes with a fair degree of success.     The most common mistake (one in every five students)
 on the pre-test was miscounting the total number of electrons in the molecule.         This did not seem to be a real
 problem, as most of the students were able to correct it on the post-test.        The second most common mistake
 (roughly one in six students) was a failure to surround each atom in the molecule exactly eight electrons, and
 five of the eight students were able to correct it on the post-test.  There is one negative aspect, however.        Less
 than three quarters of  the students who  were able to  draw good structures on      the  pre-test did the same  on   the
 post-test.  It is not clear whether this has anything to do with ChemViz.       It is curious nonetheless that 28% of
 students who did well on the first test did not on the second, and 64% of those who did not do well on the first
 test did on the second.

 Molecule      visualization

 The results of  this section were very comparable    to the results     of the  atom   visualization  section, although
 students were more successful here, in that just over half of the students maintained their original image (as
 opposed to seven in eight in atom visualization). The most popular misconception was that the hydrogen atom
 looked like two protons with electrons in planetary orbits which happen to touch each other.          Nineteen of forty
 nine students drew this type of picture on both the pre and post-tests; however, there was a total of twenty-eight
 such drawings on the pre-test, and twenty-four on the post-test.        This is an improvement, but certainly not      a
 marked one.    The only other significant misconception was very similar, but instead of two touching orbits
 around separate nuclei, both of the electrons were in a planetary-type orbit around both of the nuclei.          Almost
 one-fifth  of the students  answered this way   on the  pre-test, but   only    one in eight  did  so on   the post-test.
 Finally, the fact that may be most noteworthy is that none of the students answered the "right" way, that is,
 drawing an electron cloud, on the first test, but that almost one in five did so on the second test.

 Understanding     of  "He2"

 This was an interesting area.  Only 9% of the answers on the pre-test fell outside       of three  major categories, and
 only 11% on the post-test outside of two.      On the pre-test, the popular responses were that He2 doesn't form

232
because "the shells are full," meaning that the atomic orbitals are unable to hold more electrons, there is a law
(which was never explained or named) which prevents it, and no idea.    On    the post-test, many   students  did very
well at interpreting the images that they were shown.    Unfortunately, many students also failed to see   the image
of the cr orbital for what it is, and instead said that it showed that the molecule did not bond. An interesting
observation about the tests was made:    When the students were discussing the roles that orbitals play in        the
formation  of a molecule,    they tended to use  the  word  bonding   instead of  combining    (or  a  similar word),
indicating that they did not recognize that the original s orbitals lose their individual identities when a molecule
is formed.

Understanding    of   a  non-diatomic      molecule   (HF)

The results of this  section seem  to  show    primarily that, given a choice,   students  far prefer  to draw Lewis
structures instead of other types of pictures. However, since that is a rather subjective judgment, data about    the
students' conceptions is based solely on what they have drawn.       From that, it seems that there are some good
things going on here. One quarter   of the students  ended the  unit correctly representing HF   as  a polar covalent
molecule.   This is a 550% increase from the beginning of the unit.      There was also no regression from the
"correct" answer, which is encouraging.  The    only significant misconception    (three out of four  on  the pre-test,
over half on the post-test) was that HF is a nonpolar covalent molecule, and this is not too far from the truth.
Some students (one in twenty on the pre-test, one in ten on the post-test) went to the other extreme of the
bonding continuum and represented it as ionic.

Conclusions

Based solely on this data, there appeared to have been improvement in the students' knowledge of chemistry, but
the most significant improvement came in areas which were not the focus of ChemViz. Of those areas which
appear to be "targeted", visualization of atoms and molecules, there was very little improvement.      This is
certainly not to say that ChemViz is not useful.  The students did improve their understandings of the
thermodynamics of bonding, Lewis structure drawing, and the concept of polar covalency.

ChemViz was likely very helpful in these areas.   It includes a feature that allows the energy of a system to be
determined, and the energies of a time series (such as two atoms moving closer together) can be animated.       This
feature was surely useful in demonstrating the thermodynamic phenomena that occur as atoms approach.
Through images, ChemViz can also demonstrate the three types of bonding in a molecule (nonpolar covalent,
polar covalent, and ionic).  The students in this class seemed to pick up well on distinctions between the three.
In summary, ChemViz would be a useful classroom supplement for covering these topics; most students
showed improvements in their understanding of these concepts.     ChemViz was also very helpful to a few
students in changing the way in which they think about atoms and molecules, but the number of students
affected in this way was minimal.

Overall Results from the ChemViz Project
The full ChemViz evaluation report reflects a complex evaluation with many stages and multiple data sources.
In an effort to present the overall result we· will summarize the findings and insights of the various "probes"
taken in a variety of implementation settings across the three years of the project. The overall analysis was done
by contrasting a "perfect world" scenario of a perfect technological environment, a well-developed curriculum, a
revolutionary learning environment, and a collaborative teaching environment to an "imperfect world" with all
the fits and  starts and glitches  that  come   into  play when   real people,    fallible machines,   and  imperfect
technologies are involved.

                                                                                                                 233
 Impact   on  learning

 There is weak   to modest    evidence for the positive   impact of  ChemViz   on   learning. There  were  no broad
 overwhelming effects, such as all of the students in a class reaching an epiphany about the nature of chemical
 bonding  by  developing a clearer understanding of the   process or shifting to a  more  complex   model.  Instead,
 there were individual cases of insight surrounded by other cases of misunderstanding or confusion.        For some
 students, probably those with sufficient background knowledge to benefit from this approach, this environment
 provided just the spark they need to move to the next level of sophistication. For others, it appears to be more
 of the same. It is even less clear that the ChemViz environment     promoted    a research ethic and disposition; in
 fact the data would suggest that the teacher, not the program, was the key variable in promoting student inquiry.

 Impact   on  teaching

 The teachers truly went out of their way to accommodate this new technology and the learning environment
 accompanying it.   They did give up   their positions of privilege as the purveyors to   adopt the more facilitative
 role that they must play in a discovery oriented environment.   In the final analysis, they were overwhelmed by
 the technological barriers and hampered by the lack of instructional materials available to them.     Connectivity
 problems were, in most cases and especially in the early phases, virtually insurmountable.

 The   role  of high   performance       computing     in school  curricula

 While this question is at the core of this project, it is impossible to answer with the data at hand.    Significant
 time, energy, and resources were allocated to this project, and a generous description of the return was that the
 benefits were modest for the students and somewhat more substantial for the teachers. Nonetheless, if the same
 resources had been devoted elsewhere, then the participants would have been denied the learning opportunities
 that they gained by working in a highly experimental environment.      Viewed from this perspective, the benefits
 of ChemViz will    be not only in  the  specific curriculum developed as a   part of the project, but in the future
 generations of interactive learning environments that depend heavily upon high speed communication and even
 higher speed data analysis techniques.  In short, the full impact of ChemViz may not be known for some time.

After Effects of ChemViz
 Since the time of this study we have witnessed major changes in school networking and teaching methods.
 Clearly the technological environment has improved and this is allowing teachers the opportunity to examine
 their teaching and modify their curriculum to integrate uses of technology such as ChemViz.        Perhaps now we
 will see the major benefits originally predicted for ChemViz; perhaps the glimpses of success pointed to in this
 evaluation will be realized as breakthroughs in the teaching of chemistry; perhaps ChemViz will be recognized
 as a stepping stone to significant changes in the way we think about teaching and learning with technology.

 References
 [Sabelli 1995] Sabelli, teaching of science. In DN..THho.,m&asL(iEvdsh.)i,tsS,ciLenSt.if(i1c9V9i5s)u.aliSzahtaiorninzgn multiple complementary Mathematics and Science representations in the Teaching, Association
 for the Advancement of Computing in Education.

 Acknowledgments
 This research was supported by National Science Foundation grants in Research in Learning and Teaching (NSF#
 MDR 91-54132) and in educational research (NSF# RED-9255347). The authors thank Dr. Polly Baker, Dr.
 Lizanne Destefano, Dr. Robert Panoff, Dr. Kenneth Suslick and Dr. Steven Zumdahl for advice given throughout
 this project. Special thanks to Mr. David Bergandine for his contributions to the ChemViz project.

234
