                   Chronicles        of         Teaching:    Using          Computer-Based
             Communication           to  Tell        Stories and        Reflect        About     Teaching

                                                     Wayne A. Nelson
                                         Department of Educational Leadership
                                     Southern Illinois University at Edwardsville
                                                  Edwardsville, IL 62026
                                                      (618) 692-3586
                                                     wnelson@siue.edu

                                                     Randall E. Smith
                                      Department of Curriculum and Instruction
                                     Southern Illinois University at Edwardsville
                                                  Edwardsville, IL 62026
                                                      (618) 692-3434
                                                     resmith@siue.edu

              Abstract:  In recent years, research in teacher education has focused on ways to promote
              reflection by beginning teachers. The research project described in this paper elicits the
              help of hypermedia computer technology to encourage and facilitate communication
             among teacher education students, as they develop abilities to view classroom situations
             from multiple perspectives, suggest alternative explanations of classroom events, and use
             theoretical principles to support or evaluate decisions.

       Conceptions of teaching, especially outside the profession, often maintain simplistic and narrow beliefs
that teaching is a skill that can be acquired relatively easily by any reasonably intelligent individual.   However,
learning and development theories suggest that a complex skill like effective teaching is acquired over thousands
of hours of practice [Norman 1978]; practice that includes autonomy, collaboration, and time [Wildman & Niles
1987a]. Recent research in teacher education has stressed reflection as an important component of this learning
process [Ross 1989; Schon 1991; Wildman & Niles 1987b].        Helping beginning teachers learn to think about
and analyze their pedagogical activities is seen as an important step in developing effective teachers.
       One of the difficulties that beginning teachers face is to discover the practical theories and principles that
ground their knowledge of the complex situations inherent in the act of teaching. Reflection provides a way for
beginning teachers to develop abilities to "make rational choices" about how to proceed in the classroom, and
"to assume responsibility for those choices" [Ross, 1989].   Theoretical models suggest that five elements are
common to the reflective process:    (1) recognizing     a dilemma;     (2) responding to the dilemma based      on
recognition of similarities and differences with other situations, as well as the unique aspects of the current
situation; (3) framing and reframing the dilemma      in various ways;    (4) experimenting   to discover possible
alternative solutions, and; (5) examining and evaluating the desirability of possible alternative consequences for
various solutions [Goodman 1984; Ross 1989: Zeichner & Liston 1987].             The development of reflective
practice is influenced by the practitioner's values, knowledge and practices, which determines the types of
problems that will be recognized, how the problems will be framed and reframed, and the solutions that will be
generated [Schon 1983].   It has been suggested that mature reflection is dependent on the ability to view
problems from multiple perspectives, to generate alternative explanations for events, and to use available
information to evaluate a decision [Kitchener & King 1982].
       In response to the need to establish connections between the theories of education discussed in the
universities and actual practices of teachers     in the classrooms,    many  teacher  education  programs     have
incorporated case methods to encourage reflection by beginning teachers [Shulman 1986].     Case methodology is
a proven instructional strategy used in many disciplines, most notably law, medicine and business [Williams
1992]. Many hold the belief that case-based instruction for teachers can help them to better reason about       and

                                                                                                              243
    reflect on their practice [Christensen 1987; Schon 1983].     Stories about teaching are a common means of
    communication between teachers, a valuable source of data for research on teacher education, because stories
    represent a powerful knowledge representation for teachers [Carter 1993]. A number of projects developing and
    using case materials have been undertaken [Greenwood & Parka, 1989; Kowalski, Weaver & Henson 1990;
    Silverman, Welty & Lyon 1992], while others are advocating the use of student-written cases as a means of
    encouraging beginning teachers to reflect on pedagogical issues [Kagan & Tippins 1991; Shulman 1991].
           So what has computer technology got to do with reflection and case-based instruction?        While computer
    technologies may not be necessary or useful for all phases of the reflective process, emerging technologies
    focused on computer-supported cooperative work and computer-supported collaborative learning (CSCL) have
    proven to be valuable aids in facilitating and augmenting interactions between group members [Koschmann
    1993/1994].   In essence, such systems can facilitate new forms of conversational activities that support
    instruction and augment traditional classroom discourse [Pea 1993/1994].       Such conversations may help to
    establish "knowledge-building communities" of learners who share ideas, negotiate meanings, and construct their
    own knowledge through interaction with others that is facilitated by computer technology [Scardmalia &
    Bereiter  1993/1994].   Hypermedia    architectures  for CSCL    systems may   also      contribute to an enhanced
    environment   for learning that   allows  users to construct  their own  knowledge,       rather than  merely   b eing
    "presented" information that someone else has organized in a hypermedia document [Nelson & Palumbo 1992].
           W ith this theoretical basis,  Chronicles   of Teaching,   a hypermedia        computer system  that  featured
    prespecified stories for analysis, along with facilities for linking various aspects of one story to other stories,
    was developed and tested.  As an initial activity related to their observations in     the schools, beginning teacher
    education students were encouraged to read and react to stories that had been "seeded" in the database.       But an
    important capability of the system was that these students could also use the system to enter and link new
    stories describing what they saw in the classrooms.  The goal of the research and development efforts associated
    with   Chronicles of Teaching   was   to determine whether   the  system could effectively       support the kind of
    knowledge acquisition and reflection necessary to develop sufficient pedagogical knowledge in preservice
    teachers. The formative testing of the software was conducted to both describe the kinds of activities undertaken
    by the  students when  using  the system,  and  to explore various  strategies for     integrating the system into a
    typical teacher education curriculum.

    The    Software
           The Chronicles of Teaching software is based on a design that encourages users to read and react to stories
    that describe real classroom situations.  Users may enter their opinions about the problem, the solution, or the
    alternatives suggested by other users.    In addition, users can enter descriptions of situations that they have
    observed during their field-based activities. As a part of this process, users create their own hypermedia links
    between their story and other stories or theoretical descriptions that are found in the database.  In this way, users
    must reflect on the similarities or differences between their story and other stories in the database (or descriptions
    of theories and methods of teaching), and establish links so that subsequent users may follow the links when
    examining the stories and theories in the database.    Another feature that encourages reflection is a "notes"
    facility that can be used to create and print personal notes. The software also includes extensive search and
    indexing features so that the stories and theoretical descriptions can be easily accessed.
              The structure of the Chronicles of Teaching system centers around two database modules (Stories and
    Theories) that provide search and indexing facilities to aid the user in navigation.    The "Stories" module allows
    the student to enter descriptions of problems or activities that were noticed during classroom observations.
    Users enter descriptions of both the incident and the resolution of the situation, and may also leave comments or
    suggested alternatives to stories entered by others.  Descriptions of the learning and/or instructional theories
    underlying the events depicted in the stories are also available.   At any time, users may view descriptions of
    various theoretical principles drawn from the literature on learning, instruction, and effective teaching. The user
    simply selects the desired theoretical description from a list of descriptive titles. Users are encouraged to engage
    in debates/analyses of the stories, using the "opinions" feature to pose questions or leave comments for other
    users. Multimedia capabilities to display video clips of actual teaching episodes are also available to users.
    These video segments illustrate various features of some of the stories and theoretical descriptions in the
    database.

244
      The search facilities provided in the software are designed to allow easy access to both stories and
theoretical descriptions. Searching for particular stories can be accomplished in several ways. First, the user can
access a search facility that "filters" the available stories based on category selections made by the user,
including categories such as grade level, subject, and type of teaching activity. Each story in the database also
includes keywords entered by the author of the story that describe various topics related to the story. Users may
access a search facility for these keywords that will sequentially display all stories where a match to the specified
keyword is found.
      The hypermedia links embedded in the text of the story descriptions and solutions also provide an
important facility for accessing stories. Users may click on a highlighted word, and the system will display the
related story or theoretical description. The software provides capabilities for authors to create hypertext links
from various words or phrases in their story to other similar stories or theoretical descriptions, thereby helping
them to actively reflect on how the events they have observed in classrooms are similar to, or different from,
other situations described in the database. Users can easily create links by highlighting a word or phrase in the
story narrative, navigating to the target story, and making a selection from the menu to create the link. Links
can also be deleted by the author of the story, but once the author is satisfied with the story and links, the story
is "published" so that other users cannot alter the author's story description or links.

Field Testing

      Development of the Chronicles of Teaching software proceeded using a rapid prototyping model. That is,
more than 250 teacher education students from the target population participated in several cycles of testing and
revision of the software. Initially, randomly selected students from sections of a teacher education program who
had completed 16 hours of course work in education (Introduction to Education, Educational Psychology, etc.),
and who were entering a "block" of methods courses in elementary education that required extensive observation
in public school classrooms (20 hours per week), helped with testing of the various prototypes.      Participants
were introduced to the system and to story writing and analysis procedures during a training session prior to their
scheduled observations in the schools. The students then used the system individually during the remainder of
the semester to enter and link stories and solutions based on their classroom observations.
      The major activities completed by each student included:  (1) responding to other stories by viewing and
commenting on analyses made by previous users; (2) composing and entering their own story derived from their
classroom observations, and; (3) linking various terms in their story to other stories and theoretical descriptions
included in the database. A total of 45 stories were available for viewing, including seven new stories that were
entered by students during the prototype testing.  The system was instrumented to collect data regarding the
specific activities each user completed during interaction with the system. A summary of the kinds of activities
undertaken by the students who tested the prototypes is given below [Tab. 1]. It is interesting to note that
searching for stories of interest to the students and reading analyses of the stories dominated the interaction
patterns. A pparently, students were comfortable with procedures for searching the database, but since most had
not encountered hypermedia links before, they did not take advantage of the navigational opportunities provided
by this feature of the software.

                                    A ctivity                                 Time (in minutes)

                Average total    time spent with system                                      40.47
                Average time viewing stories                                                 2.72
                Average time viewing analyses                                                9.77
                Average time viewing and writing opinions                                     3.69
                Average search time                                                          9.55
                Average time viewing theories                                                5.56
                Average time creating and following links                                    0.23

Table 1:  Average   times    for    various   user activities.

      Feedback from the students who tested the system was used to guide modifications and enhancements of
the prototype. Specifically, users of an early version of the software asked for a more sophisticated search

                                                                                                          245
     system that would allow them to search for stories based on various categories of teacher activities (i. e.,
     discipline, instruction, classroom management, etc.) as well as student level (i. e., early elementary, middle
     school, high school, etc.) and context (i. e., math, reading, science, recess, etc.). This search feature was added
     to the system, along with navigation capabilities that allow users to "backtrack" along the path they had
     followed while browsing with hypertext links.  Examination of the logs of user activity revealed that students
     tended to search for stories related to discipline, classroom management, and learning, with "All Topics" being
     frequently chosen as a default search technique to avoid unsuccessful searches for other topics and categories
     [Tab. 2].

                                      Search Key                                        Frequency

                             Early Primary                                                    1
                             .II Topics                                                      26
                             Discipline                                                      47
                             Instruction                                                      8
                             Learning                                                        27
                             Management                                                      29
                             Development                                                      2
                             Assessment                                                      14

    Table   2:   Search keys   used   to   find stories in   the  database.

          A more extensive analysis of the stories entered during testing of the prototype reveals that the students
    noticed and discussed a wide variety of classroom situations in the classrooms. An examination of the topics for
    the stories entered in the database reveals that discipline (45%) and instructional methods (32%) dominated the
    concerns of the preservice teachers who tested the prototype, while the context of the incidents was more diverse,
    covering social studies, math, special education, science, history, language arts, health/physical education, and
    even recess.
          Besides specific suggestions regarding modifications of the system, students also volunteered their
    subjective impressions, noting that the tasks required to use the system were very appropriate for reflecting on
    various aspects of teaching. The  activities involved in entering, linking, analyzing and commenting on stories
    in the database seemed to engage the students at a high level.  It is also apparent that the system encouraged the
    kind of reflective thinking necessary to develop teaching expertise, as exemplified by the following excerpt from
    an opinion entered by someone in response to a story:

          I think proximity would be the best in this situation.  By moving closer to the students and standing
          next to them, they will know that they were heard. Some teachers may separate them, but this causes
          disturbance to the lesson flow. I would continue the lesson while moving towards the student.

    Integration into the Teacher Education Curriculum

          The Chronicles of Teaching software has been integrated in several of the courses in our Elementary
    Education program. All elementary education majors are involved in four stages of utilization of the software.
    In the first stage, students enrolled in the Foundations of American Education course (the initial course for all
    education majors) are introduced to the software through discussions of the stories already in the database. The
    software is demonstrated by the instructor during classes, and students are encouraged to browse through the
    databases and enter opinions and alternative ideas for solutions of the problems described in the stories.  After
    the introductory course, elementary education majors enroll in a general methodology course where they are
    required to write a description of a situation they observed during their field work in the public schools.  The
    students enter and link their story in the database and continue to examine the other stories that are already
    entered in the database. The third stage of integration of the  Chronicles  of Teaching software into the teacher
    education curriculum occurs in several of the five methods courses that students must complete.       For example,
    in the Social Studies Methods class, students are required to write descriptions of two situations they observed
    during their 100 hours of classroom experiences completed during this block of the program.         The last stage of

246
curriculum integration talces place during student teaching. All elementary student teachers are required to write
a story describing a situation that occurred during their student teaching and place it in their final senior student
teaching portfolio, as well as enter the description and analysis in the Chronicles database.

Conclusions

      Initial testing of the Chronicles of Teaching software has produced encouraging results, suggesting that
the activities associated with using the software in combination with the other, more common activities of a
teacher education curriculum have succeeded in engaging our students in significant reflection about teaching.
Some modifications of the system have been suggested by students as a result of the pilot testing described here.
Our experiences have also revealed interesting problems with integration of the system into the existing
curriculum that will need to be addressed as the software is used more widely within our program.
      Modifications of the software will continue as the system is integrated within our teacher education
curriculum.  The initial prototypes have been "stand-alone" systems, but      it will be necessary to develop an
application that can be placed on a network so that the databases can be accessed by multiple users at the same
time. We also have plans to provide facilities that allow users to add digital video clips of teaching episodes to
the system.  Ultimately, we plan to "press" a generic version of the software on CD-ROM, providing a set of
initial stories for analysis, theoretical descriptions of learning and instruction, facilities to create and link new
stories, and several "movies" illustrating various teaching activities.
      It is clear that our students, like so many beginning teachers, tend to focus on discipline and classroom
management concerns.    If the Chronicles of Teaching  software is      to be more than just a tool to collect and
distribute "war stories", it will be necessary to encourage students to notice and reflect on other kinds of
situations that occur in classrooms. This will have to be left to the professors teaching the various education
courses, as the software exists only as a tool to facilitate communication and reflection.        It will also be
necessary to achieve an appropriate integration with other reflective activities commonly used in teacher
education programs (i.e., journals, discussions, etc.), in order to assure that the Chronicles of Teaching software
does not merely represent a novel, yet isolated activity that our students must complete in order to obtain a
degree.  We believe the potential exists for the software to make a significant contribution toward the
development of effective teachers. But as always, the successful integration of a technology such as Chronicles
of Teaching into a curriculum hinges on whether the system is viewed as an integral part of the overall program,
rather than another requirement that is detached from the real business of learning to teach.

References

Carter, K. (1993).  The place of story in the study of teaching and teacher education. Educational Researcher,
      22 (1), 5-12.

Christensen, C. (1987). Teaching and the case method:    Texts, cases and readings. Boston: Harvard Business
      School.

Goodman, J.   (1984). Reflection and teacher education:  A case study and theoretical analysis.      Interchange,
      /5(3), 9-26.

Greenwood, G., & Parkay, F. (1989).    Case studies for teacher decision making. New York:      Random House.

Kagan, D. M., & Tippins, D. J.     (1991).  How teachers classroom cases express their pedagogical beliefs.
      Journal of Teacher Education, 42 (4), 281-291.

Kitchener, K., & King, P. (1982).    Reflective judgment concepts of justification and their relationship to age
      and education. Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology, 2, 89-116.

Koschmann, T. D.    (1993/1994).   Toward a theory of computer support for collaborative learning.    Journal of
      the Learning Sciences, 3(3), 219-225.

                                                                                                         247
    Kowalski, T. J., Weaver, R. A., & Henson, K. T.    (1990).   Case studies on teaching. New York:  Longman.

    Nelson, W. A., & Palumbo, D. B.     (1992).     Learning, instruction and hypermedia.    Journal of Educational
          Multimedia and Hypermedia, 1(3), 287-299.

    Norman, D. A.   (1978).  Notes  toward a theory of complex learning.   In A. M. Lesgold, J. W. Pellegrino, S. D.
          Fokkema., & R. Glaser (Eds.).    Cognitive psychology and instruction. New York:     Plenum Press.

    Pea, R. D.  (1993/1994).   Seeing what we build together:    Distributed multimedia learning environments for
          transformative communication. Journal of the Leaming Sciences, 3(3), 285-299.

    Ross, D. D.   (1989). First steps in developing a reflective approach. Journal of Teacher Education, 40(2), 22-
         30.

    Scardmalia, M., & Bereiter, C.     (1993/1994).    Computer support for knowledge-building communities.
         Journal of the Leaming Sciences, 3(3), 265-283.

    Schon, D.  (1983). The reflective practitioner. New York:   Basic Books.

    Schon, D.  (1991). Educating the reflective practitioner. New York: Basic Books.

    Shulman, J. (Ed.)  (1991).  Case methods in teacher education.   New York: Teachers College Press.

    Shulman, L. S.   (1986).  Paradigms and research programs in the study of teaching.      In M. Wittrock (Ed.),
         Handbook of research on teaching (pp. 3-36).   New    York: MacMillan.

    Silverman,  R., Welty,  W.,  &  Lyon,  S.  (1992).    Case studies for teacher problem solving.    New York:
         McGraw-Hill.

    Smyth, J.  (1989).    Developing and sustaining critical reflection in teacher education.    Journal of Teacher
         Education, 40(2), 2-9.

    Wildman,   T. M.,  &  Niles, J. A. (1987a,  February).      Essentials of  professional  growth.   Educational
         Leadership, 4-10.

    Wildman, T. M., & Niles, J. A.   (1987b).   Reflective teachers:   Tensions between abstractions and realities.
         Journal of Teacher Education, 38 (4), 25-31.

    Williams, S. M.   (1992).   Putting case-based instruction into context:   Examples from legal and medical
         education. Journal of the Leaming Sciences, 2(4), 367-427.

    Zeichner, K. M.,  & Liston, D. P.  (1987).  T eaching student teachers to reflect. Harvard Educational Review,
         57,   23-48.

248
