                          The    Transfusion           Medicine       Tutor:
     The   Use      of   Expert-Systems             Technology        to  Teach       Students
                    and    Provide        Support      to Practitioners            in
                                  Antibody          Identification

            Jodi Heintz Obradovich, Stephanie Guerlain, Philip J. Smith, Jack W. Smith, Jr., Sally
              Rudmann, Larry Sachs, John Svirbley, and Melanie Kennedy, and Patricia L. Strohm

                                 Cognitive Systems Engineering Laboratory
                                         The Ohio State University
                                    210 Baker Systems, 1971 Neil Ave.
                                          Columbus, OH 43210
                           jobradov@magnus.acs.ohio-state.edu (614) 292-12%
                            psmith@magnus.acs.ohio-state.edu (614) 292-4120

            Abstract:     The studies presented here provide data regarding the effectiveness of the
            expert-system-based Transfusion Medicine Tutor (TMT) when used by medical technology
            students and medical technologists in performing an important problem-solving task, the
            identification alloantibodies in a patient's blood for the purpose of finding compatible
            blood for transfusion.   TMT monitors for slips and mistakes during the evaluation of
            patient cases, and provides suggestions to the student or technologist when a potential
            concern is detected.  Use of that system was found to reduce errors in final answers on
            various    multiple antibody cases by 30%-62%   by practicing  medical    technologists.
            Similarly, use of a modified version of the system for teaching was found to enhance
            learning by 87-93%.

INTRODUCTION

We have conducted a series of empirical studies aimed at understanding how to engineer computer systems to
successfully aid students and practicing medical technologists in learning more effective strategies to solve
complex problems [Smith, Smith, Svirbely, et al. 1991; Smith, Miller, Fraser, et al. 1991].           The studies
presented here provide data regarding the effectiveness of the expert-system-based Transfusion Medicine Tutor
(TMT) when used by medical technology students and medical technologists in performing an important
problem-solving task, the identification alloantibodies in a patient's blood for the purpose of finding compatible
blood for transfusion.

ANTIBODY IDENTIFICATION

One of the most challenging problem-solving tasks confronted by medical technologists in transfusion services
laboratories is determining what antibodies are in a patient's blood. Antibody identification is a laboratory
workup task where medical technologists must run a series of tests and analyze a large amount of data to detect
antibodies in a patient's blood (as part of the process for determining compatible blood for a transfusion).

This task exhibits the   classic characteristics of an abductive   reasoning task,   i.e., reasoning  to the   best
explanation of the data. Some of the characteristics found in the antibody identification task are: noisy data (the
quality of the data is questionable), one antibody masking (or covering up) another antibody, costly data, a large
solution space (more than 400 alloantibodies have been identified), and having multiple primitive solutions true
at the same time (there may be multiple antibodies present in a patient's blood).

                                                                                                               249
  BACKGROUND              STUDIES
  This project began by conducting a series of studies aimed at understanding how to design expert-systems
  technology that can be applied to education.  These studies led to the development of an expert model of
  problem solving, the identification of common errors and misconceptions in solving such problems, and
  development of a model of expert tutoring in the domain of antibody identification.          The results of these
  background studies have been the basis for the development of an expert system that serves two areas of
  application:

      1.  Providing a computerized support tool that helps  practitioners solve cases,   while providing them with
          embedded training as they solvethese cases;
      2. Aiding medical technology students in developing their problem-solving skills for the task of antibody
          identification.

   Empirical evaluations were conducted for both applications and are presented in this paper.

  THE PROBLEM-SOLVING TOOL
  To teach medical technology students about antibody identification and to provide embedded training and support
  to medical technologists, a problem-solving environment was developed in which students and practitioners
  could solve actual patient cases, requesting test results and interpreting these results in order to arrive at an
  answer.

  This system, the Transfusion Medicine Tutor (TMT), has embedded in its architecture an expert system that
  monitors the student's performance [cf., Burton 1982; Fox 1993; Lajoie & Lesgold 1989] for evidence of errors
  of commission (erroneous inference), errors of omission (missing an expected inference), and errors due to
  incomplete protocols (insufficient converging evidence).

  This system was designed to support teaching by a human teacher. In particular, its interface design improves
  the instructor's or supervisor's ability to diagnose students' or practitioners' problems and misconceptions by
  making more explicit to the teacher/supervisor the student/practitioner's thought processes [cf., Bailey 1993;
  Dempsey & Sales 1993]. The teacher/supervisor is given warnings as students make errors and is able to access
  displays indicating where in the task the student/practitioner is encountering difficulty in order to provide
  immediate assistance to the student

  Originally, TMT consisted only of complete patient cases for the student/practitioner to solve.        An initial
  formative evaluation using medical technology students produced results that were disappointing.  Many of the
  students seemed overwhelmed by the amount of material that TMT was attempting to teach (even though the
  students had already covered this material in their normal coursework). Because of these results, five initial
  lessons were designed that are intended to teach the students a number of the critical subtasks before asking them
  to solve a complete case [cf., Gagne 1985; Gordon 1993].

  In addition, based on initial formative evaluations, we also concluded that a computer system that is only
  reactive to a student/practitioner's errors may not be the most efficient or effective method of teaching or support
  (at least with the extensive number of difficulties these students were encountering). To remedy this situation,
  we designed a checklist that made explicit the high-level goals embedded in TMT's expert model and that
  summarized some of the key knowledge necessary to achieve these goals. The checklist serves several purposes:
              As an external memory aid, acting as a reminder of certain types of knowledge necessary for
               antibody identification.
              As a representation of the kinds of knowledge the expert system is expecting the user to apply in
               solving a case.

250
TMT AS SUPPORT TOOL FOR PRACTITIONERS
One purpose of this support tool was to study the effects that critiquing systems (where users perform a task and
the computer  uses its knowledge    to critique   the person's  performance)  can   have on the performances   of
technologists when identifying the alloantibodies present in patients' blood. This system monitorsfor slips and
mistakes made during the evaluation of patient cases and provides intelligent, context-sensitive feedback to the
technologist when a potential concern is detected.

The  Practitioners

The background studies involving practitioners engaged in the antibody identification task have provided
evidence that practitioners make a significant number of errors [Smith, Smith, Svirbley, et al. 1991; Strohm,
Smith, et al. 1991; Guerlain 1993] including slips, failure to form appropriate hypotheses, failure to collect
independent converging evidencefor the answer, failure to use all information available from a test result, and
biased assimilation. Many of these errors are due to inadequate training and practice with the antibody
identification task since the practitioner may only perform this task occasionally.

In this study, 32 practitioners from six hospitals were tested. All of these technologists were identified by their
supervisors as "actually performing the task of antibody identification as part of their job, but who would
benefit from additional experience and training. Their years of experience ranged   from one to 35 years (with a
mean of 10 years).

Experimental    Design

The practitioners were randomly assigned to the Treatment or Control Group, theformer using the checklist and
a version of the system with all critiquing functions operative and the latter using the system without any
feedback.

Performance was studied using a combination of a within- and between-subjects design.       All practitioners were
first trained on the use of the interface with the control version of the system.   Following this training, they
solved a Pre-Test Case without any aiding.  This Pre-Test Case was matched with the first Post-Test case,
allowingfor the within-subjects comparison. Three additional Post-Test Cases were administered and were used
in the between-subjects analysis.  All of the cases had characteristics that made them fairly difficult to solve
(multiple antibodies, one antibody masking another, noisy data, etc.) and were actual patient cases or realistic
cases designed by an expert in antibody identification.

Results

Several important classes of errors are listed in Table 1. As indicated in this table, multiple process errors were
made by the practitioners on the pre-test case.    This finding is consistent with the evidence from previous
studies that revealed that practicing medical technologists make a significant number of errors when solving
antibody identification cases.

       Error                                                                          # of practitioners
       1. Ruling out hypotheses incorrectly                                                   20
       2.  Failing to rule out when appropriate                                               14
          3. Failure to collect converging evidence                                           26
       4.  Answer implausible given data                                                      11
       5.  Answer implausible 2iven prior probabilities                                       11

       Table 1. Number of Practitioners (out of 28) who made process errors on the Pre-Test Case.

The analysis of misdiagnosis rates on the test cases (Table 2) showed that there was no significant difference in
performance on the Pre-Test Casefor the Control and Treatment Groups. A Log-Linear analysis was run to take

                                                                                                             251
  into account the difference in performance between the two groups on the Pre-Test Case.     This analysis gave an
  overall significance level of p s; 0.000003, favoring performance for the Treatment Group.

  Test Cases           Pre-Test Case     Post-Test 1     Post-Test 2           Post-Test 3          Post-Test 4
  Control Group        6 out of 14       5 out of 15     8 out of 16           6 out of 16          10 out of 16
                       (43%wrong)        (33.3% wrong)   (50%wrong)            (37.5% wrong)        (62.5% wrong)
  Treatment Group      4 out of 15       Oout of 16      3 out of 16           Oout of 16         0 out of 16
                       (26.7%wrong)      (0.0% wrong)    (18.8% wrong)         (0.0% wrong)         (0.0% wrong)
  Significance
  (between-subjects        NS            p < 0.05        p=0.067               p < 0.01           p < 0.001
  analysis)

                                           Table 2. Misdiagnosis Rates.

  TMT AS TUTORING SYSTEM
  Another   design application  of the Transfusion Medicine Tutor     (TMT)   is as a   testbed for  studying   design
  concepts for the development of a general model for teaching abduction.        The following study describes the
  results obtained  when TMT       was used as  an expert-systems-based       tutoring system   for teaching medical
  technology students the abduction task of-red cell antibody identification.

  The  Students

  Thirty students in the Medical Technology Program at a major U. S. university were tested on TMT.              These
  students were college juniors and had completed the didactic portion of their immunohematology coursework and
  the student lab. Participation in the study was voluntary, but the students were paid for their participation.

  Experimental      Design

  Participants were randomly assigned to one of two groups: Half were assigned to be in the Control Group and
  half to the Treatment Group.     The Treatment Group used the checklist, a version of the system with all
  critiquing functions operative, and the assistance of their instructor as needed. The Control Group used a version
  of the system that offered no immediate feedback from TMf, but provided a summary at the end of the case
  containing the student's answer for the case, the correct answer for the case, and how an expert would have
  solved the subtasks or cases.

  All of the participants were trained on the interface using the same case (with all intelligent tutoring functions
  turned off) and were tested on the same cases in the same order with the exception of the Pre-Test Case and first
  Post-Test Case, which were randomized with respect to their order of use for each student (used in the within
  subjects analysis). Like the training case, the version of TMT used for the Pre-Test Case provided no feedback .

  Following the Pre-Test Case, the students completed five lessons; each of the first four lessons consisted of
  subtasks involved in solving a complete case. The fifth lesson, Complete Cases, consisted of solving complete
  patient cases, and included the use of all the subtasks covered in the first four lessons, along with more global
  strategies for gathering converging evidence to test a hypothesis.

252
  Treatment     Differences.     As described above, the Control Group represented a very passive system, but one
 that nevertheless provided students with access to a full description of expert performance on each case.    The
 Treatment Group, on the other hand, differed in three ways from Control Group:
              They received context-sensitive, immediate tutoring by the computer,
              The had access to the checklist, and
              They had access to a teacher.

 Thus, the Treatment Group represented an attempt to provide a "best-case" environment for teaching students,
 using the tutoring system to provide a learning environment and to provide active tutoring in order to assist the
 instructor's activities.

 Post-Test     Cases.     Following Lesson 5(Complete Cases), all students completed two Post-Test Cases were
 given to all students. The first was one of the two randomly ordered, matched cases. The second case (in which
 one antibody masked a second that was also present ) was the same for all students.       For the two Post-Test
 Cases, the intelligence was turned off, no end-of-case summaries were provided and no instructor assistance was
 provided.  The Treatment Group participants were, however, allowed to use the checklist for each post-test case.

 Results

 Misdiagnosis     Rates.     The results showed that there was no significant difference in the misdiagnosis rates
 on the Pre-Test Case for the Control and Treatment Groups (Table 3 ). However, the students in the Treatment
 Group  showed    a significant  (p < .0 01 ) improvement     in performance (a reduction   from 100% to    13%
 misdiagnosis error rate ) from the Pre-Test Case to the matched Post-Test Case.  Students in the control group
 showed a reduction in error rate from 93%to 73%that was not statistically significant from the Pre-Test to
 Post-Test Case 1.

 The between-subject analysis showed a significant difference in performance on the post-test cases between the
 two groups (Table 3 ). On Post-Test Case 1, students in the Treatment Group had a misdiagnosis rate of 13%
 while students in the Control Group had a misdiagnosis rate of 73%.      On Post-Test Case 2, students in the
 Treatment Group had a 7%misdiagnosis rate, while students in the Control Group had a 73%misdiagnosis rate.
 Each of these differences is significant (p < 0.01 ).

 Thus, something about the Treatment Group (the use of intelligent tutoring, the checklist and/or instructor
 assistance ) produced a sizable and statistically significant improvement in performance.

                                         Postatest Case 1        McNemar's Chi Square       PosMest Case 2

Treatment           15/15wrong                2 /15wrong                                     1/15wrong
                      (100%)                    (13%)                                          ( 7%)
Control             14/15wrong                ll/15wrong             x2 = 1.3333            ll/15wrong
                          (93%)                 (73%)               NS@ p<0.05                 (73%)
Fisher's Exact        p=    0.50
Test                NS @ P<0.05

      Table 3. Misdiagnosis rates for students in the Treatment Group (n= l5) vs. the Control Group (n=15).

 Classes    of E"ors.      In order to better understand the impact of the Treatment condition on learning, we used
 the computer logs to identify error frequencies for five classes of errors (see Table 4). On the Pre-Test, there
 were no significant differences between the Control and Treatment Groups. On the matched first Post-test case,
 Errors 2,  3a, 3b, and 4b each showed significant differences (p <    0.05) between the Treatment and Control
 Groups, with the Treatment Group making fewer errors (see Table 4). Thus, tutoring appeared to be effective
 for errors that the computer could detect during the process of solving a case, as well as for errors that were
 detected after the student marked a final answer for a case.

                                                                                                              253
                                           Subjects committing       Fisher's       Subjects committing       Fisher's
                                           error at least once on     Exact         error at least once on     Exact
                                               Pre-test Case          Test           Post-test Case 1           Test
                  Error                   Treatment     Control                     Treatment   Control
                                            (n=15)      (n=15)                       (n=15)     (n=15)
   1.  Ruling out correct answer due           7          5        p=0.3553            2            4        p= 0.3257
       to ruling out incorrectly.                                     NS                                        NS
   2.  Failure to rule out when                13         13        p=0.7011           5          11
       appropriate.                                                   NS
   3.  Failure to collect converging
       evidence.
       a  Failure to do antigen typing.        9          8         p=0.5000           1            8
                                                                      NS
       b. Failure to satisfy the 3+/3-         7          6         p=0.5000           1            6
          rule.                                                       NS
   4.  Failure to check for consistency
       of data with answer.
       a  Failure to ensure there are          1          3         p=0.2988           1            2        p= 0.5000
          no unexplained negative                                     NS                                        NS
          reactions.
       b. Failure to ensure there are          14         11        p=0.1648           2            8
          no unexplained positive                                     NS
          reactions.

   Table 4. Classes of errors made by the Treatment and Control Group participants on the Pre-Test and Post-Test
            Case 1.
  CONCLUSION
   Although the application of expert systems technology to education has a very interesting intellectual history,
   its practical impact has been disappointing to date. Clearly, the task of antibody identification is a task that
   medical technologists find difficult, since they are getting moderately difficult, yet realistic, patient cases
   consistently wrong when unassisted.     The studies presented in this paper illustrate the impact that a well
   designed learning environment can have on the performance of medical technology students and practitioners in
   the task of antibody identification.

   A systems approach was taken in the design of TMT, leading us to design a computer system that revolved
   around the application of a complete protocol, using a number of complementary problem-solving strategies to
   independently converge on an answer.        In our study with practitioners, the critiquing model of interaction
   allowed the human practitioner to stay involved in the task, apply their own expertise, learn from the computer,
   and judge the computer's feedback in a context-sensitive manner. As a tutoring system, TMT provided tutoring
   as well as supporting teacher intervention. There was evidence that TMT aided both students and practitioners
   by catching slips and mistakes and helping users to recover from these errors, employing different types of error
   checking mechanisms (checking for errors of commission, checking for errors of omission, checking for an
   incomplete   protocol, and for practitioners, checking that the  answer  was     consistent with prior   probability
   information).

   The use of a checklist with both students and practitioners was beneficial in quickly training them on the high
  level _goal structure implicit in the computer's knowledge base, and served as a reminder to participants of the
   steps necessary to successfully solve a case. This checklist is meant to be used along     with TMf (at   least until
   the student or technologist internalizes the steps), so that the user has an appropriate mental model regarding the
   computer's expectations.   The overall protocol involves collecting converging evidence to reduce the chances of
   errors in the final answer due to the use of fallible heuristics or human error.

   The success of the system's interaction with the user relied on its unobtrusive interface that allowed both
   students and practitioners to solve antibody identification cases as they normally would using paper and pencil,

254
while providing the computer with a rich set of data regarding the characteristics of the case and the user's
problem-solving steps without requiring the student or practitioner to enter information that was outside the
normal task requirements.

Although the relative contributions of the computer vs. teacher vs. checklist cannot be determined from these
studies, the results provide strong evidence that an effective learning environment was developed.         The results,
when combined with previous studies using traditional teaching methods suggest that use of such technology
could significantly enhance the quality of education for medical technology students and provide valuable practice
and support for practicing medical technologists. Additional studies are underway to identify the contribution of
the various components of this environment to overall learning.

Acknowledgements

This research was supported by a grant from the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute.

References

[Bailey 1993]   Bailey, G.D. (Ed.) (1993).   Computer-Based Integrated Learning Systems.       Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
  Educational Technology Publications.
[Burton 1982]   Burton, R.R. (1982). Diagnosing bugs in a simple procedural skill.       In D. Sleeman and J.S. Brown
  (Eds.), Intelligent Tutoring Systems, London:   Academic Press, 157-184.
[Dempsey & Sales 1993]       Dempsey,   J.V. and  Sales, G.C. (Eds.)  (1993).   Interactive Instruction  and Feedback.
  Englewood Cliffs, NJ:  Educational Technology Publications.
[Fox 1993] Fox, B. (1993).    The Human Tutorial Dialogue Project:       Issues in the Design of Instructional Systems.
  Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Earlbaum.
[Gagne 1985]   Gagne, R.M. (1985). The Conditions of Leaming and Theory of Instruction (4th Edition).        New York:
  Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
[Gordon 1994]    Gordon,     S.E. (1994).  Systematic    Training Program    Design:   Maximizing     Effectiveness   and
  Minimizing Liability.  Englewood Cliffs, NJ:    Prentice Hall.
[Guerlain 1993]  Guerlain, S. (1993). Factors influencing the cooperative problem-solving   of people  and computers..
   Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society 37th Annual Meeting, Seattle, WA. 387-391.
[Lajoie & Lesgold 1989] Lajoie, S.P. and Lesgold, A. (1989).   Apprenticeship training in the workplace:     Computer
  coached practice environment as a new form of apprenticeship.    Machine-Mediated Learning, 3, 7-28.
[Miller, Smith, et al. 1993] Miller, T., Smith, P.J., Gross, S., Guerlain, S., Rudmann, S. Strohm, P., Smith, J., and
  Svirbely, J.  (1993) The use of computers in teaching clinical laboratory science.     Immunohematology, 9, 22-27.
[Smith, Smith, Svirbley, et al. 1991]  Smith, P.J., Smith, J., Svirbely, J., Galdes, D., Fraser, J., Miller, T., Blazina,
  J., Kennedy, M., Rudmann, S., and Thomas, D. (1991).            Coping with the complexities of multiple-solution
  problems:    A case study. International Journal of Man-Machine Studies, 35, 429-453.
[Smith, Miller, Fraser, et al. 1991] Smith, P.J., Miller, T., Fraser, J., Smith, J., Svirbely, J., Rudmann, S., Strohm,
  P., and Kennedy, M. (1991).        An empirical evaluation  of  the performance     of antibody    identification tasks.
  Transfusion, 31, 313-317.
[Strohm, Smith, et al. 1991]  Strohm, P., Smith, P. J., Fraser, J., Smith, J. W., Rudmann, S., Miller, T., & Kennedy,
  M. (1991). Errors in antibody identification. Immunohematology, 7,         20-24.

                                                                                                                     255
