              A Proposal for the Reengineering of the Educational System
                                                         Luis Osin
                                          Centre for Educational Technology
                                                      16 Klausner Street
                                                     Ramat Aviv, Israel
                                                  osin@openu.ac.il

                                                        Alan Lesgold
                                       Learning Research and Development Center
                                                  University of Pittsburgh
                                                   Pittsburgh, PA   15260
                                           alan@lrdc4.lrdc.pitt.edu

                 Abstract:   We propose a reengineering of the educational system that focuses on mastery
                 and on more substantial learning activities and eliminates the constraints on learning that
                 arise from current insistence on grouping children by age.  Our basic argument is that elimi
                 nating the age-based approach to education has striking advantages that outweigh any social
                 disadvantage. The most powerful reason is the extremely large variance found in any index
                 of learning achievement, even in relatively homogeneous populations. We further argue that
                 modem information systems allow richer educational activities, research-based methods, and
                 multiage schooling to proceed efficiently and effectively. This creates a moral imperative to
                 provide real learning opportunities to the whole of the student population.

   The age-grouped classroom is quite new to education and is largely a product of the industrial revolution and especially of
   the scientific management movement [see Taylor 194711967], though there were somewhat earlier threads of similar char
   acter. Three main forces have driven the age grouping practice. First, the realization that children's cognitive capabilities
   differ from those of adults, stimulated by Freud and Piaget, led to the belief that children of different ages need different
   cognitive resources, need different learning methods, and have different cognitive dispositions for acquiring various forms
   of knowledge.   The extreme form of this view is that children need age mates to support the particular kinds of thinking
   and emotion that their level of maturation involves. So, for example, the very idealistic kibbutz movement in Israel ar
   ranged living facilities so that children lived with age mates rather than with their families (of course, community was
   valued over family in this culture, but still, a major investment in social change was driven by beliefs in the importance of
   age-peer interaction).
   The second major force toward age grouping was the drive for universal education.  This, and the third force, efficiency
   demands, forced a move from a tutorial approach to a didactic approach in age-grouped classes.    When a wealthy person
   had three or four children to educate and no communal resources to provide that education, hiring a single tutor to teach
   all the children made great sense. However, when a community had all of its children to educate, specialization of labor
   became appropriate, and the most obvious and socially compatible specialization seemed to be by age.  Had society set its
   sights higher at this time, the specialization could just as well have been first by subject matter, but the initial goals of
   universal literacy were low enough that it was assumed that any teacher already had mastered the content.  Rather, teacher
   preparation focused on teaching methods, especially adaptation to children of different ages.
   Through all of this time, minimal attention was paid to the variability of learning rates among children. We do not have
   complete data on how disparate educational achievement would be if we did not limit the speed at which children could
   progress, but there is every reason to believe that it would be dramatic (see [Gettinger 1984], which cites other findings of
   a 5:1 ratio among students in time to learn). Even within a highly constrained system, in which faster learners are not
   afforded sufficient learning opportunities, there is ample evidence of major variability.  We present here a few modest
   examples of the evidence that supports this view.
   Consider the standardized educational achievement tests we give to college bound students.      In the case of the College
   Board's Scholastic Achievement Test, for example, scores of college bound seniors have a standard deviation of about
   100, by design. What is less-often discussed is the average rate of growth in SAT scores over the course of schooling.
   Now that we have a substantial number of children taking the SAT as early as 11 or 12 years of age, there is plenty of
   evidence to support the view that SAT scores grow an average of about 35 points per year (Bond, personal communication,
   ca. 1985). This means that the standard deviation of the test scores at the end of secondary education is about three years
   worth of normative learning. While the construction of the test limits the absolute precision of the following claim, it still

264
seems worthwhile to infer that only about 2/3 of high school seniors have attained a level of intellectual capability within
three years of the average. To include all but perhaps 5% of students, we would need to have a range of perhaps 12 years
of normative education, i.e., the mean plus or minus two standard deviations.    In general, this reasoning, and examination
of a variety of data sources, suggests that in age-grouped education, the range of achievement is roughly equal to the aver
age - if we look at students after n years of schooling, they will range over O to 2xn years of normative achievement.
A very different view is available from the entry end of the public schooling world, though the conclusion is roughly the
same.   [Lesgold et al. 1985] conducted a longitudinal study of learning to read.  Over the first three years of schooling,
children were tested up to eight times in an effort to understand the differential effects of two different approaches to
reading instruction.  For our purposes, though, what is important is the variability in outcomes of learning over the three
grades. At the end of the third grade, when students are assumed to have learned the basics of reading, oral reading
speeds in the top 20-25% of the students averaged about 100 words/min on passages similar in difficulty to those in their
readers but not prepracticed, roughly the speed of conversation and clearly fast enough to support higher-level thinking
processes. The bottom 20-25% of students, though, averaged only 50 words/min for one curriculum and 80 words/min for
the other, slow enough to be a substantial barrier to understanding. Even with multiple reading groups, major differences
in achievement remain, with many students reading so slowly after three years that they will have trouble doing much
meaning processing of what they read and others clearly done with the basics of learning to read after a year or so.
While primary reading instruction is partly individualized, with each classroom usually having several different "reading
groups," this individualization tends to end after the third grade.  It is interesting to note that [Lesgold et al. 1985] ob
served substantial differences in achievement that did not decrease with years of schooling over the primary grades, yet the
capability of the instructional system to support continued individualization past Grade 3 is generally quite limited. While
dispersion of achievement did not narrow over grades, Lesgold et al. found that dispersion of "reading level" was maximal
at second grade. That is, students begin primary education in a system that allows reading to be acquired    at differential
rates, but between second and third grade, even though achievement continues to vary widely over students, classification
variance decreases-our society expects almost all children to reach the top reading level by the end of third grade, so they
do (on paper), independent of their real competence, as measured by reading of passages not previously drilled in class.
We see reading instruction as it begins in first grade as a model for individually-paced learning.    Much of the learning
activity takes place in groupings that reflect achievement, and there is room for considerable variability in rate of learning.
However, this flexibility is provided only for reading and only for a couple years.  By Grade 3, efforts are under way to
find ways of "passing" all the students out of basic reading, usually by subtle movement from capability to engage new
texts as a measure of progress to capability to read a fixed text given sufficient drill. What happens is not "cheating" by
teachers but rather an evolution of the third grade curriculum to focus more on rote, rehearsable performances and less on
broadly useful skill. In this way, most students can make it through all the "covered" content of the first three grades in
dependent of whether they really learn to read in any sense meaningful outside of school.      A truly individualized system
would preserve the standard of competence in engaging new tasks as the measure of achievement and would provide ap
propriate resources for students who need longer to achieve that real goal, rather than substituting schoolish goals or un
abashed social promotion for measured success in adaptive competences.

The Low Rate of Success in Adapting to Student Differences
The educational system can move from such an unnatural and inhuman structure as the graded system to one the may
benefit from all the insights of nongrading, adaptiveness and multiage grouping, but we find that (a)  only a very low per
centage of schools adopt the change; and (b) the results in those that actually take the    reform path are not dramatically
better than those found in conventional schools.  This is why, in spite of the positive results the reformers present (with a
justified sense of accomplishment), we consider that from a systemic point the experience was not successful, because the
results were not convincing enough to be applied nation-wide, and this in a situation where everybody is looking for solu
tions to the pressing problems of the educational system.
A major  effort  to  integrate the results of the many individual    evaluations about    the reform methods we described
(reasonably gathered under the unique label of nongradedness), was published by [Gutierrez & Slavin 1992].    The central
finding of the article, quoting from its abstract, is: "Results indicated consistent positive achievement effects of simple
forms of nongrading generally developed early:     cross-grade grouping for one subject (median ES = + .46) and cross
grade grouping for many subjects (median ES = + .34).     Forms of nongrading making extensive use of individualization
were less consistently successful (median ES = + .02)."    ES, the effect size, is obtained by comparing the results of an
experimental group (applying the new methods) with those of a control group (applying the conventional methods). The
comparison is done over the same subject (reading, arithmetic, or language arts), usually at fixed points in time (after one,
two or three years of instruction). In this case, the effect size for a given subject is defined as the difference between the
mean achievement levels of the students in the nongraded and graded programs, divided by the achievement level standard
deviation of the students in the graded program.

                                                                                                                        265
  We would have preferred larger-scale studies conducted by established researchers.       Nevertheless, this best-evidence
  synthesis is the most reliable source we can use for our analysis. What do we learn from this review:
   I.  The results favor the nongraded programs, but not dramatically.
  2.   When the complexity of the nongraded program increased, the results decreased.
  3.   The extent of departure from normative grade levels is seldom measured and has been minimal in the one
       study where this implementation measure was used.

  The Reasons for the Low Rate of Success
  We claim that the main reason is that the teachers, on whose shoulders (and heads) success is based, were assigned a
  "mission impossible". The complexity of the task they had to confront in order to fully implement nongraded programs or
  individualized instruction was above their real possibilities. With the technology of the 60s and 70s it was impossible for
  a teacher to follow up on students having each one a different curriculum and a different trajectory in the universe of
  knowledge, to assign to each one a learning task compatible with his or her previous trajectory, to help in the knowledge
  development process, and to assess individually each student for diagnostic and adaptation purposes.        The reform move
  ments, which (justly) criticized graded schools for assigning impossible tasks to students (particularly the low achievers),
  tried to solve this problem by assigning impossible tasks to teachers.
  [Gutierrez & Slavin, 1992] showed that, if the complexity of the change is small (like introducing the new methods in one
  subject only), the teachers succeed, and the results are better in a statistically significant form.     If the complexity in
  creases, although the methodological changes are conceptually the same, teachers cannot cope with it, and there is no pro
  gress. We are not attacking the designers of systems fielded to date; their ideas were excellent, and we think that the edu
  cational systems should adopt most of them.   We are not attacking the teachers either. As we said, they were assigned an
  impossible task, in the situation and with the materials at their disposal.
  What we do claim, is that now the technology is ready to built an infrastructure that will make the teacher's task feasible,
  and that the progress in educational research has provided us with additional insights required to design environments
  where the reform movements ideals can come true.
  A last point. It is possible to explain the lack of extended popularity of these reforms at the two other levels that count.
  The educational authorities never saw really convincing results that would justify the budget increases that are always
  asked in order to implement a reform, and the parents never saw great benefits, because the nongradedness never took
  their children out of the Procrustean bed.

  The Proposal
  Mapping the Traditional Linear Curriculum onto a Project Space

  Consistent with current thinking in the educational community, we propose that more of students' learning time be spent
  in work on substantial learning projects.  At least three current viewpoints on learning-constructivism, situated learning
  and cognitive apprenticeship--agree on the importance of learning through substantial student projects, as opposed to
  classical teacher presentation. While these three positions differ in their explanations of how learning happens, they con
  cur in the need for project-based learning.  Still, there is no complete definition of what a project is, so we need to con
  sider carefully what we mean by project-based education.  In general, some or all of the following characteristics appear in
  the specifications of learning projects: (a) a relatively complex task is posed for the student(s); (b) accomplishing the task
  requires, and hence fosters the development of, proficiency in different knowledge areas from several disciplines; (c) stu
  dents often work on projects in teams of two or more; (d) a (relatively) long time is allotted for completion - and varies
  according to task difficulty and student maturity: from several days in the lower grades to several weeks or even months in
  the upper grades; (e) each student is responsible for clearly defined parts of the task, but all the students discuss the work
  and progress of each task component; (f) project execution may require interaction with external resources or individuals,
  outside the class (or even school) environment; (g) the project is evaluated in terms of its results (reports, laboratory note
  books, artwork, instruments, exhibits, services); and (h) the evaluation of each student's activity within the project is in
  corporated into his/her personal record.
  Projects provide natural challenges to students and a feeling of real accomplishment when the tasks are performed.      They
  constitute a reasonable model of the type of activities students encounter outside school, as opposed to the scenario we
  find in the expository model of a conventional classroom. Projects permit the replacement of talking about thinking with
  opportunities for doing hard thinking.    In addition, they permit a more direct assessment of a student's readiness to per
  form real cognitive work, as opposed to school work, thus overcoming the old problem of "inert knowledge."

266
Although  project-based  education  is gaining   support [see BBN 1994], the majority of   teachers are   not practicing this
method in their classes, at least not regularly. Routinely, high school students get perhaps one major project assignment
each semester in each class, but the day-to-day work is traditional. This is not because teachers reject the basic idea but
rather because there is minimal supporting     infrastructure in schools for project work. The day, and the curriculum, is
excessively fragmented for each student  and teacher, making it difficult for a team project to be supported. In contrast, in
conventional education, the "coverage" of material in classroom presentations, is supported by a rich infrastructure of
textbooks, complementary materials, and conventions about responsibilities and schedules, and teachers are judged in
terms of their presentation of a curriculum defined in terms of scopes and sequences, and not in terms of projects. Fur
thermore, teachers were trained for and by means of conventional teaching.
Developing an infrastructure for projects that may compete with conventional textbooks is not a task that can be assigned
to individual teachers. What is required is the initial development of a large collection of projects that can be mapped, in
terms of cognitive achievement, over the existing curricular strands [see Lesgold I 988]. In this way, the performance of a
project can be recognized as the satisfaction of the requirements for certain segments in an overall set of schooling stan
dards, whether the conventional scope-and-sequence structure of one or more subjects or a new set of outcome standards.
With the mapping of student achievement as well as project learning goals onto a common space, a           teacher gains the
ability to select which parts of the curriculum to teach using a project-based approach, and which parts using other meth
ods of instruction.
Project development, as we see it, will require: (a) the definition of the task to be accomplished; (b) the characterization
of the prerequisites required from the participating students-in a two-tier structure indicating both the minimal cognitive
or skill demands all of the participants must satisfy and the broader set of cognitive or skill demands at least one member
of the group must satisfy; (c) the development, production and distribution of any resources required for the project which
are not readily available to individual schools; (d) a list of the resources that the project requires and that may be obtained
at or by the school; and (e) a estimate of the time required for project completion (in student-hours).
Teachers and their students would define their own projects, to be included in    the school library of projects, but for a
curriculum to have an important project-based component, the development of the infrastructure we propose is critical.
This point is essential to our proposal and is presented first, because the possibilities for individual student progress -
which are one of our main concerns - are very limited within the framework of conventional education.      Projects are need
to free students to progress at independent rates.

Developing a Software/Courseware Infrastructure

Educational Administration Software

As suggested above, it is impossible for a teacher to remember the present status of the cognitive map of each student, and
thus to make reasonable decisions based on it, when each student is following a different trajectory in the universe of
knowledge.  Fortunately, present computer technology provides us with the tools to track student status and to make this
information accessible to teachers. It is within the state-of-the-art to develop a computer program where all the require
ments of the common curriculum will be registered as nodes of a complex structure, and where each student will have a
personal copy of this curriculum, annotated with his/her performance on each node of the structure.
The mastery accomplishments can be registered in different ways:     (a) automatically, when a student is working in super
vised mode on library courseware; (b) as a result of the teacher reporting completion of a project (the computer system
will automatically translate project mastery into mastery of all the nodes covered by the project or will provide a rubric
that permits the teacher to analyze student products with respect to specific learning goals); (c) as a result of a teacher's
direct annotation over a curriculum structure; (d) as a result of school testing; and (e) in recognition of externally
accredited knowledge.   Based on these data the computer program may answer specific teacher queries, such as:     (a) who
are the students satisfying the prerequisites for project X? (b) which are the projects that student Y is ready to tackle? (c)
Which are the topics more appropriate as a next stage for student Z? and (d) What are the topics I should teach to students
V, W, X, Y, Z if I want them to tackle project A?    Using this information, and interacting with the students, the teacher
will be, for the first time, in a privileged position to assume responsibility for educational decisions. It is a debt long time
overdue that we owe our teachers.

Pedagogical/Instructional Courseware Support

It is necessary to provide a variety of instructional resources, trying to optimize the matching with each student's learning
style.  Within these resources are particularly important those which are computer-based, in that they may allow for
downloading part of the instructional teaching load to the computer.  For a general coverage of this topic, see [Venezky &

                                                                                                                         267
  Osin   1991], and for artificial-intelligence based applications see [Lesgold 1988]. We distinguish between two modes of
  student-computer interaction: supervised and unsupervised.
  In supervised mode, the computer program which manages the interaction includes a knowledge model, a student model
  and a pedagogical model.  The student model may be divided into three layers: (a) the relatively fixed psychological pa
  rameters relevant to the instructional process; (b) the cognitive map described above; and (c) the short-term information
  related to the achievements and problems encountered in the interaction within the specific instructional unit being stud
  ied. Based on these data, the pedagogical model will adopt instructional decisions whose objective is to optimize (as well
  as we know how) the learning process.
  The experimental data on student progress results when using well-conceived courseware, are very encouraging [Becker
  1992] [Becker 1994]     [Osin 1984].   For example,    [Osin et al. 1994] showed that the groups which benefit more from
  computer-assisted instruction are the extremes of the class distribution, i.e., the high achievers and the low achievers.
  These results exemplify how the computer can supplement the teacher activities, in the areas more difficult for him/her to
  reach.
  Learning time, a very valuable resource, may be optimized as shown by [Lesgold 1994] and [Gott et al. in press]. Trainees
  in an electronics fault diagnosis training program acquired the equivalent of about four years of on-the-job experience from
  a 20-25 hour interaction with an intelligent learning-by-doing computer environment.
  In unsupervised mode there are neither student nor pedagogical models. The computer is a resource in the student's hand.
  Nevertheless, this mode is equally valuable, because the computer is the tool of the information era, and mastering its
  utilization is a fundamental component of education for the future. Furthermore, there are many simulations, microworlds
  and exploratory tools, designed in unsupervised mode, of high educational value.      A well designed educational admini
  stration package will include the facilities for providing advice to any student on which of these educational computer
  programs match more closely his/her cognitive profile, within a certain area of knowledge, using the data stored in the
  student record [Osin 1992].

  Allowing for Dynamic Student Grouping

  Conventional schools group students of the same age for fixed periods of time.  There is no educational reason that can
  justify this approach. The diversity of individual learning rates makes it absurd to expect all the students in the same-age
  cohort to learn the same contents in the same amount of time.   Trying to solve this problem by what is called "ability
  grouping", i.e., separating high achievers from low achievers, is pedagogically and socially unsound. These labels are as
  signed on the basis of data that is sensitive to maturity, transitory motivation, and teacher quality. Ability grouping tends
  to perpetuate these labels as a self-fulfilling prophesy, by providing the so called low achievers a low level educational
  environment, that will inhibit their real possibilities of intellectual growth. We propose to group the students dynamically,
  according to the similarity of coverage of the curriculum, as reflected in their individual cognitive maps, irrespective of
  age and learning rates.

  Flexible Classes

  We start with an organization that keeps many of the formal aspects of the present school structure, while avoiding present
  pitfalls. Possible alternatives will be presented below.  A class consists of a group of students who are ready to pursue
  most of the learning goals for a particular grade, under the guidance of a teacher.   Classes would not be age constrained.
  A student would enter a class when he/she is cognitively ready for it, i.e., when allowed to enter a first grade class (more
  or less determined by age), or when he/she has learned the previous grade curriculum, as shown by the personal record. A
  student would leave (graduate from) a class upon completion of the curriculum requirements for the corresponding grade.
  Satisfaction of the curriculum requirements does not necessarily imply mastery of every topic in the curriculum.   This is
  done to take into consideration that a student may have different aptitudes, and different learning rates, in diverse areas of
  knowledge, so that it would be too rigid to expect a lockstep progress in all the curriculum areas.    Criteria will be estab
  lished to determine the most convenient moment or circumstance to move a student from one grade to the next. Although
  the teacher, supported by the educational administration software, would try to keep a relative balance, avoiding the con
  centration of a student in the study of one specific area to the detriment of the others, the system would allow for a student
  to pass a grade with 'debts' in certain subjects that would need to be learned in the next class. This means that a teacher
  responsible for a grade must master the curriculum of at least the adjacent grades also. This is important not only because
  of our expectations in terms of teacher knowledge, but also because changing grades should be done, for administrative
  and instructional reasons, at the end of a session (e.g., trimester or semester); a student who has satisfied the requirements
  of a grade before the end of the period should be able to continue progressing in his/her educational process, in the class
  where he or she is, until the end of the given period.

268
Another element worth mentioning is that the emphasis is not on complete encyclopedic knowledge, so that the curriculum
requirements for a grade may very well allow for some flexibility of learning goals for different students.
The net result of this approach is that every student has the right to remain in a class for as many sessions as it takes
him/her to satisfy the curriculum requirements, and also the right to progress to the next grade as soon as he/she has satis
fied them.  The immediate consequence is that, particularly as we advance in grades, the age range within a class will
increase. There is nothing wrong with this, but it may take a while for society to get accustomed to it.  We think that mul
tiage grouping is a better model of the real world, where people are not segregated according to age.   Having to get used to
it is a small price to pay if it solves a major problem of the educational system.
With our proposed organization, testing of seventh graders, for instance, would not show a performance distribution rang
ing from second to eleventh grade [Tyler 1950], but rather a relatively homogeneous population of precisely seventh grad
ers. It is this cognitive coherence in class which allows for efficient use of time and resources, transforming the learning
process into a fruitful experience for every student.
None of the problems of ability grouping are present in this structure. The educational system offers to all students the
same enriching environment. The average and below average students will have the activity of the brighter students as a
model and, furthermore, by doing cooperative learning where they can also contribute their part, they will not have a feel
ing of rejection or isolation.
A practical problem that this "conservative" approach to reform helps to address, is that many teachers do not master the
curriculum of all the grades in equal form.  There is enough change regarding teachers when we ask them to switch to
project-based education and to individual monitoring of student learning, so that we feel that keeping them working with
the curricular materials in a grade they are familiar with may help in the adaptation process.
We may envision the alternate usage in class of variable groupings, interclass activities, and other approaches to afford
individualized learning opportunities.

Variable Groups

A variety of instructional activities will be available within a class, including  project-based education; cooperative learn
ing; computer-assisted instruction;  audio-visual    resources; didactic presentations (expository,   demonstrations, discus
sions); individual tutoring; self-study; laboratory experiments; and assessment activities. Focusing now on the grouping
strategy to be used when defining a project team, or a cooperative learning group, we suggest the following heuristics:  (a)
heterogeneity of intellectual capabilities; (b) varying partners from project to project (at least partially); (c) matching of
student aptitudes to task requirements; and (d) striving for a good working relationship within the group.
In a different dimension, we must consider the number of learning tasks to be assigned to a student.    This is the parameter
that distinguishes between fast and slow learners, and constitutes an important distinction with conventional schooling. In
conventional methods all students are assigned the same tasks, and what distinguishes between them is the quality of their
learning. Our proposal expects all the students to reach mastery in each and everyone of the learning tasks they are as
signed. The way to give expression to different intellectual capabilities is to allow for a difference in the number of top
ics a student may be learning simultaneously. Thus, a very fast learner may be participating in three projects, two coop
erative learning groups and a CAI activity, while a slow learner may be participating in one project, one cooperative
learning group, and an individual tutorial activity.  This is how a fast learner may finish a grade in much less time than a
slow learner even though both students interact and study together in a socially convivial environment.
A critical element that permits this differential progress is the mapping of the linear curriculum into projects, because it is
possible to work on different projects simultaneously, while in the present linear structure every student is forced to prog
ress step by step over a rigid sequence. In other words,  we can preserve learning as a social activity, and allow for a dif
ferent learning rate, because the projects are not sequentially ordered.     On the other hand, the classical scope-and
sequence structure forces a rigid order that has to be followed step by step, and we cannot expect a group of students
reaching mastery of every step, all exactly at the same time.   This may be one reason why students in nongraded or adap
tive schools still exhibit a rate of progress which is very much in lockstep with their age cohorts.

Inter-Class Activities

Although the class is the center for the student's cognitive development, the school as a whole serves as an environment
where social, emotional and physical development takes place.       The school should organize activities where different
kinds of groupings take place, crossing class boundaries. Social activities will tend to group students by age, sport activi
ties will tend to group students according to physical or skill development, artistic activities will tend to group students by
temperament or special abilities.

                                                                                                                        269
  Additional Possibilities

   According to school preferences, it is possible to define multigrade classes and use a team-teaching approach.            There may
   be a disadvantage of additional complexity, and an advantage of less frequent class changes for fast learners.

  The Implications
  Clear Benefits for High and Low Achievers

   The present educational system is built on the assumption that all the students that belong to the same age-cohort have a
   similar intellectual  development,   and   thus all the  curricula, materials  and   teaching   practices  are  tailored towards   the
   "average" student.
   Our proposal, by recognizing the existence of large individual differences within the same age-cohort, provides equally
   "tailored" education   to all the levels of the cognitive  spectrum.   It is clear that  the  main beneficiaries   will  be precisely
   those that received the poorest service from the conventional system.         In a conventional school, the further a student is
   from the "ideal" average student, the more his/her educational needs are ignored.        This is why low and high achievers will
   be the major beneficiaries of our proposal.    Low achievers will be spared failure,     while high achievers will   have the possi
   bilities for fully developing their intellectual potential.   In addition, it is our educated   guess  that  by changing   drastically
   the present school climate, by creating an atmosphere of challenge and intellectual activity, the "average" students will
   benefit also, and the baseline of educational achievement will be raised at all levels.

  An Improved Model of Social Interaction

   The scenario where a teacher, in front of a class, "distributes" knowledge to rows of learners is not only false, but is a very
   bad model for the real-life situations the students will encounter.     By creating their own knowledge, and by cooperating to
   do so, the students will get used to the environments found in productive activities, and will develop, by practicing it, the
   cognitive style required in a modem society.
   Furthermore, by integrating the students in groups of diverse intellectual capabilities, and various ages, we are again pro
   viding a better model for their adult life.  Last but not least, the fact that this integration is done with students who are all
   mature and able to tackle the tasks assigned, allows the students with lower intellectual capabilities to feel productive
   also, and reassert   themselves,  while providing   the high achievers  with  concrete   examples   that  students  at a lower    intel
   lectual level than their own may, nevertheless, be partners in fulfilling a task or creating a product.

  The Need for a Coordinated National Effort

   Although our proposal may be implemented at a regional scale, the real benefits, and the utmost efficiency (in investment
   terms) would be obtained in a state-wide, or even nation-wide sharing of many implementation chores.                 For instance, a
   rich  database  of  instructional resources (including   newly-defined    projects), carefully  indexed   in terms   of  conventional
   topics, although a relatively large investment, would result in a very low per capita cost if amortized over a very large
   student population.    These  savings  can  be  achieved  whether   or not the   entire population  is expected   to meet   the   same
   standards (i.e., different states with different standards might still benefit from common development of the needed infor
   mation bases for adaptive education).
   For  example,   if 1,200 projects  were to be  developed  for a  national database (and    this would  provide   an average    of  100
   projects to select from for every school year), with an estimated cost of     $50,000 per project, this would be an investment
   of $60 million dollars. For an estimated student population, in the US, of 50 million students,           who could use these proj
   ects during a minimum of three years, we would have a cost of        40 cents per student-year.
   Another  dimension    where   the national implementation    would   be very  important,   is that of  the transferability  of educa
   tional credits. A student learning at the fourth grade level, irrespective of age, should be able to move to another school,
   maybe in another state, and continue to be in the fourth grade.       Ideally, if all schools were working according to our pro
   posal, the transition would be very smooth, because the student would continue to learn enjoying the same instructional
   methods, and the same type of educational environment .

  Superior Work-Force for Industry and Services

   In the era of information and high-tech, the instructional level required for the work force is much higher than in previous
   eras. This point has been made in several opportunities and, most forcefully in the report:        "A Nation at Risk".

270
The high standards defined in the common curriculum result in a population able to cope with the requirements of the
most sophisticated industries. Otherwise, the uneconomical trend will continue of industries having to educate their work
force according to their requirements, which are not satisfied by the graduates of the present educational system. Another
important dimension is time. By accelerating the better learners, we allow for their incorporation into the work force, with
or without an university degree, in a much shorter time than in the conventional system.

Zero-Increment over the Present Educational Budget

The most "original" point in this proposal is to allow each student to progress according to his/her learning rate.     As
learning rates are normally distributed, this will result in the above-average students leaving the system in less time then
what presently takes. Of course, this fact frees educational resources, personnel, materials and space. We can use the
resources that have been freed to take care of the below-average students, who will require more teacher attention, more
materials, and more time to stay in school. The symmetry of the distribution of learning rates allows us to say that, in
general terms, the savings generated by the acceleration of the above-average students will compensate for the additional
expenses required by the slower learners.

References
[BBN 1994] B.B.N. (1994) Designing a Co-NECT School.        Cambridge, MA:   Bolt, Beranek and Newman Inc.
[Becker 1992] Becker, Henry J. (1992) Computer-Based Integrated Leaming Systems in the Elementary and Middle
Grades:  A Critical Review and Synthesis of Evaluation Reports.   Journal of Educational Computing Research,   v8,  nl, 1-
41.
[Becker 1994] Becker, Henry J. (Ed.) (1994) Computer-Based Integrated Leaming Systems:      Research and Theory.     Inter
nationallournal of Educational Research, v21, n1, 1-119.
[Gettinger 1984] Gettinger, Maribeth (1984) Individual Differences in Time Needed for Leaming:    A Review of the Lit
erature. Educational Psychologist, v l 9, n l , 15-29.
[Gott et al. in press] Gott, S. P., Lesgold, A., & Kane, R. S. (in press). Tutoring for transfer of technical competence.
Educational Technology.
[Gutierrez & Slavin, 1992] Gutierrez, R. & Slavin, R.E. (1992). Achievement Effects of the Nongraded Elementary
School: A Best Evidence Synthesis. Review of Educational Research, Winter 1992, 62, 4, 333-376.
[Lesgold 1988] Lesgold, A.  (1988). Toward a theory of curriculum for use in designing intelligent instructional systems.
In H. Mandi & A. Lesgold (Eds.), learning issues for intelligent tutoring systems. New York:  Springer-Verlag.
[Lesgold 1994] Lesgold, A.  (1994). Ideas about feedback and their implications for intelligent coached apprenticeship.
Machine-mediated Leaming, 4, 67-80.
[Lesgold et al. 1985] Lesgold, A.M., Resnick, L.B., & Hammond, K.    (1985).   Learning to read: A longitudinal study of
word skill development in two curricula.  In G. Waller and E. MacKinnon    (Eds.), Reading Research: Advances in Theory
and Practice. New York: Academic Press.
[Osin 1984] Osin, Luis (1984)   TOAM: CAI on a National Scale. Proceedings of the 4th Jerusalem Conference on Infor
mation Technology, 418-424. Silver Spring: IEEE.
[Osin 1992] Osin, Luis (1992) A Computerized Leaming Environment Integrating Prescribed and Free Student Activities.
Proceedings of the East-West Conference on Emerging Computer Technologies in Education, 241-244.        Moscow: Interna
tional Center for Scientific and Technical Information.
[Osin et al. 1994) Osin, L., Nesher, P. and Ram, J. (1994) Do the Rich Become Richer and the Poor Poorer? A longitudi
nal analysis of pupil achievement and progress in elementary schools using Computer-Assisted Instruction.  International
Journal of Educational Research, 21, I, 53-64.
[Taylor 1947/1967] Taylor, Frederick Winslow (1967, c1947) The principles of scientific management. New York, Norton.
[Tyler 1950] Tyler, Fred T. (1962) Intraindividual Variability, in: Individualizing Instruction, The Sixty-first Yearbook of
the National Society for the Study of Education. Chicago: NSSE.
[Venezky & Osin  1991] Venezky, R. and Osin, L. (1991) The Intelligent Design of Computer-Assisted Instruction.      New
York: Longman.

                                                                                                                     271
