                                      The Computer Clubhouse:
                 Helping Youth Develop Fluency with New Media

                                                 Mitchel Resnick
                                               The Media Laboratory
                                      Massachusetts Institute of Technology
                                               Cambridge, MA 02140
                                               mres@media.rnit.edu
                                      http://www.media.rnit.edu/~mres/

                                                     Natalie Rusk
                                         Science Museum of Minnesota
                                                St. Paul, MN 55101
                                               nrusk@sci.mus.rnn.us

            Abstract: The gap between the technological haves and have-nots is widening, leading to
            dangerous economic and cultural rifts in our society. But access to technology alone is not
            enough to bridge this gap. This paper describes a new model of a learning community, called
            the Computer  Clubhouse,    that   breaks away from   the traditional computer  lab. At the
            Clubhouse, inner-city     youth become    designers and  creators-not  just consumers-of
            computer-based products.    The    paper  describes four core principles of the Clubhouse
            educational approach-and discusses how the Clubhouse helps prepare today's youth for life
            and work in tomorrow's world.

Introduction
Ever since the personal computer was invented in the late 1970s, there have been concerns about inequities in
access to this new technology [Piller, 1992]. Over the years, the gap between the technological haves and have
nots has widened, leading to dangerous economic and cultural rifts in our society. In an effort to narrow these
rifts, some groups have worked to acquire computers for inner-city schools. Other groups have opened
community-access centers, recognizing that schools are not the only (or necessarily the best) place for learning
to occur. At these community-access centers, members of inner-city communities (youth and adults alike) can
use computers at little or no charge.

The  Computer   Clubhouse  (organized       by The   Computer   Museum    in collaboration   with   the MIT  Media
Laboratory) grows out of this tradition, but with important differences. At many other centers, the main goal is
to teach youth basic computer techniques (such as keyboard and mouse skills) and basic computer applications
(such as word processing). The Clubhouse views the computer with a different mindset. The point is not to
provide a few classes to teach a few skills; the goal is for participants to learn to express themselves fluently
with new technological media. Technological fluency means much more than the ability to use technological
tools; that would be equivalent to understanding a few common phrases in a language (like English or French).
True fluency involves the ability to express, explore, and realize ideas [Papert & Resnick, 1995]. At the
Clubhouse, young people become designers and creators-not just consumers-of computer-based products.

Images of the Clubhouse
The first Clubhouse was opened in 1993, in a 1000-square-foot space on the ground floor of The Computer
Museum in downtown Boston. During its first two years of operation, it attracted more than 1000 young people
ages 10-16, with 98%   coming from       underserved    communities.    Participants  were  from    diverse cultural
backgrounds, including African American (61%), Asian (13%), and Latino (11%). To attract participants, the
Clubhouse initially established connections with community centers and housing projects in target communities;
since then, it has relied primarily on word of mouth. Youth do not have to sign up for time at the Clubhouse;
they can "drop in" whenever the Clubhouse is open.

                                                                                                                285
 What does the Clubhouse learning community look like? Here are some quick "snapshots" from the Computer
 Clubhouse.

      Binh moved to the United States from Vietnam three years ago. He and his friend Liem learned
      from Clubhouse staff how to build a computer interface to control motors. Binh and Liem are now
       showing other Clubhouse members how to build interfaces to control motorized devices, such as
       robot arms and toy dune buggies.

       Essam,  a  ninth grader  from  Roxbury,  designs and programs     his own   computer  games at the
       Clubhouse.   He   usually uses the Logo  programming    language,     but Michael,  a student from
       Wentworth Institute, is mentoring him to program in C, a professional programming language that
       Essam had been wanting to learn. Essam's work has attracted the interest of other Clubhouse
      participants, and he is in turn helping other youth learn to design and program their own games.
      Michael is also gaining confidence and learningfrom his experience as a mentor.

       Sandi is developing an interactive multimedia project for an independent study course at her
       school. She chose to research the history of Native Americans to learn more about her heritage.
       Her project combines text, graphics, photographs, and sound. Sandi's teachers are impressed by
      what she has produced, and they hope that more of their students will start producing multimedia
      reports.

       Emilio saw a laser-light show at another museum, and wants to create something similar at the
       Clubhouse. He glues small mirrors onto a few LEGO motors, writes a short computer program to
       control the motion of the motors, and bounces a laser light off of the mirrors to create wonderful
      Lissajous-like  patterns.  Throughout the  project, Emilio    is involved in mathematical  thinking,
      modifying angles and speeds to create new laser patterns.

      Several Clubhouse members are creating an Online Art Gallery on the World Wide Web . Once a
      week, they meet with a local artist who agreed to be a mentor for the project. After a year, their
       online art show is accepted as an exhibition at SIGGRAPH, the premiere computer-graphics
      conference.

      Paul's art teacher recommended he visit the Clubhouse, just two weeks after Paul moved to
      Boston from Trinidad. Paul had always enjoyed drawing but had never used a computer before
       coming  to the   Clubhouse. He now   comes  to the  Clubhouse     three  or four days a week. Last
      summer, based on his Clubhouse experiences, Paul got a job designing Web pages for a local
      company. He designed a series of original character drawings, and he reliably met demanding
      deadlines. Now, Paul is interested in pursuing a college program in computer animation and
       graphic design.

 Clubhouse Principles
 The development of the Clubhouse learning environment has been guided by four core principles.

       Support learning through design experiences
       Help youth build on their own interests
       Cultivate "emergent community"
       Create an environment of respect and trust

 Principle 1: Support learning through design experiences

 Activities at the Clubhouse vary widely, from constructing and controlling LEGO robots to orchestrating virtual
 dancers. But these varied activities are based on a common framework: engaging youth in learning through
 design. In recent years, a growing number of researchers and educators have argued that design projects provide
 rich opportunities for learning [Hare!, 1991; Lehrer, 1993; Papert, 1993; Soloway, Guzdial, & Hay, 1994].
 There are many reasons for this interest in design-based learning:

286
      Design activities engage youth as active participants, giving them a greater sense of control (and
     responsibility) over the learning process.

      Design  activities encourage  creative   problem-solving  avoiding   the right/wrong   dichotomy
     prevalent in most school math and science activities, suggesting instead that multiple strategies
     and solutions are possible.

      Design activities can facilitate personal connections to knowledge, since designers often develop
     a special sense of ownership (and caring) for the products (and ideas) that they design.

      Design activities are often interdisciplinary, bringing together concepts from the arts, math, and
     sciences.

      Design activities promote a sense of audience, encouraging youth to consider how other people
     will use and react to the products they create.

      Design activities provide a context for reflection and discussion, enabling youth to gain a deeper
     understanding of the ideas underlying hands-on activities.

At the Clubhouse, youth work on a variety of different design activities. Participants use leading-edge software
to create their own artwork, animations, simulations, multimedia presentations, virtual worlds, video games,
musical creations, Web sites, and robotic constructions.Youth learn not only technical skills, but the heuristics
of being a good designer: how to conceptualize a project, how to make use of the materials available, how to
persist and find alternatives when things go wrong, and how to view a project through the eyes of others. In
short, they learn how to manage a complex project from start to finish.

The design tools at the Clubhouse were chosen, in part, because they connect with children's imaginations and
interests. But at the same time, these tools connect with important mathematical and scientific concepts. The
tools don't directly teach mathematical and scientific ideas; rather, youth use (and learn) these ideas as an
integral part of their design projects. For example, as Clubhouse youth work on robotics projects with
LEGO/Logo [Resnick, 1993] and the Programmable Brick [Sargent, Resnick, Martin, & Silverman, 1996], they
naturally engage in thinking about important scientific concepts such as mechanical advantage and feedback.

Principle 2: Help youth build on their own interests

In schools of education, the focus is usually on methods of teaching, not motivations for learning. When the
issue of motivation is addressed, the emphasis is often on extrinsic motivators and incentives, such as grades
and prizes based on performance. Yet if you look outside of school, you can find many examples of people
learning-in fact, learning exceptionally well-without explicit "rewards." Youth who seem to have short
attention spans in school often display great concentration on projects that they are truly interested in. They
might spend hours learning to play the guitar or play basketball. Clearly, youth interests are a great untapped
resource. As Roger Schank has written: "An interest is a terrible thing to waste" [Schank, 1994].

At first, some youth interests might seem to be trivial or shallow, but youth can build up large networks of
knowledge related to their interests. Pursuing any topic in depth can lead to connections to other subjects and
disciplines. The educational challenge is to find ways to help youth make those connections and develop them
more fully. For example, an interest in riding a bicycle can lead to investigations of gearing, the physics of
balancing, the evolution of vehicles over time, or the environmental effects of different transportation modes.

The Clubhouse is designed to support youth in developing their interests. While youth from middle-class
households generally have many opportunities to build on their interests (music lessons, specialty camps, etc.),
the target audience of the Clubhouse has few such opportunities. For most Clubhouse participants, there are no
other constructive after-school options. And many do not even have a clear sense of their interests, let alone
how to build on them.

Clubhouse participants are encouraged to make their own choices. Just coming to the Clubhouse involves a
choice: all of the youth at the Clubhouse have chosen to be there, and they can come and go as they please.

                                                                                                                287
  Once inside the Clubhouse, participants continually confront choices on what to do, how to do it, and whom to
  work with. The Clubhouse helps these youth gain experience with self-directed learning, helping them
  recognize, trust, develop, and deepen their own interests and talents.

  Helping youth develop their interests is not just a matter of letting them do what they want. Young people must
  be given the freedom to follow their fantasies but also the support to make those fantasies come to life. On the
  walls, shelves, and hard drives of the Clubhouse, there is a large collection of sample projects, designed to
  provide participants with a sense of the possible and with multiple entry points for getting started. In one corner
  of the Clubhouse is a library of books, magazines, and manuals filled with more project ideas (and a sofa to
  make reading more comfortable). Many youth begin by mimicking a sample project, then work on variations on
  the theme, and soon develop their own personal path, stemming from their personal interests.

  This approach works only if the environment supports a great diversity of possible projects and paths. The
  computer plays a key role here. The computer is a type of "universal machine," supporting design projects in
  many different domains: music, art, science, math. At any time, a pair of youth might be using a computer to
  create a graphic animation, while at the next computer another participant might be using a similar computer to
  control a robotic construction.

  Of course, the technology alone does not ensure diversity. In schools, more teachers are beginning to include
  design experiences in their classroom activities. But in many cases, these design activities are very restrictive.
  Students do little more than follow someone else's "recipe." In classes working with LEGO/Logo, students are
  often told precisely how and what to build. For example, a teacher might instruct every student to build the
  exact same LEGO car, using the same bricks, same gears, same wheels, and the same computer program to
  control it. The Clubhouse takes a very different approach; it has the feel of an invention workshop. In working
  with LEGO/Logo, Clubhouse youth have built, programmed, and experimented with a wide assortment of
  projects, from an automated hair curler to a computer-controlled LEGO city. The LEGO materials and computer
  technology allow this diversity--even more important, the Clubhouse community supports and encourages it.

  Principle 3: Cultivate "emergent community"

  How do people become fluent in a natural language? It is now common wisdom that people learn French much
  better by living in Paris than by taking French classes in school [Papert, 1980]. Many American students take
  several years of French class in high school, but still can't communicate fluently in the language. The language
  is learned best by living in the culture, by going to the store to buy a baguette, by joking with the vendor who
  sells Le Monde, by overhearing conversations in the cafe, by interacting with people who know and care about
  the language.

  For young people to become technologically fluent, they need a similar type of immersion. They need to live in
  a "digital community," interacting not only with technological equipment, but with people who know how to
  explore, experiment, and express themselves with the technology. To foster this type of community, the
  Computer Clubhouse includes a culturally-diverse team of adult mentors-professionals and college students in
  art, music, science, and technology. Mentors act as coaches, catalysts, and consultants, bringing new project
  ideas to the Clubhouse. Most mentors volunteer their time. On a typical day, there are two or three mentors at
  the Clubhouse. For example, engineers might be working on robotics projects with Clubhouse participants,
  artists on graphics and animation projects, programmers on interactive games. For youth who have never
  interacted with an adult involved in academic or professional careers, this opportunity is pivotal to envisioning
  themselves following similar career paths.

  In this way, the Clubhouse deals with the "access issue" at a deeper level. In addition to access to new
  technology, inner-city youth need access to people using technology in interesting ways. This type of access is
  not possible in a classroom with 30 children and a single teacher. The Clubhouse takes advantage of an
  untapped local resource, providing a new way for people in the community to share their skills with local youth.
  By involving mentors, the Clubhouse provides inner-city youth with a rare opportunity to see adults working on
  projects. Mentors do not simply provide "support" or "help"; many work on their own projects and encourage
  Clubhouse youth to join in. John Holt argued that children learn best from adults who are working on things that
  they themselves care about. As Holt wrote: "I'm not going to take up painting in the hope that, seeing me,

288
children will get interested in painting. Let people who already like to paint, paint where children can see them"
[Holt, 1977].

At the Clubhouse, youth also get a chance to see adults learning. In today's rapidly-changing society, perhaps
the most important skill of all is the ability to learn new things. It might seem obvious that youth, in order to
become good learners, should observe adults learning. But that is rarely the case in schools. Teachers often
avoid situations where students will see them learning: they don't want students to see their lack of knowledge.
In contrast, Clubhouse youth often see adults in the act of learning.

Projects at the Clubhouse are not a fixed entity; they grow and evolve over time. A mentor might start with one
idea, a few youth will join for a while, then a few others will start working on a related project. For example,
two graduate students from Boston University decided to start a new robotics project at the Clubhouse. For
several days, they worked on their own; none of the youth seemed particularly interested. But as the project
began to take shape, a few youth took notice. One decided to build a new structure to fit on top of the robot,
another saw the project as an opportunity to learn about programming. After a month, there was a small team of
people working on several robots. Some youth were integrally involved, working on the project every day.
Others chipped in from time to time, moving in and out of the project team. The process allowed different youth
to contribute to different degrees, at different participation" [Lave & Wenger, 1991]. times-a process that some researchers call "legitimate p톏ripheral

This approach to collaboration is strikingly different from what occurs in most school classrooms. In recent
years, there has been a surge of interest among educators in "collaborative learning" and "communities of
learners." In many schools, students work in teams to solve problems. Often, each student is assigned a distinct
role in the collaborative effort. At the Clubhouse, collaboration has a different flavor. No one is assigned to
work on any    particular  team. Rather, communities   "emerge" over     time. Design teams form informally,
coalescing around common interests. Communities are dynamic and flexible, evolving to meet the needs of the
project and the interests of the participants [Resnick, 1996]. A large green table in the middle of the Clubhouse
acts as a type of village common, where people come together to share ideas, visions, and information (not to
mention food).

As youth become more fluent with the technologies at the Clubhouse, they too start to act as mentors. During
the first year of the Clubhouse, a group of six youth emerged as "regulars," coming to the Clubhouse nearly
every day (even on days when the Clubhouse was officially closed). Over time, these youth began to take on
more mentoring roles, helping introduce newcomers to the equipment, projects, and ideas of the Clubhouse.

Principle 4: Create an environment of respect and trust

When visitors walk into the Clubhouse, they are often amazed at the artistic creations and the technical abilities
of Clubhouse participants. But just as often, they are struck by the way Clubhouse youth interact with one
another. Indeed, the Clubhouse approach puts a high priority on developing a culture of respect and trust. These
values not only make the Clubhouse an inviting place to spend time, but they are essential for enabling
Clubhouse youth to try out new ideas, take risks, follow their interests, and develop fluency with new
technologies.

There are many dimensions to "respect" at the Clubhouse: respect for people, respect for ideas, respect for the
tools and equipment. Mentors and staff set the tone by treating Clubhouse youth with respect. Right from the
start, participants are given access to expensive equipment and encouraged to develop their own ideas. "You
mean I can use this?" is a common question for youth to ask when they first visit the Clubhouse and find out
about the resources and options available to them.

Even with all these options, youth won't take advantage of the opportunities unless they feel "safe" to try out
new ideas. In many settings, youth are reluctant to do so, for fear of being judged or even ridiculed. At the
Clubhouse, the goal is to make participants feel safe to experiment and explore. No one gets criticized for
mistakes or "silly" ideas.

Youth are given the time they need to play out their ideas; it is understood that ideas (and people) need time to
develop. One new Clubhouse participant spent weeks manipulating a few images, over and over. But then, like

                                                                                                          289
 a toddler who is late learning to talk but then starts speaking in full sentences, he suddenly started using these
 images to create spectacular graphic animations.

 Clubhouse youth are given lots of freedom and choice. But with this freedom come high standards and high
 expectations. Clubhouse staff and mentors do not simply dole out praise to improve the "self esteem" of the
 youth. They treat youth more like colleagues, giving them genuine feedback, and pushing them to consider new
 possibilities. They are always asking: What could you do next? What other ideas do you have?

 Clubhouse youth learn not only new computer skills, but new styles of interaction. Participants are treated with
 respect and trust-and they are expected to treat others the same way.

 Beyond Rodin
 When people think about thinking, they often imagine Rodin's famous sculpture The Thinker. Rodin's Thinker
 is a solitary thinker, sitting by himself, with his head resting on his hand. This image seems to say: if you just sit
 by yourself quietly, and concentrate hard, you will do your best thinking.

 But that image provides a very restricted view of thinking-and one that is becoming less and less relevant in
 today's world. In recent years, there has been a growing recognition that thinking usually happens through
 interactions-interactions with other people and interactions with media and technologies. New media and
 technologies support new representations of knowledge, which in turn enable new ways of thinking about
 problems.

 The Clubhouse helps young people become fluent with these new "tools for thought." Two product managers
 from Adobe, a leading software company, spent several days at the Clubhouse, hoping to gain insights on how
 they might change and improve their products. Afterwards they wrote [Mashima, 1994]:

       We were amazed at the incredible rate the kids learned complex products such as Photoshop and
       Director and how they used the software almost as an extension of themselves. The kids seem to
       have a lot more enthusiasm and creativity in the work since they choose their own projects and
       determine for themselves what they want to do. I liked how the more experienced members trained
       the new members how to do things and how they took responsibility for the computers and their
       setups. Clearly the Clubhouse is their clubhouse, not someone else's place.

 Their comments capture some of the core ideas underlying the Clubhouse approach: young people working o n
 design projects, following their own interests, developing fluency with new technologies, sharing knowledge as
 a member of a community, and becoming self-confident as learners.

 Of course, creating this type of learning environment isn't easy. At times, the Clubhouse might seem chaotic. It
 takes trust and patience to allow youth to follow their own interests and learn from their experiences. But the
 Clubhouse should not be seen as an unstructured environment: although youth have great freedom in choosing
 their projects, there is structure embedded in the design of the materials, space, and community. Through its
 choice of mentors, sample projects, and software tools, the Clubhouse provides a framework in which rich
 learning experiences are likely to develop.

 Our long-term goal is to make these types of experiences available to youth in many more low-income
 neighborhoods. We are currently establishing an nationwide network of Computer Clubhouses. As part of this
 effort, we are developing workshops and materials to help other sites start their own Clubhouses. In addition, we
 are creating the infrastructure for network-based   interaction among      the sites, so that youth at different
 Clubhouses can collaborate on joint design projects, and mentors and staff can share ideas with one another.
 Ideally, these new Clubhouses will serve as models, sparking people to rethink their notions of technology,
 learning, and community, and contributing to a broader discussion of how to help today's youth prepare for
 tomorrow's world.

290
References
[Harel, 1991]. Harel, I. (1991). Children Designers. Norwood, NJ: Ablex Publishing.

[Holt, 1977]. Holt, J. (1977). On Alternative Schools. Growing Without Schooling, 17 (5). Cambridge, MA:
Holt Associates.

[Lave & Wenger, 1991]. Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

[Lehrer, 1993]. Lehrer, R. (1993). Authors of knowledge: Patterns of hypermedia design. In S.P. Lajoie & S.J.
Derry (Eds.), Computers as Cognitive Tools. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.

[Mashima, 1994]. Mashima, K. (1994). Personal communication.

[Papert, 1980]. Papert, S. (1980). Mindstorms. New York: Basic Books.

[Papert, 1993]. Papert, S. (1993). The Children's Machine. New York: Basic Books.

[Papert & Resnick, 1995]. Papert, S., & Resnick, M. (1995). Technological Fluency and the Representation of
Knowledge. Proposal to the National Science Foundation. MIT Media Laboratory, Cambridge, MA.

[Piller, 1992]. Piller, C. (1992). Separate Realities. Mac World, 218-231. September 1992.

[Resnick, 1993]. Resnick, M. (1993). Behavior Construction Kits, Commmunications of the ACM, 36 (7), 64-71.

[Resnick, 1996]. Resnick, M. (1996). Towards a Practice of "Constructional Design." In L. Schauble & R.
Glaser (Eds.), Innovations in learning: New environments for education. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.

[Sargent, Resnick, Martin, & Silvennan, 1996]. Sargent, R., Resnick, M., Martin, F., and Silverman, B. (1996).
Building and Learning with Programmable Bricks. In Y. Kafai & M. Resnick (Eds.), Constructionism in
Practice. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.

[Schank, 1994]. Schank, R. (1994). The Design of Goal-Based Scenarios. Journal for the Leaming Sciences, 3
(4), 303-304.

[Soloway, Guzdial, & Hay, 1994]. Soloway, E., Guzdial, M., & Hay, K. (1994). Learner-Centered Design.
Interactions, l (2), 36-48.

Acknowledgments

The Computer Clubhouse is a group project with many contributors. Sam Christy, Stina Cooke, Noah Southall,
Brian Lee, and Nancy Boland helped turn the Clubhouse from an idea into a vibrant reality. Dozens of mentors
have volunteered their time and enthusiasm. Gail Breslow, Oliver Strimpel, Marilyn Gardner, Betsy Riggs, and
Ana Gregory of The Computer Museum have provided organizational, fund-raising, and intellectual support.
Members of the Computer Clubhouse staff, particularly Stina Cooke, contributed to the preparation of this
article. The Computer Museum has been the institutional driving force and has provided organizational
leadership for the Computer Clubhouse project. (Natalie Rusk previously served as Director of Education at The
Computer Museum; Mitchel Resnick is on the Board of Overseers and is Chair of the Education Committee at
the museum.) The Clubhouse has been supported by generous financial and in-kind contributions from many
corporations and foundations, including the National Science Foundation (grant 9358519-RED). Above all, we
want to thank the young people who have made the Computer Clubhouse their Clubhouse.

                                                                                                         291
