          Adaptive       Teaching        Strategies      to    Improve      Individual           Student
            Achievement            in    Problem-Based            Learning     Environments

  Rebecca Denning
  Center for Cognitive Science
  The Ohio State University
  USA
  rdenning@magnus.acs.ohio-state.edu

  Philip J. Smith
  Cognitive Systems Engineering Laboratory
  The Ohio State University
. USA
  psmith@magnus.acs.ohio-state.edu

          Abstract:  This study investigates the use of adaptive  teaching strategies to promote learning in
          cooperative learning settings. The Biology Sleuth, a problem-based learning environment, was
          developed as a testbed to vary the distribution of critical resources and to examine the use of
          teaching strategies and their effects on group dynamics and individual learning. Students work in
          small groups, aided by various resources including a knowledge-base, each other, the software, and
          the teacher.  This study examines the effects of applying two different teaching strategies and
          suggests that these strategies can have a large impact on both group dynamics and individual
          learning.  A 35% improvement (p < .05) was measured in the treatment group.         Based on this
          work we suggest that while many design features are chosen while developing training tools,
          designers also need to explicitly consider how these environments can be adapted during use to
          maximize the learning experience.

  Introduction

            The Biology Sleuth is an interactive learning environment designed to teach important problem-solving
  skills, specifically, diagnostic reasoning [Albanese   & Jacobs  1990;   Carlson &   Delany  1988; Charniak   &
  McDermott 1985; Cicourel 1987; Clancy 1985; Elstein, et al. 1978; Mittal, Chandrasekaran & Smith, 1979;
  Peng    & Reggia  1990; Pople 1982; Reggia,    et al. 1985], to high school students.    Secondary goals of The
  Biology Sleuth include improving students' knowledge of health science and biology, computer literacy, social
  and communication skills, and increasing students' awareness of possible health science careers.
            This cooperative learning environment has been developed so that students work in groups      [Cohen
  1994; Cousins & Ross 1993; Thousand 1994; Cook 1991; Cooper & Meuck 1990; Duffy & Knuth 1989],
  aided by both the software, each other, and the classroom teacher.  Specifically, the students play the role of
  physicians. They work together in groups of three students each group assigned to a single computer.        The
  students are presented with nine problem-solving episodes in the form of hypothetical patients.    Initially they
  are asked to identify the hypotheses which could explain the pattern of clinical results associated with each
  patient. As these skills become more practiced, they are also asked to begin running tests and interpreting data
  for themselves. Finally, they are asked to choose individual tests which are the most diagnostic for a particular
  instance.
            If students need assistance, they may request help from other  students or the classroom teacher. The
  teacher is also made aware of whether a group is having difficulty by audible feedback supplied by the computer
  system whenever it detects an error.   Similarly, the software provides additional feedback to the students to help
  them remediate their own errors.

30
         The Biology Sleuth has been evaluated at 20 schools, including rural, suburban, and inner city schools
in five different geographical regions of the U.S.. Over 2000 students have participated in these evaluations. A
final summative evaluation using a pre-test/post-test score comparison (using a between-subjects design)
indicated that The Biology Sleuth is a very powerful tool, especially for populations at risk of academic failure
and for groups typically underrepresented as professionals in science [Denning & Smith 1995].
         The goal of this particular study, however, was to use this context to explore the effects of different
teaching strategies and resource allocations on group dynamics [Douglas 1983] and, subsequently, on individual
learning, and to help develop guidelines for using such an educational tool. This study suggests that focusing
on resource allocation and the teaching strategy employed can significantly influence group problem-solving
behavior and individual learning in this type of environment.

Methods
         Becker  [1993] suggests     that, while cooperative  learning has become    one of   the most popular
instructional reforms in the U.S. in the past five years, not all forms of cooperative learning work as well as
some might believe.   He reports that research evidence strongly suggests that peer interaction alone is not
sufficient to help students learn. Rather, cooperative teams should be structured such that while the group may
be rewarded for good performance, all group members retain responsibility for their own achievement and
productivity.
       The    social psychology     literature   [Douglas 1983) indicates  that   constraints such as access to
information, distribution of resources, knowledge, or input to a computer system, can be manipulated in order to
influence such group and individual behaviors. This general finding was used to guide part of the design of The
Biology Sleuth.
       In particular, one design goal was to influence students to develop explanations for successful and
unsuccessful problem-solving.      (The literature (Chi et al. 1989) indicates that learning is more likely to occur
on problem-solving tasks if the student develops such explanations.)     To accomplish this goal the students
worked using The Biology Sleuth in groups of three; each group had access to the data and symptom
information through a shared medium (ie., a single computer), thus encouraging interactions among group
members; each group was allowed to enter a single conclusion for each patient case, thus inducing group
discussion in order to arrive at a consensus; the "knowledge-base" relating test results to particular diseases was
distributed to each student individually [as a paper chart], encouraging the students to do their preliminary
problem-solving individually.
      It was hypothesized that such a design, providing for distribution of a key resource (the knowledge
base), would help students to detect errors (when the students in a group found that their individually derived
answers disagreed) and to develop explanations in order to resolve these disagreements and arrive at a group
consensus. In particular, providing the chart of clinical results associated with the diseases in paper form and
providing each student with his or her own copy of this paper form was expected to encourage each student to
actively engage in the problem-solving task on his own, forming his own hypotheses, comparing them with the
hypotheses generated by his peers, and developing explanations to account for any disagreement.
      Given Becker's research, The Biology Sleuth was designed to provide the following structure to the
groups. First, the group is rewarded through positive, audible feedback when they reach the correct answer to a
problem.   Second, individual group members are responsible for their own performance in two ways.        The
distribution of knowledge (on the paper forms) to each student is intended to encourage each student to provide
input to the group after he works individually to generate a hypothesis. In addition, the students are also told,
prior to using the system, that they are preparing to take an individually answered test and that the experience
with the system is provided to help them "study" for that test. Finally, cooperation between students is stressed
during the learning process. Since the principal reward, audible feedback, is provided to the group, behaviors
such as individual students helping each other, and detecting and correcting the problems and misconceptions of
the other students in their group, are encouraged.   The act of generating an explanation for another group
member should not only help to remediate that individual's knowledge, it should also help the student who is
generating that explanation to think more deeply about the situation in question.
      In the original design of this system, each student in a group of three was given his or her own copy of
the knowledge-base.  By distributing the chart in this manner, it was hoped that all the students would generate
their own hypotheses.  Since the computer would only accept a single answer for each case, they would then

                                                                                                              31
have to come to some agreement about the group's answer in the event that their individually generated
hypotheses did not match.  It was hoped that in such situations students would discuss their problem-solving
methods in the process of reaching a consensus and thus teach each other.       Videos made during the initial
formative evaluations of The Biology Sleuth revealed that many groups behaved as intended. First, as a group,
they first select a particular datum from the computer display for consideration. Second, individually they look
at their paper charts (the "knowledge-base") to find the hypotheses consistent with that datum. Third, as a group
they compare the intermediate hypotheses generated in this fashion, providing explanations to each other when
there was disagreement or confusion. Fourth, they continue this process until the case is solved.
         The distribution of resources (in this case, the "knowledge-base") to all of the individuals was quite
successful for most students. As we started to study "at risk" populations, however, there were groups where
one student lagged behind the others and "followed along" as the others did the problem-solving exercises.
Unable to keep up with the rest of the group this member was often ignored by the other students who were
busily engaged in the problem-solving exercises. Intervention by the teacher, suggesting that the more advanced
students help explain the methods to the slower student, occasionally resulted in peer tutoring.    More often,
though, the advanced students seemed uncomfortable with the role of teaching and ignored the teacher's
suggestion.
         As an experiment, to encourage the students to participate more fully, the resources critical to the
problem-solving task were redistributed to induce the advanced students to take on the role of teacher for the
students who were experiencing problems. Further, the role of the slower students was also changed, and they
were given a central role in producing an answer for the group.   Resources were redistributed in the following
way:    Step 1: The students  were rearranged    physically  in front of the computer  with the  student having
difficulties placed in the middle of the group. Step 2: The knowledge-base, pens, and pencils were taken away
from all students, except the student who was experiencing problems. Step 3. The student having problems was
given control of the mouse and, consequently,    the responsibility to enter an answer for the group.  (This was
done with the explanation by the teacher that everyone needed a chance to work with the mouse, so as to avoid
putting a stigma on the slower student.)

Subjects

         The students who participated in this evaluation attended an urban public school in a West Coast State.
Of the 25 students who participated, nine were Asian-Americans, eight were Hispanic, five were Caucasian, and
four were African-Americans. Eleven were male, fourteen were female. All were of low socio-economic status.

Procedure

         Two equivalent classes of students were randomly assigned to either the treatment or the control
groups.  All students were instructed that they were using the system to prepare for a test and that they should
help teach each other if a group member was having trouble with the exercises.       All students in each group
were given their own copy of the knowledge-base for all nine problem-solving exercises.
         The groups in the treatment condition were rearranged, as described above, at the first indication that
any group member was lost and unable to participate in the group's problem-solving activities.

Results

         Video tapes of the students' interactions revealed that the redistribution of resources did change the roles
of the students within their groups.  Students who had previously excelled at the problem-solving task, and
were still highly motivated to get the correct answers, now took on thejob of working with the troubled group
member (in effect now teaching that student, even though their explicit goal was still just to get the problem
right).   Further, the video  indicated  that   the students who  had    previously allowed others  to  take the
responsibility for their group's success or failure became more engaged in the problem-solving exercises,
actively generating hypotheses and marking the knowledge-base for their group.

32
        A test question was devised to help assess whether students individually learned to select the piece of
data which would be the most diagnostic if trying to refine a set of hypotheses to a single hypothesis regardless
of their group's interactions. This test was on the topic of archeology to assess whether students were able to
generalize the problem-solving skills which were emphasized as tlJ.ey      worked with the system.    The test was
given to all students in both the treatment and control conditions after working with the system.      The results
suggest that there were benefits both for the students who had experienced difficulties early in the problem
solving exercises and for the students who had taken on the role of teaching those students.          In the control
group, only 29% of the students were able to generate a set of hypotheses and then to identify the most
diagnostic test to run to refine that hypotheses set.  In the treatment group, however, 64% of the students were
able to perform this task.  The treatment group improved 35% from the control group.         This improvement is
statistically significant with p <.05 [Eberhardt and Fligner 1977; Robbins 1977].

Discussion
        We    can see that  the treatment group,      in which   resources were   redistributed, showed  quite   an
improvement from the control group. By controlling the distribution of critical resources, the group dynamics
[Douglas 1983] were altered drastically. By using resource allocation students new roles within that group, the
students who had been successfully completing the problem-solving task by themselves directed their energy to
working with a troubled student because he or she now had control of the critical resources, the knowledge-base,
pen and the mouse, for solving the case and entering the group's answer.       These students, who had previously
experienced problems, became interested in the group's activities and individually engaged in the problem
solving processes. This new group configuration resulted in learning for both the students who were taught by
their peers and the students who provided the tutoring.

Summary
        Research on cooperative learning and instructional design have focused on strategies that can be
employed in order to develop productive and efficient training environments [Gustafson and Tillman 1991].
This research suggests global design strategies to improve learning, such as suggestions about group sizes
[Gagne, Wager and Rojas 1991]. Winn (1987] suggests that instructional design and teaching are very similar.
In both cases, decisions must be made about the methods to employ in order to reach a particular training
objective. He continues that the difference lies    in the fact that the designer of training systems is forced  to
decide which method to use prior to the implementation of instruction, and that teachers can change their
methods while in the process of teaching if necessary.
        Given these comments and by watching what happens when various teaching strategies are applied in
the classroom, it seems clear that designers should not limit themselves to designing training systems and then
leaving the choice of teaching strategy to the person supervising the environment.   Rather, there is a need for a
theory of adaptive teaching strategies which can be suggested by the designer of a training environment to the
teacher who will be teaching when the environment is in use.          By designing the teaching strategies to b e
employed during such interactions and making those strategies readily available t o the teacher the training
experience can be improved.

References
Albanese, M.,  & Jacobs, R.    [1990). Reliability and validity of a procedure to measure  diagnostic reasoning and
problem-solving skills taught in predoctoral orthodontic education. Evaluation and the Health Professions, 13[4],
412-424.

Becker, H.  J.   [1993).   A   model for  improving      the performance   of  integrated learning systems: mixed
individualized/group/whole class lessons, cooperative learning, and organizing time for teacher-led remediation of
small groups. In G.D. Bailey [Ed.], Computer-Based Integrated Leaming Systems. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Educational

                                                                                                                  33
Technology    Publications.

Carlson, R., & Dulany, D.      [1988).  Diagnostic reasoning with circumstantial evidence. Cognitive Psychology, 20[4],
463-492.

Charniak, E., & McDermott, D. [1985). Introduction to artificial intelligence [Chapters 8 and 10).         Reading, MA:
Addison-Wesley.

Chi, M.T.H., Bassok, M., Lewis, M.W., Reimann, P., & Glaser, R.         [1989].  Self-explanations: How students study
and use examples in learning to solve problems. Cognitive Science, 13, 145-182.

Cicourel, A.     [1987).    Cognitive  and organizational aspects of medical diagostic  reasoning. Discourse  Processes,
10[4),  347-367.

Clancy, W. [1985).     Acquiring, representing, and evaluating a competence model of diagnostic strategy [Report No.
HPP-84-3: STAN-C5-85-1067].: Stanford University, Department of Computer Science.

Cohen, E. G. [1994].      Restructuring the classroom: Conditions for productive small groups.   Review of Educational
Research, 64[1], 1-35.

Cousins,  J.  B., &   Ross, J. A.  [1993).  Improving higher order thinking skills by teaching "with" the computer: A
comparative study.    Journal of Research on Computing in Education, 26[1], 94-115.

Denning,  R., &   Smith, P.J.  [1995). Design changes based on the needs of students "at risk" of academic failure [CSEL
Technical    Report   No. 218-1995).      Columbus,  OH:  The Ohio   State University,  Cognitive  Science   Engineering
Laboratory.

Douglas, T.   [1983].   Groups understanding people gathered together. London: Tavistock Publications.

Duffy, T. M., & Knuth, R. A.      [1990).  Hypermedia and instruction: Where is the match? In D. H. Johassen & H. Mandi
[Eds.],  Designing hypermedia for learning.    Berlin: Springer-Verlag.

Eberhardt, K. R., & Fligner, M. A.        [1977).  A comparison of two tests for equality of two proportions. American
Statistician, 31[4],  151-155.

Elstein, A.,  Shulman,    L.,  &  Sprafka, S.  [1978).    Medical problem  solving -an. analysis  of clinical reasoning_.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Gagne, R. M. Wager, W., & Rojas, A.        [1991).  Planning and authoring computer-assisted instruction lessons. In L. J.
Briggs, K. L. Gustafson & M. H. Tillman [Eds.], Instructional design principles and applications [2nd ed.].   Englewood
Cliffs, NJ: Educational Technology Publications.

Gustafson,    K.  L., &   Tillman,  M. H.   [1991). Designing the  general strategies  of instruction.  In Briggs, L. J.,
Gustafson, K. L. & Tillman, M. H. [Eds.], Instructional design principles and applications [2nd ed.].         Englewood
Cliffs, NJ: Educational Technology Publications.

Mittal, S., Chandrasekaran, B., & Smith, J.   [1979).  Overview of MDX - a system for medical diagnosis.     Proceedings
of 3rd Annual Symposium on Computer Application in Medical Care, IEEE, 34-46.

Peng, Y., & Reggia, J.      [1990).   Abductive inference models for diagnostic problem-solvin&. New York: Springer
Verlag.

Pople, H. [1982).     Heuristic methods for improving structure on Ill-structured problems: The structuring of medical
diagnostics. In P. Szolovits [Ed.], Artificial intelligence in medicine [pp. 119-190).

Reggia, J., Nau, D., Wang P., & Peng, Y.      [1985).  A formal model of diagnostic inference. Information Science, 37,
227-285.

Robbins, H.   [1977).   A fundamental question of practical statistics. American Statiscian, 31[4], 97.

34
Thousand, J. S.[Ed.] et al. [1994]. Creativity and Collaborative Learning: A Practical Guide to Empowering Students
and Teachers. Baltimore, MD: Paul H. Brookes Publishing.

Tonta, Y. [1992]. Indexing in hypertext databases. In S. Stone & M. Buckland [Eds.], Studies in multimedia state-of
the-art solutions in multimedia and hypertext. Medford, NJ: Learned Information.

Winn, W.    [1987].  Instructional  design and   intelligent systems: shifts in the designer's decision-making role.
Instructional Science, 16, 59-77.

Young, M. F., & Kulikowich, J. M.     [1992, April].  Anchored   instruction and anchored assessment: An ecological
approach to measuring situated learning. Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the American Educational Research
Association, San Francisco.

                                                                                                                     35
