                  An Activity Framework for Fostering Reflection in
                           Project-based Engineering Design Classes

                                                     Jennifer Turns
                                     Center for Human Machine Systems Research
                                     School ofIndustrial and Systems Engineering
                                           Georgia Institute of Technology
                                             Atlanta, Georgia 30332-0205
                                           jennifer@chmsr.isye.gatech.edu

              Abstract:    Employers of engineering school graduates frequently lament that their new
              employees do not have adequate design abilities.   Such sentiments are echoed in almost all
              major reports on engineering education.    Two approaches for addressing this issue are to
              provide students with more engineering design experiences and to find ways to enhance the
              learning the results from existing experiences. This paper focuses on the second approach
              since providing students with more design experiences can be costly and, at the same time,
              evidence suggests that students do not always capitalize effectively on the potential learning
              opportunities stemming from such experiences.        This paper     proposes a   framework for
              reflective  activities that students can perform  in order to     enhance their  learning from
              engineering design experiences.      More  specifically, this     paper presents 1) some  data
              suggesting that learning opportunities may arise through project based engineering design
              experiences but may not go unpursued, 2) a framework for reflective activities designed to
               facilitate students   in pursuing these learning opportunities,     3) two  slightly different
              instantiations of that activity, and 4) the proposed evaluation.

  1. Reflection in Project-Based Engineering Design

  Recent interviews with and surveys of the employers of engineering graduates demonstrate a strong feeling that
  graduates lack adequate design skills [John      1995; McMasters & Ford             1990; Todd, Sorensen, & Magleby
  1992).  This perception is not new; almost all reports created to guide engineering education since the tum of
  the century have recommended an increased focus on design in engineering education (e.g. [ASEE                   1994;
  Grinter   1955; Mann    19181).    This call seems to be becoming more frequent and more central to the re
  engineering of engineering education, as evidenced by the increasing number ofreports in recent years.

  One approach for addressing the issue is to provide students with more engineering design experiences. Most
  engineering curricula have at least one design experience each term during the junior and senior years.         These
  experiences are typically project-based [Blumenfeld, et al.       1991) with students completing representative
  design tasks in small groups, over the course of a term, with intermittent submission of pre-specified
  deliverables. Such a pedagogical approach has many strengths including implicit learning of concepts and skills
  from experience, memory of an episode and thus a case from which to reason, the strength of the situated and
  contextualized learning that can result, and the motivational nature of working on a authentic activity.         More
  experiences may help students but will be costly in terms of student and faculty time as well as resources.        In
  addition, there is evidence  to    suggest that   project-based  design       classes create  opportunities  which go
  uncapitalized [Newstetter & Kolodner      1995).  At least one engineering educator has recognized this situation
  and warned that we need to be careful not to confuse experience with learning [Dixon 1991).

  A complementary approach is thus to help students process existing design experiences more effectively. From
  an economic perspective, learning to make the most of a costly experience is always valuable. From a cognitive
  perspective, many theories of learning suggest that there is more to learning than simply experience (e.g. [Kolb
  1984; Kolonder   1995)).   In general, the experience can be (needs to be) processed in many ways include

316
abstraction, generalization, and the determination of applicability/transfer conditions.     The general thought
process which can be said to underlie these higher-order cognitive activities is reflection. Reflection, as used in
this paper, can be defined as any cognitive activity directed toward organizing and refining one's personal
knowledge.     Although orchestrating reflection is not without its difficulties, documented evidence of the
benefits of reflection exist in several domains (e.g. [Chi, Leeuw, Chiu, & Lavancher  1994; Recker & Pirolli
1992), etc.).  The challenge is to determine the role that reflection needs to play in learning from experience in
engineering design courses.

This paper explores the role that reflection can play in enhancing engineering design students learning from
experience.    The next section describes some lessons about reflection taken from our work in a specific
engineering design course.  This analysis suggests three questions which need to be answered in order to have
an effective reflection activity. These questions along with other research on reflection in different contexts are
used to guide the specification of a reflective activity to complement project-based engineering design courses.
The last sections of the paper describe how the activity specification is being instantiated in two different
project-based engineering design courses and the evaluation that is proposed.

2. Reflection in a Mechanical Engineering Design Class

During the past year, my colleagues have been both observing existing reflective activities as well as trying to
induce reflection in a mechanical engineering design course, ME3110 [Guzdial et al.  in press-a; Guzdial et al.
in press-b; Guzdial, Turns, Rappin, & Carlson in-press; Newstetter & Kolodner    1995; Turns     1995). ME3110
(Creative Decisions and Design) is a junior level mechanical engineering course in which students learn about
mechanical engineering design through participation in a term-long, group project The students work in groups
of three to six students where they strive to understand design requirements, plan the design tasks for the
quarter, complete the design tasks culminating in a demonstration of the mechicanal devices that they have
created. We have studied reflection in the class using three strategies - observations of an intervention designed
to support collaboration and engender reflective discussions, observations of a current reflection activity - the
individual learning essay, and an ethnographic study of the activities of one design group.

CaMILE, Collaborative and Multimedia Interactive Learning Environment [Guzdial      1995], is an educationally
motivated collaboration tool which we introduced into the course and studied for three quarters [Guzdial et al.
in press-a; Turns  1995).   In addition to supporting and facilitating student collaborations with the tool, we
hoped to promote and subsequently see evidence of students reflecting on their emerging designs through
electronic discussions with their peers. Although CaMILE use was high, it was not exactly consistent with our
expectations.    We learned that students were capable of and even preferred to manage the day to day
collaboration without CaMILE. With respect to more reflective collaboration, such as discussing their designs
within CaMILE, we discovered that the students did not perceive the benefit as high enough to make the effort
worthwhile.    The students seemed to need scaffolding as well as motivation for such reflective discussion
activities. The students had no examples of how to have such a critical discussion, they did not have access to
modeling of such discussions as cognitive apprenticeship would suggest as important [Collins, Brown, &
Newman 1989], and finally they did not see enough benefit in such activity for them to feel very motivated to
exert the effort

Our attempt to orchestrate reflection in this course was not the first attempt.  Students in this course have
regular written learning essays, essays submitted along with each deliverable where students articulate what
they believe they have learned. In talking with students and instructors and through reading these essays
ourselves, we have noticed the activity to be fraught with similar issues as those uncovered when trying to
engender reflective CaMILE discussions. More specifically, the students do know what to write or how to write
about their learning. They frequently resist believing that they could be evaluated on such an open ended
activity since they do not understand how they are    evaluated. As a result, they are not always motivated  to
invest effort. Additionally, the content of the essays is often superficial.  Because the activity is performed
weekly, though, many of these problems are mitigated over time with students getting at least acclimated to the
task, and subsequently their performance improving and objections subsiding.

                                                                                                           317
  The ethnographic study provided observations that round out, for now, what we have learned about reflection in
  this course [Newstetter & Kolodner     1995]. The findings of this study help explain some of the observations in
  the previous two studies.    This study found that students frequently 1) lose sight of the big picture and 2)
  complete tasks in a rote manner with little functional understanding of the tools or methods they are using.    In
  other words, the pace of the class, the volume of required work, and the novelty of formal collaboration for
  design problem solving often induces students to simply complete the required activities without giving much
  thought to the purpose of the activity  or the potential usefulness of the activity in the future. The observed
  students completed the course knowing what they had done but not necessarily why they had done it and how
  their experience could guide them in the future.

  3. Specifying Reflection-Inducing Activity

  The results of the ethnographic study coupled with the contents of the learning essays suggest that there is a
  need to induce more reflection in order to get the students to process the experience better. The results of the
  first two studies suggest, though, that there is more to inducing reflection than simply providing opportunity. In
  particular, the experiences described above suggests that attempts to induce reflection need to be specific with
  respect to the following three questions:

  1. WHY: What is the goal ofreflection?
  2. WHAT/HOW: What is the method oractivitywhich willbe used to induce reflection?
  3. WHEN:    At what times during the course of an experience will the reflective activity become the focus of cognitive
      effort?

  These questions are answered implicitly in the medical school work on problem-based learning [Barrows
  1986], where reflection plays a major role in the overall activities students complete.       In problem-based
  learning, small collaborative groups work together to solve diagnosis problems and in the process learn about
  the scientific knowledge on which the field of medicine is based. Reflective activities are used with the goals of
  helping students to clarify their emerging knowledge about how to use resources, to clarify their emerging
  knowledge base, and to learn to assess their own performance. Group discussions, orchestrated by a facilitator,
  are used to induce this reflection. Discussions centered around the first topic occurs during each problem
  solving session, while discussion centered around the latter two occurs when each diagnosis problem isfinished.
  These discussions form a cornerstone of the problem-based learning method. Those involved in problem-based
  learning curricula believe that these reflective phases are crucial to the success of the problem-based learning
  method.

  In the context of engineering design education and specifically the class just described, these questions have
  been addressed in a haphazard manner thus far. The ethnographic study and the course objectives can be used
  to suggest reflection goals. In particular, the goals for reflection in engineering design need to be focused on
  helping students get the big picture as well as helping them understand and learn the applicability conditions
  associated with the methods, tools,. and concepts they are learning in the project-based design experiences.    A
  framework for thinking the choice of      method and timing for the reflective activity are explored in the next
  section.

  4. A Reflective Activity in Project-Based Engineering Design

  It is easy to conceive of many activities (specifications of method and timing) which can induce reflection
  relative to a set of learning or reflection goals.   Such reflective activities might include collaborative
  discussions, debates, resolution of large philosophical questions, and explanations of externally represented
  problem solving performance.     This section proposes six features of a specific reflective activity that is
  amenable to the reflection goals described in the previous section and takes into account the weaknesses

318
observed in previous attempts to orchestrate reflection in ME3110, the strengths of the problem-based learning
approaches to reflection, and other literature on reflection.     In particular, a reflective activity appropriate for
project-based, term-long, engineering design classes can be characterized along the following six dimenstions:

1.   Students  create    and maintain  specifically designed external representations  which  capture goal oriented
     and meaningful units of knowledge.         The choice of representation enables the activity to be adapted to
     particular  learning    goals.  For example, a planning representation that contains information about the
     sequencing of tasks during the design process would help students focus on the overall process and thus the
     big picture.   Having the representation be external means that students must understand their thoughts and
    processes well enough to articulate them and that these articulations can then be reviewed and critiqued by
     others. Externalization of personal understanding is a critical feature of Cognitive Apprenticeship, a form
     of apprenticeship adapted to cognitive activities such as reading, writing, and reflection [Collins, Brown, &
     Newman     1989].    This focus on externalization through representation should be readily adaptable to the
     culture of engineering education.     In this context, students have long been advised to create diagrams and
     representations since good representations can both permit inspection and make it easy for one to discover
     the important issues and even become attention directing devices, actually drawing one's attention to the
     critical issues.

2   These representations are maintained on an continual and formalized manner.         Performing reflection in an
     on-going manner seems to be important to its success.      Chi et al. found continuity to be an important aspect
     of successful reflection.     In their experiment, they had students reflect on biology texts by suggesting to
     them that they self-explain each sentence after it was read.     They found that self explaining significantly
     improved scores on reading comprehension relative to control subjects who simply read the text twice [Chi,
    Leeuw, Chiu, & Lavancher           1994].   They attribute the success of the self explanation activity to its
     continuous as well as integrative and constructive nature.       Ensuring that the reflection occurs in an on
     going manner is easier when the role of the reflective activity is formalized.     Reflection has a formalized
     role in the  problem-based       learning pedagogy   [Norman  &   Schmidt   1992].   In the ME3110    research
     described earlier, the role of CaMILE was not formalized and students simply ignored it in favor of their
     task goals.  The learning essays, because their role was more formalized, showed improvement over time as
     students learn the nature of the task and thus can focus on the goal of the task.

3.  The reflective activity needs to have consistent structure that has been proven effective and pennits minor
    adaptivity.   Coupling the continual nature of the activity with a consistent structure will allow students to
     become expert at doing the activity.      Over time, this will permit learners to focus on the learning issues, not
     the  structure   of the task.   Our observations from the ME3110 studies are that reflection is not easy.
     Students need help in learning how to do it      With a consistent structure to the activity, they will be able to
     learn through practice.   In addition, the task can be modeled for the students, permitting the students to gain
     a general understanding the task through observation.      Modeling is another important feature of cognitive
     apprenticeship      [Collins,  Brown, &   Newman      1989].  The  consistent structure  should  involve both
     summarization and abstraction.       In the Chi et al study, the better students not only reflected more but a
     greater portion   of  their self explanations   were abstraction statements [Chi, Leeuw,  Chiu,  & Lavancher
    1994].    The   summarization      could   take the form of updating  the external  representations, while the
     abstraction could be induced by posing specially designed questions.

4.  The reflective activity needs to be contextualized with respect to the project-based engineering design task.
     Part of the student difficulties in using CaMILE can be attributed to the decontextualized nature of the tool.
    1be students were responsible for adapting the tool to the reflective task, something which they were not
    able to do very well.      Students need cues that help them tie the reflection to the design tasks.      Such
     contextualization can be in the form of prompts that ask students for details of their design experiences,
     questions and subtasks that help students to focus on integrating their new experiences with their existing
    knowledge, design specific terminology that makes it easy for them perform the mapping, and even links to
     engineering design materials that provide examples.      The contextualization can make it easy for students to
     see the value of the activity as well as focus their efforts on integrating new knowledge with existing

                                                                                                               319
      knowledge.    This latter issue of integration was the third characteristic of the Chi self explanation activity
      that was used to explain its success [Chi, Leeuw, Chiu, & Lavancher 1994].

 5.   Motivation should be considered.    Motivation is a complex phenomena tha cannot be ignored when
      thinking about how to achieve instructional goals. Students who are more motivated will, in general, learn
      more.   Motivation can be manipulated via many means including 1) providing students with explicitly
      stated evaluation criteria [Barrows 1986], 2) ensuring that students know how they will use their new
      knowledge in the future [Recker & Pirolli 1992], and 3) capturing students personal interest [Blumenfeld,
      et al. 1991].  In the context of engineering design education and the proposed activity, motivation could be
      managed through several different strategies including grading of the activity, making the activity represent
      authentic and anticipated uses of the knowledge, and providing clear demonstrations of the benefits of the
      activity in the design or learning context.

  6.  The implementation,  resource, and  time     demands  of the   task need to be balanced  with  the  potential
      benefits. If the time requirements demanded of a student for the new activity are excessively high, the
      resources are unavailable, or the technology in which the activity is implemented is unreliable, students
      may avoid the activity despite any perceived benefits, potential benefits, or existing motivation.

 5. Two Instantiations

 We are in the process of using this reflective activity framework to design specific reflective activities and
 associated technology environments for two distinct project-based engineering design classes.     In this section,
 the two targeted classes are described along with details of the instantiation of the framework.   In both cases,
 the activity can be characterized as a form of planning, tracking, and progress reporting, where students
  anticipate, track, and report progress  relative  to both design    goals and   learning goals.  The details are
  summarize in [Tab. I].

                                            representations

                                           Activity has continual,
                                            formalized role in class

                                            Activity implementation
                                            manages both costs and
                                            benefits

320
ME3110:     Creative Decisions and Design.
ME3 l l 0 is the junior level mechanical engineering design class described earlier. The focus of the course is on
learning about design process issues as well as domain-general methods that make use of their prior mechanical
engineering   knoweldge.  Many of the issues and challenges in this context have already been discussed.
Currently, planning and progress reporting are required tasks, although the focus is specifically on reporting
progress with respect to design goals not necessarily progress with respect to learning goals.     In the beginning
of the quarter, the project groups each create a multi-component plan specifying how they will collaborate to
complete the design tasks by the end of the quarter. The components of this plan include a team contract and a
time-based representation of the design activities, the PEI diagram.   The PEI diagram shows the anticipated
phases, events, and emerging information for the design process as bars drawn horizontally relative to an x-axis
time line. The PEI diagram is particularly important since it is an external representation of the design process.
These two representations along with meeting logs, group activity logs, and individual activity logs are updated
weekly and submitted as progress reports.    The planning and progress reporting activities are authentic to
engineering design and have the potential to induce reflection since they involved looking back at what was
accomplished.     Several obstacles seem to exist that preclude students from treating the activity as truly
reflective. The tasks are extremely paper-based and time consuming.    They are not graded and thus students do
not spend much time on these activities.  During the ethnographic study, Newstetter observation that in the
completion of these activities, students seem to reflect little (Newstetter, 1995).

The existing planning and progress reporting activities form the foundation for the proposed reflective activity
in ME3110.     Students  will be able to build   the plan,   including the  PEI     diagram and  other text-based
representations, within a specially designed computational environment.    Students will then continue to update
these representations each week, following the completion of design deliverables.       They will also respond to
questions and prompts that induce them to explore the meaning and potential uses of the new knowledge.
These prompts and questions will be easy to manipulate throughout the quarter since the entire activity is
currently being implemented to run within Netscape and to store data in an Oracle database.      From a technical
standpoint,  this will improve   accessibility, reliability, accuracy, and  flexibility    for the students.   The
environment will support students by managing their data and by automatically generating the progress report
submissions, based on their entries during the previous week.   We anticipate that grades will provide one form
of evaluation, but we will also try to motivate students by by having questions or prompts be thought-provoking
potentially by making the progress reports become the cheat sheets that students bring to the exam.

ISyE3010: Human Machine Systems.
ISyE3010 is a junior level industrial engineering course which focuses on the design of complex systems in
which the human operator has a critical role.   In general, that role is designed into the system by taking into
account human capabilities and limitations, both cognitive and physical as well as other factors.      The course
deals with human factors, interface development, cognitive science, and complex system issues, all in the
context of a design curriculum.  Students work in small teams of three or four students to gather data on an
interface design problem, model the problem components (i.e. user, task, and environment), design and
prototype the interface, formatively evaluate the interface, and finally redesign the interface based on the
evaluation data.  The nature of this class is a slightly different from the previous course in that both design
understanding and domain specific design methods (e.g. data collection methods, prototyping methods) are
jointly foci of the course. Otherwise it shares many of the same features.

Currently,  there is no preexisting activity in  the course   which can be   adapted    to be  consistent with the
framework - the existing course has only design deliverables but neither planning reports or progress reports.
This is not an obstacle since the redesign of the course is under development and the reflective activity is being
designed specifically into the new course.      It is envisioned that the basic reflective activity will be the
annotation of a design process representation (e.g. the PEI diagram) with information about the design methods
used in class during a particular stage of the design process.  For example, during the data collection phases,
students will update the portion of the design process representation with information about data collection
methods including strengths, weaknesses, alternatives, costs, and benefits.          In addition, students will be

                                                                                                               321
  prompted with questions that induce them to use the knowledge to solve some conceivably authentic problem.
  Students may be given a design scenario in which a particular data collection method has been proposed, be told
  that the method is too costly, and be required to suggest alternative methods.        Students will perform these
  reflective activities during each week of the course. This activity will be implemented using the same basic
  Web-based structure as in the mechanical engineering context.    Again, both grading as well as having the
  product of all reflectivity be the cheat sheet for the exam will be at least two forms of motivation provided.

  While the instantiations in the two context are guided by the same framework, they do have slight differences.
  ME3110 has collaborative element in that the progress report with the exception of the individual activity log is
  a group endeavor. The activity, as envisioned for ISyE3010, is primarily individual.    In ISyE3010, the role of
  the activity is explicitly being designed into the course while ME3110 is  leveraging existing role.    Through
  implementation in these two contexts, we seek to illustrate the generality of the framework described.

 6. Evaluation

  The evaluation of this framework will consist of three parts.    We will be performing 1) ongoing expert
  evaluation of the concepts, particularly in light of new data, 2) formative evaluation of components of the
  environment and activity with individual groups in the courses, and 3) summative evaluations in each of the two
  courses. A currently ongoing ethnographic study of ISyE3010 and the use, by ME3110 students, of a Web
  based environment for writing, submitting, and receiving feedback on the learning essays are parts of the first
  two evaluation strategies. The summative evaluation will be performed across two phases.      During the Fall of
  1995, we  will evaluate the  entire  framework and    proposed activity, embedded      in planning and progress
  reporting, in ME3110. We will compare the designed artifact, the course grades, grades on a specially designed
  exam for students in a class using the tool to students in class not using the tool. In addition, use of the tool will
  be monitored to help understand and explain    outcomes.    During the Winter of 1995, we will evaluate the
  framework in a redesigned ISyE3010     where the role of the framework is designed into course.    Again we will
  look at the designed artifact, the course grades, grades on a specially designed exam but this time students in a
  class using the tool and having a new structure will be compared to status quo class.

 7. Summary

  In engineering design education, we need to be focusing jointly on providing students with rich experiences and
  helping them reflect on and learn from these experiences.   Our previous work has demonstrated the need to      be
  specific with respect to the goals, methods, and timing of the reflective activity. Research from diverse sources
  suggests that the methods and timing issues can be addressed via an activity that involves students 1) making
  on-going updates 2) performed via a consistent structure to 3) external knowledge and design representations 4)
  contextualized with respect to the design tasks and class discussions where issues of 5) motivation and 6)
  attention to implementation details are also high priority. Project planning, tracking, and progress reporting
  represent a general type of authentic activity which fulfills these guidelines and can be adapted to the unique
  goals of design courses in different domains.  In a research environment where many are talking about the
  benefits of reflection for learning but few formalisms and little empirical evidence is being supplied, we are
  attempting to provide a single step.

 8. References

  [ASEE 1994]. ASEE (1994). Engineering Education for a Changing World: Project Report. Washington, D.C.: ASEE.
  [Barrows 1986]. Barrows, H.S. (1986). A taxonomy of problem-based learning methods. Medical &Jucation, 20, 481-486.

322
[Blumenfeld et al. 1991]. Blumenfeld, P.C., Soloway, E., Marx, R.W., Krajcik, J.S., Guzdial, M., & Palincsar, A. (1991).
Motivating project-based learning: sustaining the doing, supporting the learning. Educational Psychologist, 26(3&4), 369-
398.
[Chi, Leeuw, Chiu, & Lavancher 1994]. Chi, M.T.H., Leeuw, N.D., Chiu, M.H., & Lavancher, C. (1994). Eliciting Self
Explanations Improves Understanding. Cognitive Science, 18, 439-477.
[Collins, Brown, & Newman 1989]. Collins, A., Brown, J.S., & Newman, S.E. (1989). Cognitive Apprenticeship: Teaching
the Crafts of Reading, Writing, and Mathematics. In L.B. Resnick (Ed.), Knowing, Leaming, and Instruction: Essays in
Honor of RohenGlaser (pp. 453-494). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erbaum Associates.
[Dixon 1991]. Dixon, J.R. (1991). The State of Education. Mechanical Engineering(February), 64-67.
[Grinter 1955]. Grinter, L.E. (1955). Report on the Evaluation of Engineering Education. Washington, D.C.: ASEE.
[Guzdial, Rappin, and Carlson 1995]. Guzdial, M., Rappin, N., and Carlson, D. (1995). Collaborative and multimedia
interactive learning environment for engineering education, 1995 ACM Symposium on Applied Computing (pp. 5-9),
Nashville, TN: ACM Press.
[Guzdial et al. in press-a]. Guzdial, M., Carlson, D., and Turns, J. (in press-a). Facilitating Learning Design with Software
Realized Scaffolding for Collaboration, Frontiers in Education, Atlanta, Georgia.
[Guzdial et al. in press-b] . Guzdial, M., Vanegas, J., Mistree, F., Rosen, D., Allen, J., Turns, J., and Carlson, D. (in press-b).
Supporting Collaboration and Reflection in Problem-Solving in a Project-Based Qassroom, Second Congress on Computing
in Civil Engineering, Atlanta, Georgia.
[Guzdial, Turns, Rappin, & Carlson   in-press]. Guzdial, M., Turns, J., Rappin, N., & Carlson, D. (in-press). Collaborative
Support for Learning in Complex Domains, Computer Supponfor Collaborative Leaming, 1995.
[John 1995]. John, V. (1995). A future path for engineering education: Education engineers for Europe. Engineering Science
and Education Journal, June, 99-103.
[Kolb    1984]. Kolb, D.A. (1984). Experiential Leaming:    Experience as the Source of Leaming and Development.
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
[Kolonder 1995]. Kolonder, J. (1995). Case-Based Reasoning.
[Mann 1918]. Mann, C.R. (1918). A Study of Engineering Education: The Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of
Teaching.
[McMasters & Ford    1990]. McMasters, J.H., & Ford, S.D. (1990). An Industry View of Enhancing Design Education.
Engineering Education, July/August, 526-529.
[Newstetter & Kolodner  1995]. Newstetter, W., & Kolodner, J. (1995). Learning to Change the World:   a Case Study of a
Mechanical Engineering Design Course, Frontiers in Education, Atlanta, GA.
[Norman & Schmidt    1992} Nonnan, G.R., & Schmidt, H.G. (1992). The psychological basis of problem-based learning:   a
review of the evidence. Annals of Medical Education, 67(9), 557-565.
[Recker & Pirolli   1992]. Recker, M.M., & Pirolli, P. (1992). Student Strategies for Learning Programming from a
Computational Environment. C. Frasson, G. Gauthier, & G.I. McCallan (Eds.), Intelligent Tutoring Systems '92:    Second
International Conference, Montreal, CA: Springer-Verlag.
[Todd, Sorensen. & Magleby 1992]. Todd, R.H., Sorensen, C.D., & Magleby, S.P. (1992). Redesigning the Senior Capstore
Course to Meet the Changing Needs of Industry,American Society of Engineering Education (pp. 1769-1773).
[Turns   1995] Turns, J.A. (1995). I wish I had understood this at the beginning:   Dilemmas in Teaching, Research, and
Introduction of Technology into Engineering Design Courses, Frontiers in Education.

Acknowledgements

This work was supported by the EduTech Institute through a grant from the Woodruff Foundation.

                                                                                                                   323
