                                        Doing Their Own Math:
  Computer Support of Discursive Approaches to "Real" Math Problems

                                                Sylvia Weber-Russell
                                         Department of Computer Science
                                                   Kingsbury Hall
                                           University of New Hampshire
                                                Durham, NH 03824
                                                     U.S.A.
                                                 swr@cs.unh.edu

                                                 Mark D. LeBlanc
                              Department of Mathematics and Computer Science
                                                 Wheaton College
                                                Norton, MA 02766
                                                     U.S.A.
                                            mleblanc@wheatonma.edu

              Abstract: Traditionally, there has been no obvious role for the computer in an elementary
              level classroom oriented toward "talking about math" as a way of deepening children's under
              standing of mathematical problem situations. We suggest that an appropriate computer learn
              ing environment can serve as a useful tool to both complement and be enhanced by discursive
              approaches to mathematics.  In this paper we describe software, some of which is currently
              being tested in classrooms, which allows students to create and share word problems moti
              vated by classroom discussion  of an arithmetically relevant situation, and to dynamically
              explore links between linguistic and other symbolic representations of their problems and
              those of other children. In conjunction with the discursive approach, these facilities support
              pedagogical methods such as the integration of writing, science and mathematics; roles for stu
              dents as knowledge contributors rather than as passive recipients; and a motivated use of the
              computer for understanding mathematical problem relationships.

1. Introduction

      "Sorry, the kids can't talk now--they're  doing their math."  But is   it their math?  Traditionally,   young stu
 dents have "done their math problems" by reading arithmetic word problems constructed by educators and try
ing, usually in isolation, to come up with an answer, often by guesswork manipulation of the numbers given and
 with little attention to common sense or to the meaning constructed by the sentences of the problem [Verschaffel
 & DeCorte 1996].
      Some approaches in elementary mathematics education, however, have increasingly recognized the medi
ating role of natural language in expressing everyday problem situations as a potential focus for both research
on children's mathematical problem solving and new classroom approaches to teaching "mathematical think
ing." The NCTM Curriculum Standards [NCTM 1989] emphasize the pedagogical importance of representing
and reading mathematics; both the Curriculum Standards and the Professional Standards [NCTM 1991] focus
on encouraging children to write mathematics and particularly to talk about mathematical aspects of situations.
      Consistent with this research, a growing number of classrooms are engaging in group discussion of math
ematical problems. Informal group discourse about mathematics is an important step in increasing children's

324
conceptual understanding.     Yet in certain respects this approach is incomplete with respect to the above  goals.
By itselfgroup discussion may not help those who do not actively participate and who do not feel that they have
a role in solving the problem; it does not relate natural language to other modalities, symbolic systems or repre
sentations [see Janvier 1987) which might play a particular role in some children's understanding; it does not
allow most children in any given discussion to individually initiate problem conceptualizations; a child's partic
ular level or difficulty may not be addressed by the discussion.
        A more individual-oriented approach has been offered commercially through software which has enter
taining situation pictures and includes quantitative mappings, but does not relate to any difficulties which might
be particular to an individual child at a certain stage, does not actively involve the child in his own learning,
does not relate to a situation in which the child is currently involved, and is not social in nature. An exception
to some of these criteria is provided by the Word Problem Processors (WPP) software [Pogrow 1994], which
enables children of fourth-grade level and above to become actively involved by writing their own word prob
lems with feedback from the WPP,      presented as a "space creature."   Like other software, however,  it does  not
focus at all on the role of significant types of linguistic constructs, and is more oriented toward game-playing
and competition than real-world problems.
        Is either the discursive or the typical software approach sufficient to help the student conceptualize the
problem in natural, mathematical or other symbolic language, thereby promoting precise reasoning and perhaps
communication skills? We would claim that while discourse about mathematical situations is an excellent par
tial approach, a different and expanded role for learning software would do much to enhance and complement
the discourse approach, while providing a means of relating situations, quantitative concepts and language.
        To start determining what such a computer learning environment should do, we pose the question, why is
it that children can understand  e.g. 'a piece  of pie,' and even  '3 pieces  of  pie with ice cream   on  top,' but
can't/won't relate these to other pieces of pie mentioned in the problem, even though they know [Cummins
1991] part-part-whole relationships? With the original linguistic statement of an arithmetic problem situation as
the focus of our attention, we will suggest that several key competences underlie the desired understanding and
that these might be strengthened by a computer learning environment interacting with the context of a natural
classroom situation.   In the following discussion,   a sketch of how such a software design would fit into this
approach is preceded by a general and then a more specific consideration of aspects of language about mathe
matics that require extension of children's thinking.

2. Difficulties in Language Processing

      Research in cognitive science and mathematics education has emphasized that understanding arithmetic
word    problems involves   a complex  interaction  of text  comprehension    and mathematical    processes.  This
research includes   results on semantic  types  of  problems and   children's logico-mathematical     competencies
[Riley & Greeno 1988], the locus of low-achieving students' eye-fixations [Hegarty, Mayer & Green 1992] and
the developmental sequence of central numerical structures [Okamoto 1992).       Lacking in the above work, how
ever, is an account of how the student's ability to arrive at mathematical connections might depend on identifi
able ways in which natural language expresses or facilitates such connections.    Results concerning the effects of
small changes in problem wording [Cummins 1991, Davis-Dorsey, Ross & Morrison 1991, Staub & Reusser
1995, DeCorte, Verschaffel & DeWin 1985 and others] and the role of integrated propositions in memory [Tra
basso & Sperry 1985] provide evidence that problem difficulty is determined by text comprehension factors as
well as by semantic structure and the development of central numerical structures.     The information processing
and learning assumptions in this research reflect the idea that different kinds of natural language used to convey
a problem situation have different effects on the ability to conceptualize the problem in terms of correct mathe
matical relationships.
     Most of these researchers, however, stop short of defining how natural language is somehow "translated"
into correct mathematical relationships or into a solution, choosing instead to start their studies with proposi
tional or idealized models of the problem.   Addressing this gap has been a research goal of LeBlanc's cognitive
process  model   of arithmetic  word  problem   solution  (LeBlanc  &    Weber-Russell,  in press),   which  parses
(EDUCE) and performs text integration (SELAH) on such problems.             (EDUCE     [Burns  1993)   is based  on

                                                                                                                 325
 conceptual analysis of natural language [Schank & Riesbeck 1981), extended for mathematically relevant lan
 guage.) These   processes   have been monitored    through  predictor variables  including   MEMORY       (the average
 number of "conceptual units" in     memory at the end of each sentence) and INFERENCES (the average number
 of times per sentence that i) significant relationships facilitating text integration or ii) arithmetic actions are
 implied rather than made explicit in the text).   Regression  analyses show the MEMORY + INFERENCES                vari
 ables together (i.e., holding conceptual units in working memory while making inferences) as accounting for
 approximately 60% of the variance when correlated with empirical evidence of solution difficulty (grades K-3)
 for 18 benchmark problems.
       The results suggest that while young students are able to handle the memory load of sentence comprehen
 sion and are capable of making inferences if the memory load is not high (neither of these variables proving to
 be significant by themselves), the task of making such inferences while retaining conceptual input presents a
 particular difficulty for some students. The   implication of taking observations about language to this       level of
 detail is not just that students fail to make conceptual connections leading to a correct problem structure, but
 that the focusing power needed to retain previous information while attempting such connections, for one reason
 or another, does not appear to be there.  We suggest that an approach to strengthening students'       focusing abili
 ties and thus making them more active learners should offer reinforcement of interrepresentational mapping,
 encourage precise conceptualization of the problem, and be something in which students would be motivated to
 participate.

 3. Language-related Dimensions of Word Problem Understanding

       Software which reinforces conceptual mappings should be based on a theory of what transitions the stu
 dent needs to accomplish. The above research on arithmetic word problem solution has usefully considered lin
 guistic aspects of such problems in terms of their "semantic structure" (Change, Combine, C ompare, Equalize).
 However, this somewhat general characterization does not tell us what concepts, analyses, or types of wordings
 make such problems difficult   or easy.  It is therefore not evident how learning environment components could
 address observed difficulties in a specifically targeted way. In an effort to come closer to the "elementary com
 petences" involved    in word problem   understanding, we    propose  taking    the semantic   structures apart, giving
 dimensions in terms of the following task components:
  (1)    An entire problem structure,  not just a simple assertion, must be understood as presented.       A complica
         tion is an "unknown" referent which cannot be processed immediately, but must be retained while the
         rest  of the problem is read or processed.  In nonquantitative    domains,   this task may be relatively   easy
         for most young    students. However,   in combination  with  (2), i.e., for quantitative problems,  a  perhaps
         unfamiliar mode of reading is required.
  (2)    Words and phrases must be understood in their quantitative rather than in their ordinary linguistic sense.
         Mathematically relevant language is embedded in the natural language, and must be abstracted from the
         linguistic statements into (ultimately) a numeric domain.    Young children may have difficulty recogniz
         ing certain phrases as "mathematically significant"; they may recognize that a quantity is involved in
         any individual assertion in the problem, but not focus on it as if it "made a difference" (pun intended).

         As in (1), in isolation this task seems doable by most young students; they understand 'three pieces of
         pie.' In combination with (1), however, i.e., in the context of a word problem, extra effort is required.
         For the "expert" solver, 'three' triggers the quantitative "mode." This mode extends 'three pieces of pie'
         to a quantity (3) which will relate to other quantities in the problem.      (See also [Nesher 1982] on the
         understanding    of number-words   vs.    numbers.)   The mathematical      mode   of  reading    requires both
         abstraction and active focusing.  Focusing is even more difficult in the case of an unknown quantity,
         such as in 'some pieces of pie,' since children, using linguistic senses familiar to them, may understand
        the meaning of 'some' simply as an adjective [Cummins, Kintsch, Reusser & Weimer 1988], rather than
        retain it in memory as an unspecified quantity.     Similarly, we would point out that the relational word
         'of' can be understood conventionally ('a piece of pie') or quantitatively as "subtracted from," that is, as

326
        '1 of? pieces,' requiring an extension to the numeric domain.[l ]

        As an example of the difficulty presented by the concurrence of problem processing and quantitative
        abstraction, consider:

         John has 3 million dollars.
         Ifsomeone has millions ofdollars, he is rich.
         Is John rich?

        Ifthis problem had proceeded quantitatively after the first statement, e.g., 'He lost 2 million dollars in
        the stock market,' a child who did not carry through quantitative expectations while processing the prob
        lem structure might be focused on nonmathematical (irrelevant) aspects ofthe problem, with possible
        implications for ease ofproblem solution.    This potential difference in the mode ofreading a problem
        points out the importance ofa motivating purpose for creating the problem.
 (3)    Higher-order thinking is required for e.g. Compare problems, which involve relations between entities
        as opposed to entities themselves. This ability requires a problem solver at the least to retain more than
        one entity in memory at a time, with roles assigned to those entities.                        A particular difficulty is intro
        duced by quantification ofrelations. While many children can understand the ordinary sense of'greater
        than' or 'less than,' they may not understand 'How many more...'                          The identification ofthis dimension
        helps to account for the relative ease ofsolution ofKintsch's (nonrelational) situation models [Kintsch
        1989] as opposed to relationally worded problems.
      A possible generalization across these three dimensions is that the quantification and retention ofnoncon
crete concepts (unknowns and relations) present a particular difficulty, since, as in LeBlanc's results above, it
involves concurrent processes--a task we believe can be addressed by a learning context which encourages
active focusing.

4. Word Problem Learning Environments as a Classroom Tool

      We propose an integrated pedagogical approach which a) balances exploration and initiative on one hand
and guidance and reinforcement ofconceptually relevant mappings on the other; and b) is motivated by class
room discourse about and experience with "naturally" arising situations.                          Consistent with the previous section
[Language-Related Dimensions ofWord Problem Understanding], the guidance component should aim to:
 (1)    help _young students to conceptualize problem structures including unknown quantities;
 (2)    extend students' existing knowledge to analogous situations and numeric representations;
 (3)    foster the understanding and conceptualization ofrelational language.
      Our  own    interactive  pilot implementations  [LeBlanc           1992]  have                started by using the output of
EDUCE/SELAH to dynamically link (in the sense advocated in [Kaput 1992]) natural-language assertions to
progressively more abstract representations (icons,   dots,          numbers). For example, our "Language                Link" tool
allows students to see immediately how language (e.g., 'have more than' ) is changed when they alter certain
iconic representations. Planned versions include the converse ofthis process,                       additional symbolic modes (such
as number lines) and a dynamic linkage between mathematically significant prepositions and corresponding
actions on icons. These features should make conceptual components ofthe problem solving process explicit
and should extend students' awareness ofthe power ofmathematics to account for many analogous situations
[see Thompson 1989]. However, as emphasized above, there must be an active focus on these conceptual steps
and  patterns if students  are  to   effectively "construct"          [Cobb 1994]                 mathematical meaning  from these

     [l]That children may be ready to make such extensions (see [Vosniadou 1995] for emphasis on the developmental role of analogical
reasoning) is suggested by the many extensions (though unconscious) they have previously learned through the assimilation of language
which is actually metaphoric [Brugman & Lakoff 1988, Russell 1986]. For example, from the presumably literal 'piece ofpie,' a (nonquan
titative) extension of the sense of 'of' can be made to expressions such as 'color of the ball.'

                                                                                                                                327
 associations. By itself, this approach may still not motivate children (especially those jaded by years of passive
 learning and entertainment).   While students can express a preference of learning style through choice of con
 ceptual modes (numeric, iconic, spatial, linguistic) offered by such a learning environment, this approach does
 not really address the "initiative" requirement stated above.   The following scenario,  in the spirit of "anchored
 instruction" ·[Barron & Kantor 1993], reflects a far more motivating environment where the learning is self
 directed, goal-oriented and situated.
        The class, with the teacher, looks at a real-world problem (e.g., weights of different types of whales) and
 talks about it until some degree of understanding is involved, specifically the inherent relationships that exist in
 the situation (e.g., differences between male and female weights).   Then students are encouraged to get the com
 puter to help them finish solving the problem (or a variation of the problem), and to see what the computer does
 with the problem as created by the students in their own words.     This step will in most cases be preceded  by a
 phase where students write about the situation, the relationships of interest and possibly an open question.  This
 includes conferral with the teacher or possibly with other students.    Writing is thereby used to facilitate "owner
 ship" of mathematical    language. A necessary  side effect of this write-rewrite cycle is to present the computer
 with something intelligible and spelled correctly.  This "linguistic conceptualization," especially the expression
 of problem relationships, is consistent with the "mathematical writing" approach advocated by [Winograd &
 Higgins 1995] and represents a "role reversal" with respect to the traditional situation in which the student is
 given a word problem to solve.  In submitting the problem to a computer supplied with the type of software out
 lined above, students would see the abstractions the computer goes through, providing a link between the expe
 rienced situation and the quantitative characterization.   Students could share their problems with other students,
 who would also   have the option of exploring the problem interactively.      Comparing similarities or differences
 between their problems should also further their sense of how problem parts relate to the whole picture.
        Analogous situations/problems could then be brought in.    Either the teacher introduces another real-world
 problem which the students "discover" can be stated in similar terms (or dissimilar terms, giving another way to
 solve the problem), or the teacher asks for different themes using the same structure, or the student chooses a
 topic. In whatever case, a desirable effect is that students, having once followed dynamically displayed concep
 tual steps for their own problems, as described above, may be motivated to engage in a similar process for these
 other problems.
        Up until recently, a bottleneck in this kind of approach has been a lack of software which processes arith
 metic  word problems from their original statements.  The Word Problem Processors of       [Pogrow 1994] "under
 stand" students' word problems sufficiently to allow, for example, feedback by the computer as to comprehensi
 bility of the problem. However, writing creativity is constrained by prompting for expected sentence parts.   The
 reading/solution capabilities of EDUCE/SELAH, on the other hand, parse natural language statements without
 such constraints, and are able to handle syntactic and semantic variations which influence problem difficulty.
 The   (planned) integration of EDUCE/SELAH       with    a recently created   program, eXpress Math  [LeBlanc   &
 Natola 1995], which supports students in writing their own word problems, will allow a reasonable freedom of
 style in writing about problems which can then be translated to various conceptual depictions.        The use of
 eXpress Math allows the teacher to: integrate writing, science and mathematics; facilitate ownership of mathe
 matical language by encouraging students to highlight quantitative relationships in situations independent of
 arithmetic; view students as knowledge-contributors rather than passive recipients; and encourage the construc
 tion of problems at unexpected levels of difficulty [see Fuson  1994].   eXpress Math (beta version) has been dis
 tributed to over 50 requesting sites and is currently operational as a pilot project in a number of classrooms
 nationwide. The integration of eXpress Math into the proposed classroom scenario can be described as follows:
  ( 1)   Classroom discussion of problem situation
  (2)    Linguistic conceptualization of problem with support of eXpress Math:

         The teacher decides how to constrain the problem, e.g., chooses 2 or 3 relational words (from a long list)
         that inust be included, for example: 'more than' and 'altogether.'    Different combinations of words will
         make problems vary widely in level of difficulty, where the intent is to (a) force students to really under
         stand the language and (b) encourage them to write (at least) two-step problems, perhaps even problems
         for grades above their own. The teacher can also constrain the topic, chosen from a long list (e.g., ento
         mology,  oceanography).    The student writes the problem,  clue,  and solution "by hand," reviews it with
         the teacher (rewrite cycle),  selects constraining  words   (if any), and enters the problem into eXpress

328
       Math [see Fig.I].
 (3)   Exploration   and manipulation             of  problem   solution        processes               in alternative          symbolic     modes through
       EDUCE/SELAH and interactive graphics tools.
 (4)   Sharing of both printed and dynamically representable versions of children's problems.

       Currently, eXpress Math only prints the problem to share with others. Problems can be shared "horizon
       tally" among students in the same class/grade or "vertically" between students in upper or lower levels.
       Work in progress will allow students to submit their problems to a World Wide Web server.                                                    Teach
       ers/students could search the database and download word problems (eventually those written in other
       languages).  For example, they could search for "all problems containing 'more than' && 'altogether'
       && grade < 5." Web access to the interactive graphics tools is also planned.

                                                                                                    Sample Topics
                               Name:/Jenn                                             Astronomy                                 :9
                               School: !Beechwood Knoll Elementary SchoolCity: !OuincyBotany                                    Entomology (Insects)Geology-/j![i
                                Stale: I   MA                                                   ·I   ';111111·, IJIUGrade:II)Whales

                                                                                                     Oceanography
                                   I  like math. Mr. Nutola is a nice teacher.He makes it fun.'11'j£  eHpress Mcoral reefcurrentdensitydiatomdissolved oxygen
                                                    I W Author j -   jsolution        echolocationechosystem             f,
                                                                                    '::=====:--;:::::=
                              I\IC-------,0=-0-=-1p""h.,.in-,.,W,-e-i= g-=-h-,,--(ndd Word to List)                    ( Delete

                                   ·,    A dolphin   weighs    300    ounds.      His s ister
                                   ·,    wei   hs 367    ounds and his brother
                                   ·,    weighs 524 pounds.        How much do they__
                                   ·,    weigh   alto  ether?

                                   ·,    How much     more does    the brother wei                   h
                                         than  the  sister?

                        Figure 1:          eXpress Math screens for an actual student-created problem

5. Conclusion

     In the described approach to learning about word problems, mathematically relevant real-world problems
discussed in class motivate students' own construction of word problems in interaction with teachers and with a
computer learning environment.           The   computer graphics make explicit the multi-modal conceptual components
of the problem portion of the student's written input, allowing the discovery of analogies between conceptually
or mathematically similar problems.            Central to this environment are the children's own conceptualization and
creation of word problems, their derivation from a real-world context, their conversion to various symbolic
modes and their sharing with peers--an integrated means of promoting a situation-related sense of mathematics
in young children.

                                                                                                                                                      329
 6. References
 [Barron & Kantor 1993]
 Barron, B., & Kantor, R. (1993). Tools to enhance math education: The Jasper Series.    CACM, 36 (5), 52-53.

 [Brugman & Lakoff 1988]
 Brugman, C., & Lakoff, G. (1988).     Cognitive topology     and lexical networks. In S. Small, G. Cottrell & M. Tanenhaus
 (Eds.), Lexical Ambiguity Resolution. San Mateo, CA: Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, Inc.

 [Bums 1993]
 Bums, J.E. (1993).   EDUCE:    An Arithmetic   Word Problem Parser, M.S. Thesis, Computer Science  Department, University
 of New Hampshire, Durham, NH.

 [Cobb 1994]
 Cobb, P. (1994).  Constructivism and learning.  In T. Husen & T.N.    Postlethwaite (Eds.), International encyclopedia of edu
 cation (2nd ed., p 1040-1052). Oxford, England: Pergamon.

 [Cummins 1991)
 Cummins, D.D. (1991).   Children's interpretations of arithmetic word problems.    Cognition and Instruction, 8 (3), 261-289.

 [Cummins, Kintsch, Reusser & Weiner 1988]
 Cummins,    D.D., Kintsch, W., Reusser, K.,   & Weimer,   R.  (1988). The  role of understanding in solving   word problems.
 405-438.

 [Davis-Dorsey, Ross & Morrison 1991]
 Davis-Dorsey, J., Ross, S.M., & Morrison, G.R.   (1991)."    The role of rewording and context personalization in the solving of
 mathematical word problems. Journal of Educational Psychology, 83, 61-68.

 [Decorte, Verschaffel & DeWin 1985]
 DeCorte, E., Verschaffel, L., & DeWin, L. (1985). Influence of rewording verbal problems on children's problem represen
 tations and solutions. Journal of Educational Psychology, 77, 460-470.

 [Fuson, K. 1994]
 Fuson, K.   (1994). Children's solving of the whole range    of addition and subtraction problems using schematic drawings.
 Presented at the Annual Meeting of the American Educational Research Association (AERA-94), New Orleans, LA.

 [Hegarty, Mayer & Green 1992]
 Hegarty, M., Mayer, R.E., & Green, C.E. (1992). Comprehension of arithmetic word problems: Evidence from students' eye
 fixations. Journal of Educational Psychology,  84 (1), 76-84.

 [Janvier 1987]
 Janvier, C. (1987).  Translation processes in  mathematics education.   In Problems   of Representation in the Teaching and
 Leaming    of Mathematics, Janvier, C. (Ed.), Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.

 [Kaput 1992]
 Kaput, J. (1992).   Technology and mathematics education.     In Handbook of Research  on Mathematics Teaching and Leam
 ing, Grouws, D.A. (Ed.), New York: Macmillan, 515-556.

 [Kintsch 1989]
 Kintsch, W.  (1989). A theory  of discourse comprehension: Implications    for a tutor for algebra problems.  T hird European
 Conference for Research on Leaming and Instruction.    Madrid.

 [LeBlanc & Natola 1995]
 LeBlanc, M., & Natola, T. (1995).  eXpress Math - A    tool for writing mathematically. Presented at the National Education
 Computing Conference (NECC-95), Baltimore, MD.         TR 95-11, Dept.     of Mathematics and Computer Science, Wheaton
 College, Norton, MA.

 [LeBlanc & Weber-Russell in press]
 LeBlanc, M.D., & Weber-Russell, S. (forthcoming).      A computer model of the role of text integration in the solution of
 arithmetic word problems.   Cognitive Science.

330
[LeBlanc 1992]
LeBlanc, M.D. (1992).   When more is less - interactive tools for relational language.  16th International Group of the Psy
chology of Mathematics    Education  (PME-92),    3, 171. TR #92-14, Computer   Science   Dept,, Univ. of New   Hampshire,
Durham, NH.

[NCTM   1989]  NCTM     - National Council   of Teachers of Mathematics (1989). Curriculum   and Evaluation Standards      for
School Mathematics.  Reston, VA: Author.

[NCTM 1991] NCTM        - National Council of Teachers of Mathematics (1991). Professional Standards   for   Teaching Mathe
matics. Reston, VA: Author.

[Nesher 1982]
Nesher, P. (1982). Levels of description in the analysis of addition and subtraction word problems. In Addition and subtrac
tion: A cognitive perspective. Carpenter, T.M., Moser, J.M., and Romberg, T.A. (Eds.), Hillsdale, NJ:   Lawrence  Erlbaum
Associates, 25-38.

[Okamoto 1992]
Okamoto, Y. (1992).  The role of central conceptual structures in children's arithmetic word-problem solving.   Presented   at
the Annual Meeting of the American Educational Research Association (AERA-92), San Francisco, CA, April.

[Pogrow 1994]
Pogrow, S. (1994). Word Problem Processors:      A New Mathematical  Software Tool.    Demonstrated at the National Educa
tional Computing Conference (NECC-94), Boston, MA. Educational Innovations, Inc.

[Riley & Greeno 1988]
Riley, M.S., & Greeno, J.B. (1988). Developmental Analysis of Understanding Language About Quantities and of Solving
Problems.  Cognition and Instruction; 5 (I), 49-101.

[Russell 1986]
Russell, S. Weber (1986). Information and experience in metaphor: A perspective from computer analysis.       Metaphor and
Symbolic Activity, 6 227-270.

[Schank & Riesbeck 1981]
Schank, R.C., & C.K. Riesbeck (1981).  Inside    Computer Understanding. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.

[Staub & Reusser 1995]
Staub, F., & Reusser, K. (1995). The role of presentational structures in understanding and solving mathematical word prob
lems. In Discourse Comprehension.    Essays in Honor of Walter Kintsch, Weaver, C.A., Mannes, S., & Fletcher, C.R. (Eds.),
Hillsdale, NJ; Lawrence Erlbaum Asociates, Inc.

[Trabasso & Sperry 1985]
Trabasso, T., & Sperry, L.L. (1985). Causal relatedness and importance of story events.  Journal of Memory    and Language,
24, 595-611.

[Verschaffel & DeCorte 1996]
Verschaffel, L., & DeCorte, E. (1996).  Teaching realistic wor(l)d problem solving in the upper elementary     school.    Pre
sented at the Annual Meeting of the American Educational Research Association (AERA-96), New York, April 8-12.

[Vosniadou 1995]
Vosniadou, S. (1995). Analogical reasoning in cognitive development. Metaphor and Symbolic Activity, 10 (4), 297-308.

[Winograd & Higgins 1995]
Winograd, K., & Higgins,  K.M. (1995).  Writing, reading, and talking mathematics:     One interdisciplinary possibility. T he
Reading Teacher, 48 (4), 310-318.

Acknowledgements

The authors wish to thank the Beechwood Knoll Elementary School in Quincy, Massachusetts, especially Jenn, for con
tributing a sample of their use of eXpress Math.

                                                                                                                          331
