         An environment for supporting independent, individualized
                     learning and problem solving

                        Susan M. Williams, Ray Bariess, & Brian J. Reiser
                             Sclwol of Education and Social Policy
                               Institute for the Leaming Sciences
                          2II5 N. Campus Drive, Evanston, IL 60208
                E-Mail: williams@ils.nwu.edu, bareiss@ils.nwu.edu, reiser@ils.nwu.edu

               Abstract: We have been investigating ways of supporting middle-school students who are
            learning mathematics by constructing unique solutions to complex problems. This work addresses
            three needs in supporting independent, individualized learning and problem solving: realistic,
            complex contexts for learning, structured problem-solving activities that make complex problems
            more manageable for novices, and readily-available guidance for students during problem solving.
               Leaming is problem-based. Students are asked to design and layout a playground in order to
            learn to measure, draw to scale, and compute perimeter, area, and volume. The curriculum
            encourages an iterative approach to problem solving in which students create designs, give each
            other feedback, and revise their work. To support their problem solving, a software environment
            provides a simple model of the design task that aids students in identifying sub-goals, brainstorming
            questions that provide general procedural hints, and two structured multimedia databases: A student
            database is used to record students' designs, annotated with procedures used, new concepts learned,
            design rationale, and evaluations.Aperformance support database provides an archive of previously
            created designs with associated conceptual and procedural information.

    Creating a learning environment in which students are actively engaged in constructing knowledge and pursuing
 their own learning goals involves more than adopting activities in which the students can participate. It also has
 far-reaching implications for the roles ofteachers and students who must transform the autocracy of the traditional
 classroom into a partnership in which all participants share responsibility for teaching and learning.
    Lampert (1995) has described this situation as similar to that of a tour director who is accustomed to taking
 tourists on a guided tour at each stop along the route. Imagine how difficult it would be for this director if each of
 the tourists is given a personal motor scooter and an opportunity to explore. There would be maps, tickets, and
 other materials to prepare and distribute before the tourists could begin their individual explorations. If problems
 or questions arose during the tour, the director would need to provide assistance to a widely separated group. The
 tourists themselves would take on increased responsibilities as they learned to read maps and recognize signs
 (perhaps in a foreign language), and became responsible for being back at the bus in time to continue theirjourney.
    Lampert's analogy vividly communicates the dilemma of a teacher who attempts to transform his or her
 classroom: How can I anticipate which materials students will need? How will I know ifthe students have done
 everything they are supposed to do? How can I help one student without losing track of what the others are doing?
Students who are accustomed to getting step-by-step instructions have similar questions: What is the problem w e
 are being asked t o solve? What are we supposed t o do? Where can we get help?
    We have been investigating ways to provide answers to these questions for middle-school students who are
 learning mathematics by constructing their own unique solutions to complex problems. This work addresses three
needs in supporting independent, individualized learning and problem solving. First, creating appropriate, realistically
 complex contexts for learning helps students understand "What is the problem we are being asked to solve?"
Second, structuring problem-solving activities makes them manageable for novices who ask "What are we supposed
 to do?" Finally, providing support for students during problem solving answers "Where can we get help?" This
paper characterizes our approach to meeting each ofthese needs, and describes a curriculum and computer-based
 learning environment that synthesizes these components.

332
Creating realistic, complex contexts for learning

       In problem-based curricula such as the one described herein, many of the initial questions asked by
students are motivated by their attempts to understand the problem. Therefore, we emphasize the importance of
selecting appropriate problems and presenting them in a way that facilitates comprehension. Our work is based, in
part, on anchored instruction (Bransford, Sherwood, Hasselbring, Kinzer, & Williams, 1990), an approach known
for its use of realistic complex contexts for learning. These contexts, called anchors, afford opportunities for
students to learn a variety of concepts and procedures, how they are related, and the nature of the situations in
which they can be useful.
       The initial understanding of complex anchor problems are made simpler by the way they are presented:
First, problems are presented in a video format because students can more easily form mental models of problem
situations when they are presented in dynamic images rather than text. Second, problems are presented as stories,
a format that is easily remembered. Third, most data required for problem solving are embedded in the stories.
Students do not have to acquire this information from secondary sources. Fourth, the stories accurately represent
real world situations, so that students can use prior knowledge during problem solving. Each story ends when the
main character encounters a problem, and students are challenged to solve the problem using the information
provided in the video. Leaming begins with the goal of thoroughly understanding the situation described in the
anchor and finding solutions to the problem that it presents.
       In addition to supporting initial understanding by the way problem situations are presented, learning is
also facilitated by certain kinds of curricular activities. Anchored instruction emphasizes taking multiple perspectives
on a problem situation. The importance of this approach is supported by research indicating that, when learning by
solving problems, students' initial understanding of the anchor problem is very inflexible, i.e., they understand a
single solution to a single problem and have difficulty adapting this solution to solve very similar problems (Williams,
Bransford, Vye, Goldman, & Carlson, 1992).
       Besides adding curricular activities that encourage multiple perspectives, the problems themselves can
encourage such activities. One type of problem that provides opportunities for taking multiple perspectives is a
design problem, e.g., students might be asked to plan a trip or design a building that meets certain requirements
and constraints. In contrast to typical school problems, the frequently ill-structured nature of design problems
requires students to create their own interpretations of the problem. Each student can interpret the problem in a
different way, and each definition is likely to suggest a different solution. Answers can be evaluated using many
criteria, and many students can have correct answers without having the same answer. Students have the opportunity
to compare their solutions with those of others in their class and to determine which aspects are required. In
addition to comparing their answers to those of others, students must often create multiple designs themselves in
order to optimize their solution.
      We have selected the anchor, Blueprint for Success, from the problem solving series, The Adventures of
Jasper Woodbury, (CTGV, 1993), as a context for our research. Blueprint is a design problem that introduces
important geometry concepts in the context of a "career day" trip to an architectural firm. In the video, the main
characters meet a businessman who is donating a lot to the city to be used as a playground. The challenge for these
characters (and for the students) is to design this playground.
      The Blueprint video provides much information about designing the playground, e.g., it requires a slide,
swings, sandbox, and one other piece of student-chosen equipment. Additional scenes provide information about
donated materials and safety factors, as well as how to create and communicate a design. Specifically, students are
challenged to create scale drawings of each piece of equipment and a layout for the playground. They must ensure
that their designs do not violate any of the requirements and constraints presented in the video. During the design
process, students have opportunities to learn important skills and concepts, e.g., measurement, proportional reasoning,
and creating and reading scale drawings. Solving this problem allows students to create designs that reflect their
personal knowledge of playgrounds and affords an opportunity to be creative. At the same time that students have
flexibility and personal freedom in problem solving, they learn that they must also use precise mathematics to
create their designs and to communicate them to others.

Structuring learning and problem solving
       If students are to complete a complex design task successfully, they need support during problem solving.

                                                                                                 333
 Determining which kinds of assistance are effective, and when and how they should be provided, is especially
 difficult when learning is organized around problem solving. Depending on their understanding of the problem,
 and the knowledge and skills that they bring to the process, students will have many different approaches and
 many different answers, even for a very simple problem. As problems increase in complexity, it quickly becomes
 impossible to anticipate students' errors and to supply them with feedback tailored to their specific strategies and
 solutions.
       ASK Jasper is a computer-based, multimedia environment, designed to structure and support students'
 problem solving as they learn geometry while solving a complex design problem and communicating their design
 to others. In the ASK Jasper curriculum, students begin by viewing the Blueprint video, then use ASK Jasper to
 record their designs, while their teacher serves as a coach. The computer environment comprises a simple task
 model, a set of brainstorming questions that provide general procedural hints, and two structured multimedia
databases.A student database is used to record students' designs, as well as their explanations of procedures used,
 new concepts learned, design rationale, and evaluations. A performance support database provides an archive of
previously created designs with associated conceptual and procedural information.
Task model
       Task modeling is a generally useful approach for studying learning and problem solving. A task analysis
creates a model of problem solving by dividing a complex task into smaller sub-tasks. Such a model is an effective
 way to provide guidance when each learner is using a different approach because it focuses on breaking down the
problem into necessary sub-goals rather than attempting to track or dictate the performance of the student. In the
ASK Jasper environment, a hierarchy of sub-goals structures students' problem solving by helping them keep
track of where they are in the problem space and provides cues when they don't know what to do next. It is up to
the students to track their progress, i.e., which sub-goals they have achieved and what remains to be done.
       For Blueprint, or for that matter any design problem, the top levelof the task model includes the following
steps: Understand the problem, design one or more components, combine the components, execute the design, and
reflect on the success of the design and what has been learned. Each of these steps is broken down further, and
problem solvers may cycle through these steps multiple times as understanding of the problem grows, and they
revise their designs. TheBlueprint model is designed to provide structure without being overly prescriptive. Students
can start at many different points in the model. They must operationalize each of the sub-tasks before they can
carry it out. They are free to do so in any way they choose and to skip steps that they feel are unnecessary.
Brainstorming questions
       Sometimes, the general task model does not provide sufficient guidance for a student. Therefore,
brainstorming questions are associated with each sub-task to provide hints for how to solve the Blueprint problem.
Like the task model, these questions are not specifically related to the Blueprint problem and, with minor
modifications, could be used with any design task. In general, the goals of the brainstorming questions are to
reduce the complexity of the problem and to help students develop good strategies for problem solving.
       The brainstorming questions do this in several ways. First, they suggest ways to break the tasks down into
still smaller sub-tasks. For example, students are encouraged to summarize the problem according to a standard
story schema: Who are the main characters, what problem did they encounter, etc. Second, the questions provide
students with heuristic methods used by professional designers (e.g., Schon, 1983): What is the most important
requirement for your design, what would a design look like that just satisfied that requirement (and ignored the
rest), does this design satisfy all of the requirements, can the design be modified to satisfytherest of the requirements,
etc.Third, brainstorming questions help students by providing suggestions for evaluating their designs: Does your
design satisfy the safety constraints, is there enough fence to go around your playground, etc. Finally, the
brainstorming questions encourage reflection: How did you create your design, why did you do it this way, what
math did you use, etc.
The student database
       Creating and organizing design documents. As students go about the task of designing their playgrounds
and communicating their designs to others, they generate documents of many kinds: drawings of playground
components, evaluations by teachers and peers, explanations of procedures that were used, etc. The purpose of
ASK Jasper's student database (Fig. 1) is to organize these materials in a way that corresponds to the task model,
thus reinforcing the task model as an approach to problem solving (cf.ASK systems, Bareiss and Osgood, 1993).
Students' entries in the database consist of text, graphic, and video materials for each of the sub-tasks in the model.
Students can use a host of inexpensive and readily available computer-based graphics, video, and word processing
tools to create their notes and designs, or theycan createthem on paperand input themvia a scanner.The opportunity

334
to "publish" their work in the performance support database, which is discussed in the next section, provides an
authentic audience for their work.
       Annotating designs. Students make entries into the database as they enter their designs, following the
steps of the task model; however, the primary learning goal is not to create a solution to the Blueprint problem.
Instead, it is for students to acquire the skills and concepts necessary to solve complex mathematical problems
they will encounter in the future. The ASK Jasper database supports this process by encouraging students to
elaborate their designs, not in an ad hoc manner, but according to a standard set of activities.
       The first of these activities is reflection which helps students refine their understanding. Annotation
categories called Why andHow To encourage students to explain the rationale for their designs and the procedures
they used to create them. LeamingIssues allows student designers, their classmates, and teacher to add suggestions
for what the designers might need to learn to improve their designs (Fig. 2). The Leaming Issues category is
especially important for focusing students on the knowledge-building purpose of their problem solving.

                                                                      Big picture              i    fT
                                                                      Sandbox requirement.               Calculating.volume
                                                                                  Alicia                      Alicia ..

                                                                    Other examples             i      fleorning  issues     fT
                                                                 J=n·· $800bOXde3ign                 Need w do a dr.....tng too
                                                                      J4son                                       R8y

                 Fig. I. Categories in the database organize student-created materials

      The second activity supports generalization from the Blueprint problem by having students connect their
designs with other information. Two categories, Big Picture and Details, help students to structure their database
entries, e.g., a list of requirements and constraints might be linked to Details notes in the form of video clips of
scenes from which the requirements were extracted, or a text story summary might have a Big Picture link to the
Blueprint video. Another category, Othe r Exampl es, allows students to link their designs, procedures, and
explanations to similar entries in the database. These related examples could be those of other students, alternate
designs created by the same student, or revisions to correctmistakes in an earlierdesign. Understanding similarities
and differences between examples is at the core of the generalization process. The ability to link notes within the
database encourages students to make these connections.

Providing performance support
      The task model, the brainstorming questions, and the student database provide general tools and suggest
general techniques for solving design problems. However, they may not be specific enough to help students who
are having difficulty. One ofthe benefits of anchoring students' learning in a specific problem is that it becomes
possible to provide specialized help.This type ofhelp is provided by a performance suppo,:t database that provides
specific examples of designs and other work products that are solutions to sub-tasks ofthe design problem. When

                                                                                                                                         335
 designing ASK Jasper, we debated the wisdom of providing such examples, rather than providing examples by
 analogy to other design tasks. We decided to provide direct examples because wefelt that less successful students,
 especially, would have difficulty in transferring the associated procedures and issues across domains.

                                                                     Roy,
                                                                       On the lest screen, you seid you
                                                                     think you hove drawn the smallest
                                                                     playground possible, given the
                                                                     dimensions of your equipment. I
                                                                     think you could moke it smaller
                                                                     still if you moved things oround
                                                                     end then rotated the whole
                                                                     playground. Can you figure out how
                                                                     to do it?
                                                                                            Susan

                 Fig. 2. Leaming Issues notes encourage reflection and collaboration

       The use of direct examples can be problematic, however, because students can simply copy the designs
 and other information rather than constructing their own solutions to the problem. This practice is discouraged in
 two ways. First, students are asked to create a rough draft of their own design before consulting the database.
 Second, the database is populated with examples that are substantially correct, but fail in one or more ways to meet
 the requirements and constraints of this problem. Students must recognize and modify these discrepancies if they
 are to reuse the design successfully. For example, one swingset design has dimensions that do not correspond in
 the three view drawings and also violates a primary safety constraint. A student is assisted in identifying these
 flaws by general comments associated with the design in the Leaming Issues category of the database. Eventually,
 the performance support database will contain many example designs (linked via the Other Examples category)
 that span the range of naive conceptions of the design problem. Studying multiple designs may assist students in
 recognizing and avoiding problems in their own designs.
       In addition to example designs, the performance support database contains examples of other documents
the students are asked to produce, such as story summaries and lists of design constraints. Specific procedural
guidance is associated with each of these documents via the How To category. For example, one procedural note
 describes how to make a ruler with graph paper to facilitate measuring to scale. Design rationale is provided via
 the Why category. For example, a note associated with a swingset design explains how it was modeled after actual
 swingsets that a student designer studied in his own playground. Problems with designs and other learning issues,
 raised by the designer or by other evaluators, appearin Leaming Issues. As in the student database, Big Picture and
Details help to relate a component of the solution to the overall context of the design problem. These categories
also contain information from Blueprint to provide a context-sensitive reference source in which students can
 easily locate embedded data relevant to an aspect of their task.
       The performance support database provides models, at several levels, to assist the student designer. Each
 individual note in the database is a model of a type of note that the student may want to include to create and
 communicate his or her design. Taken as a whole, a sequence of notes by a single designer constitutes a design
 episode that provides an overall model of the design process. However, it provides only one solution to the design
 problem. To encourage the student to consider multiple perspectives, a number of such design episodes are included

336
in the database, which differ in approach, results, and as noted above, in misconceptions.
         The addition of student designs to the performance support database is a publication process rather than
an incremental and conversational process, as is typical in computer-supported collaborative learning environments
(e.g., CSILE (Scardamalia, & Bereiter, 1992), CoVIS (Edelson, O'Neill, Gomez, & D'Amico, 1995), CaMILE
(Guzdial, Rappin, & Carlson, 1995)). A student creates a design in the student database, subjects it to peer and to
teacher evaluation, and revises it. When the design is satisfactory, it is added to the performance support database,
and the student links it to other content, e.g., to design examples which he or she found useful during the design
process.

Initial Results

         A pilot test of the ASK Jasper curriculum and software was conducted with eight 6th-grade, public
school students of mixed ability in a pull-out program for a two week period. This preliminary evaluation focused
on the usability and affordances of the problem and software. As expected, Blueprint proved to be an excellent
problem for students of this age. Students found it interesting and had sufficient background knowledge to gener
ate initial design ideas; however, their lack of knowledge of geometry and proportional reasoning caused them to
make many errors in developing and communicating their ideas. Initially, they were reluctant to use the perfor
mance database for help with these problems either because they believed their designs were correct or because
they didn't know what kind of help this resource could provide. After some initial encouragement, students began
to consult the database regularly. The task model provided an effective organization and students appeared to have
no difficulty finding the information they were seeking. Students were disappointed to find that the examples
provided in the database needed modification to meet the requirements and constraints of the current problem.
This attitude was more prevalent for less successful students. Students scripted and videotaped demonstrations of
the target skills to use as annotations for their designs. They were very eager to have these demonstrations included
in the database even though writing accurate scripts explaining the procedures required significant work beyond
that required to create an acceptable design. These reflective activities appeared to be very effective in deepening
students understanding.
         After this pilot test, a three week classroom evaluation of the curriculum and software was conducted in
two 5th grade math classes in suburban Nashville, Tennessee. Students in the two classes were grouped by their
scores on the Tennessee Comprehensive Achievement Program. The mean percentile score for the high-achieving
class (N=29) was 81. The less-successful class (N=26) had a mean of 41. Twenty-five percent of the students (all
of them male and most of them in the less successful class) had been diagnosed with attention deficit hyperactivity
disorder (ADHD) or recommended for testing for ADHD.
         Two adjustments were made to the curriculum for this study. First, because of limited classroom time and
computer resources, the curriculum was abridged: Students identified the goals, requirements, and constraints of
the problem; designed and revised a swingset; and designed and revised a slide. Second, because our experimental
design did not include an explicit control group, we required students to create each of the initial designs without
access to the performance support database. This design allowed the initial swingset design to serve as a pretest
and the second to serve as a posttest. The first slide design represented a near transfer task for the swingset design.
         Analysis of the data is not complete at this time. Scoring of the initial and revised swingset designs
reveals the following: Students' visual representations became less distorted between the initial design and the
revision, i.e., virtually all students adopted the standard orthographic projection employed in examples in the
performance support database. Their revised drawings included more details. (Interestingly, this increase was
greatest for the ADHD students.) They labeled more dimensions in their drawings, and the labeling was more
consistent with their scale drawings.The students became more cognizant of requirements and constraints on their
designs and generally adhered to them in the revised designs.
         Not an of the results of the intervention were positive. The variability of students' designs diminished
between their first and second swingset drawings, possibly as a result of studying examples in the performance
support database. Many students' initial designs were quite unique, but almost an of their revised designs were
standard A-frame designs, similar to the examples in the performance support database. As the variety of examples
in the database increases, we believe that this effect will decrease.
         While our results are preliminary, our experience encourages us to believe that Blueprint for Success, our
curriculum, and ASK Jasper, taken together, provide an authentic, rich, and motivating context for learning.

                                                                                                             337
                                            References

 Bareiss, R. and Osgood, R. (1993). Applying Al models to the design of exploratory hypennedia systems, Hypertext '93
    Proceedini:s, 94-105.
 Bransford, J.D., Sherwood, R.D., Hasselbring, T.S., Kinzer, C.K., & Williams, S.M. (1990). Anchored instruction: Why we
    need it and how technology can help. In D. Nix & R. Spiro (Eds.). CofIDition, education and multimedia: Explorations in
    hif:h technolottV (pp. 115-142). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum & Associates, Inc.
 Cognition and Technology Group at Vanderbilt (CTGV). (1993). The Adventures of Jasper Woodbury [Video]. Warren, NJ:
    Optical Data.
 Edelson, D. C., O'Neill, D. K., Gomez, L. M., & D'Amico, L. (1995). A Design for Effective Support of Inquiry and
    Collaboration. In J.L. Schnase & E. L. Cunnius (Eds.) Proceedini:s of CSCL '95: The First International Conference on
    Computer Support for CoHaborative Leamini:, October 17-20, 1995, Bloomington, Indiana. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
 Guzdial, M., Rappin, N., & Carlson, D. (1995). Collaborative and multimedia leamini: environmentfor eni:jneerini: education.
    ACM Symposium on Applied Computing '95
 Lampert, M. (1995). Managing the tensions in connecting students' inquiry with learning mathematics in school. In D.N.
    Perkins, J.L. Schwartz, M.M. West, & M.S. Wiske (Eds.), Software Goes to School. NewYork, Oxford University.
 Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (1992). An Architecture for Collaborative Knowledge-Building. In E. Decorte, M. Linn, and
    H. Mandl (Ed.), Computer-based leamini: environments and problem solvini:. Springer-Verlag, Berlin.
 Schon, D.A. (1983). The reflective practitioner: how professionals think in action. New York : Basic Books.
Williams, S.M., Bransford, J.D., Vye, N.J., Goldman, S.R., & Carlson, K. (1992). Positive and nei:ative effects of specific
    knowledi:e on mathematical problem solvini:. Paper presented at the annual meeting oftheAmerican Educational Research
    Association, San Francisco.

 Acknowledgements

 This work was supported by a grant from the James S. McDonnell Foundation to the first author.

338
