     On the Progress of Developing Groupware to Support Notetaking

                                                Dave Berque
                                            dberque@depauw.edu
              Computer Science Department, Depauw University, Greencastle, IN 46135 USA

                                               LeAnn Gaerte
                                            lagaerte@depauw.edu
              Computer Science Department, Depauw University, Greencastle, IN 46135 USA

                                                Tim Harrison
                                              thhl@cec.wustl.edu
              Computer Science Department,    Washington University, St. Louis, MO 63130 USA

                                                  Matt Heitz
                                            mheitz@cs.oberlin.edu
                   Computer Science Department, Oberlin College, Oberlin, OH 44074 USA

                                                  Ryan Ritz
                                              rritz@depauw.edu
              Computer Science Department, Depauw University, Greencastle, IN 46135 USA

                                                Todd Witter
                                             wittert@depauw.edu
              Computer Science Department, Depauw University, Greencastle, IN 46135 USA

                                                John Yoder
                                            jyoder@depauw.edu
              Computer Science Department, Depauw University, Greencastle, IN 46135 USA

Background
The Problem

Teachers  traditionally write on  blackboards and similar devices while  delivering  their  lectures. Often the
majority of   each student's energy is then devoted to  copying what  the instructor has   written into his/her
notebook. Only occasionally does a student find time to listen to the lecture, think about the associated ideas,
and appropriately annotate the copied notes.  The difficulties stemming from the need to copy  a large  amount
of information arise in classes taught in many academic disciplines.  However, the problem is perhaps most
pronounced in science and mathematics classes where a large amount of information, usually expressed using
potentially confusing symbols and notation, is frequently presented very rapidly. A mathematics teacher who
is very familiar with the notation of the discipline may very quickly write a formula like:

on the blackboard, but students may require several minutes to copy it. Unfortunately, while the students are
busy copying   the formula   they are often distracted from  thinking about the instructor's discussion  of its
significance. A recent article in the Chronicle ofHigherEducation summariz.es the problem with the following

                                                                                                            345
comment made by a student at Cornell University: "In some classes, you're so busy trying to write down what
the  professors  say that you miss  half of the information" [Collison  1992].   Statements like this are quite
common and served as a primary motivation for our system design.

Related Work
The situation described in the previous subsection can be viewed as a group communications problem.       Simply
stated, the teacher needs to efficiently and effectively communicate written information to each student in the
group.  This information should be transmitted in   a way that does not impede the students'    ability to perform
other  tasks which   are  essential to the learning process  Oistening, thinking, etc.)      Computer-Supported
Cooperative Work (CSCW) is the branch of Computer Science which deals with developing technology to assist
group communications. The term groupware·is often used to describe software systems related to CSCW. The
reader who wants     background information on CSCW    or groupware is  referred to [Baecker    1993].

Several groupware systems have been developed which place an electronic spin on standard blackboards and
whiteboards.   The software component of such a system is commonly referred      to as whiteboarding software.
For example the SoftBoara [Microfield 1995] is a whiteboard that is equipped with a laser which tracks pens
as they write (with real ink) on the surface of the board.  Whiteboarding software is provided to display the
information written on the SoftBoard simultaneously on a computer monitor.    Although the information cannot
be interactively edited on the computer monitor, it can be printed, saved to a file, or imported into other
documents and edited later.

In some senses the LiveBoard, developed at Xerox PARC, is an interactive version of the SoftBoard.      In place
of writing on a whiteboard, users write on a large electronic monitor which measures 46 x 32 inches.         This
enables previously prepared material to be displayed on the screen and then edited interactively [Elrod et al.
1992]. Software has also been developed which allows the Liveboard to be used for medical instruction.     Using
this software  students  and teachers  can gather around the   Liveboard  and collaborate    on constructing and
evaluating decision trees related to medical problems [Jain et al. 1994].

Programs like GroupSketch,    GroupDraw [Greenberg    et al. 1994], and   Colah [Stefilc et al. 1994], provide a
shared drawing surface for two or more users.   These systems  operate in a WYSIWIS (What You See Is What
I See - pronounced Whizzy Whiz) mode.       Whenever a user writes or draws something on his/her monitor,    the
result is immediately displaye4 on each of the other users' screens.· SlateMate [Hamilton 1993] provides a
similar drawing surface with features designed especially for use in the classroom.     Although the system can
be used in several ways, it is primarily intended to help a teacher provide rapid feedback to any student in the
class. For example the teacher might pose a mathematics problem to the class.           Each student works   on a
solution to the problem by writing with a special pen on their computer monitor.   By selecting different icons
the  teacher can view  the progress  of any individual student in the class, and can    send that student written
comments.    Thus the teacher can share a writing surface with any student in the class [Hamilton 1993].

The DEBBIE System
Overview
The DePauw Electronic BlackBoard for Interactive Education (DEBBIE) is a groupware system designed by
the authors to enhance  a teacher's ability to share written information with students. The system differs from
other groupware in that it integrates a complete student-oriented notetaking system with a restricted form of a
WYSIWIS shared writing surface.      Most shared writing groupware is designed for a homogeneous group; all
members of the group are peers, and whatever is written by one person is displayed on every other person's
monitor. The restricted form of WYSIWIS which DEBBIE uses was developed based on the observation that,
from a note-taking point of view, many classroom groups are heterogeneous with the teacher being a special

346
member of the group.   The teacher may choose to transmit some information to the students in the class.     In
this case the material written by the teacher should be seen by every student in the class.  However, as the
students make written annotations on their individual copies of their notes, nothing should be transmitted back
to the teacher (nor to other members of the class).   Thus the writing surface should be like a one-way mirror
sharing information in only one direction.  We call this restricted form of a shared surface WYSIWISODO,
(What You See Is What I See One Direction Only - pronounced Whizzy Whizz Odo).

Classroom Coniiguration

A DEBBIE-equipped classroom may contain one or more traditional writing surfaces (blackboards, whiteboards,
overhead projectors, etc.)  In addition the room contains a SoftBoard as described earlier. The SoftBoard is
attached to a teacher station which is a computer running the teacher version of DEBBIE.    This computer is
also a node on a local area network. Each student in the class has a student station, a personal computer which
is also attached to the network and which runs the student version of DEBBIE.

The computers comprising the teacher and student stations may be any IBM compatible personal computers
running Windows'" 3.1 or higher, although we have obtained best results when the computers are equipped with
486 or pentium processors.    Since the computers must accept hand-written input, the user will find it most
convenient if the computers are either standard computers augmented with a light pen, or specially designed
pen computers which have an electronic pen in place of a mouse as an input device.

The Teacher's View

When the teacher speaks, or writes on standard writing surfaces (blackboard, overhead projector, etc.), the
students can use DEBBIE to take notes in the usual way.    Although the students are writing with electronic
pens, it is important to emphasize that they are interacting with the teacher in the traditional manner: the teacher
delivers oral and written information, and the students selectively copy that information into their (electronic)
notebooks.

Only when the teacher chooses to write information on the SoftBoard does the interaction mode between teacher
and students change significantly. Any information written on the SoftBoard can appear on a  student's screen
automatically if the student so chooses. Thus the teacher is free to write information on the SoftBoard that s/he
does not want the entire class to spend time copying. For example if a student in a poetry class asks a question
about the structure of a Haiku, the teacher may want to show the class a specific Haiku in order to illustrate
the answer to the question. While the students may want to have a copy of this Haiku in their notes, there is
no benefit to be gained from having the students take the time to copy it. In fact the effort spent copying the
Haiku will likely distract the students from listening to the teacher's explanation of its structure. Therefore,
the teacher might choose to write the Haiku on the SoftBoard so that it appears immediately and automatically
in the students' notebooks. As the teacher explains the poem's structure,  the students can annotate their notes
appropriately.

The Student's View

When DEBBIE starts to run the screen appears as shown below [see Fig. 1].

                                                                                                            347
                                                          ·f3=1=11¥A4@®11'1dMi,i,
                          file   Iools   .Eaper    Pisge Move   oftBoisrd    :,[iew  Animiste   Flag Y(ords

                            Continuous    Page   1 of 1     x:169 y:45                         All Notes

                                                Figure 1:     DEBBIE's Initial Display

The next pair of figures show the screen on a student station after the instructor has written some information
on the SoftBoard [see Fig. 2] and the same screen after the student has added some additional notes to those
written by the teacher [see Fig. 3].

                                                        ·J3=i=ii¥Vlfi®t®l!lffil1i1
                       File  Tools    Paper   Pisge Move     SoftBoard   View    nimate      Flag Words

         I            Continuous       Page 1 of 5 j    x:393 y:186     Modified           All Notes

                                       Figure 2: DEBBIE Display with Imported Notes

348
                                                          ·J#=l=ll¥klfittt®'J:;gt3[,f,
                         File  Tools    Pl!pcr   P,,gc Move   Soft8ol!rd  !{,cw   A,,iml!tc  Alig Words

                         Continuous · ,  Pllge 1 of 5 I  x:404 y:313 I    Modified I        All Notes

                                  Figure 3: Debbie Screen With Student Annotations

As shown in the preceding figures DEBBIE displays several menu options at the top of the screen which can
be selected using the pen.      Once selected,        these options display sub-menus which allow the following tasks to
be performed:

                · Savini notes to a disk file, and retrieving, deleting or renaming these notes at a later time.

                · Changing the thickness and color of the pen (red, blue, black, and green are available), or
      temporarily replacing the pen by an eraser.

                · Changing the way the pages are lined (blank pages, horizontal lines, vertical lines, and
      graph paper are available.)

                · Moving         to     various     pages in the     notebook    (previous,    next,    first, last, or a page with a
      specific number) and creating new pages.                 The student can view one page while the teacher is writing
      on another.

                · Specifying whether the screen should display only notes written by the teacher, only notes
      written by the student, or both sets of notes simultaneously.

                · Allowing students to take snap-shots of their notes as a complex diagram evolves in stages.
      This permits students to store an animated set of notes.                       To take a very simple example, suppose a
      teacher in a traditional classroom is showing a class how to draw a 3-dimensional cube.                             The teacher
      would first draw a square on the blackboard which the students would copy into their notes. Next the
      teacher would draw a second square shifted down and to the right, and overlapping with the first
      square.  Again          the students would copy this into their notes.                 Finally the teacher would connect   the
      corresponding comers of the two squares (and the students would do the same) thus completing the
      cube.   The problem here is that although the students have a picture of the completed cube in their
      notebooks,  they do not have a              record    of the process that was         used to construct the cube.   If the point
      of the class was to teach the students how to draw a cube, then the students' notes do not capture the
      spirit of the lecture.         Using DEBBIE, however, the students can store each step of the process as a
      frame rather than saving only the final result.                    These steps can be played back at a later time either
      continuously or by stepping forward and backward one frame at a time.

                                                                                                                                  349
                · Allowing one or more flag words to be stored on a specific page. For example the student
       might wish to store the word "velocity" on all pages that contain material related to this concept. The
       flag words are stored as ASCII text so that the student can search for pages containing specific flag
       words at a later time. If a pen computer running the Windows for Pen Computing Operating System
       is used as the student station, the flag words can be entered using the pen and the system will convert
       them to ASCII text.    Otherwise the flag words must be entered at the keyboard.

References
[Baecker 1993] Baecker, R.M. (1993), Readings in Groupware and Computer-Supported Cooperative Work,
San Mateo, CA: Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, Inc.

[Berque 1993] Berque, D. (1993), Electronic blackboards: a vision of the future, Proceedings of the Tenth
International Conference on Technology and Education, Boston, MA. 340-342.

[Collison 1992] Collison, M. (1992), Sale of class notes: a new skirmish over an old idea, The Chronicle of
Higher Education, April 8th, A35-A36.

[Elrod et al. 1992] Elrod, S., Bruce, R., Gold, R., Goldberg, D., Halasz, F., Janssen, W., Lee, D., McCall,
K., Pedersen, E., Pier, K., Tang, J., & Welch, B. (1992), Liveboard: a large interactive display supporting
group meetings, presentations and remote collaboration, Proceedings of the 1992    ACM   Computer Human
Interface (CHI) Conference, 599-607.

[Greenberg et al. 1992] Greenberg, S., Roseman, M., & Webster, D. (1992), Issues and experiences designing
and implementing two group drawing tools, Proceedings of the 25th Annual Hawaii International Conference
on the System Sciences, Hawaii, 139-150.

[Hamilton 1993] Hamilton, E. (1993), Remote sharing ofelectronic paper (SlateMate), Proceedings of the Tenth
International Conference on Technology and Education, Boston, MA, 1068-1070.

[Jain et al. 1994] Jain, N.L., Murphy, J.F., Hassan, S.W., Cunnius, E.L., Metcalfe, E.S., Schnase, J.L.,
Schoening, P.A., Spooner, S.A., & Frisse, M. E. (1994), Interactive electronic whiteboards in the medical
classroom. JAM/A 8-ymposium Supplement, SCAMC Proceedings, American Medical Informatics Association,
Hanley & Belfus, Inc. Philadelphia, PA.

[Microfield 1994] Microfield Graphics, Inc. (1994), About SoftBoard, Beaverton, OR.

[Roberts 1984] Roberts, F. (1984), Applied Combinatorics, Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.

[Stefik 1993] Stefik, D., Bobrow, D.G., Foster, G., Lanning, S., & Tatar, D. (1993), WYSIWIS revisited:
early experiences with multiuser interfaces, In R.M. Baecker (Ed.), Readings in Groupware and Computer
Supported Cooperative Work, San Mateo, CA: Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, Inc. 585-595.

Acknowlegements

The work described in this paper was supported in part by the National Science Foundation under grant CDA-
9322371 and by the DePauw University Faculty Development and Presidential Discretionary Funds.

350
