   An Analysis of the Quality of Text as Fifth-Grade Formerly Identified
                      Title I Reading Students Write and Revise from
                              Paper and Pencil to Word Processor

                                               Shelly M. Bucci
                                           University of Pittsburgh
                                           SRl7 Forbes Quadrangle
                                          Pittsburgh, PA 15260      USA
                                              smbst36+@pitt.edu

         Research confirms that the use of a word processor by students (generally college and adult writers) for
writing assignments increases the quantity of writing (Azarrnsa, 1991; Sewell, 1990), improves writers' attitudes
toward writing (Geisert & Futrell, 1990; Snyder, 1993), encourages the view of writing as a process (Dudley
Marling, 1985), and makes revising easier (MacArthur, 1988; Williams, 1992).    However, only a small body of
literature concentrates on elementary-age school writers (Cochran-Smith, 1991), and because of this it is too early to
make broad generalizations about (1) word processing and writing quality of young children (Owston, Murphy &
Wideman, 1992); and (2) the number and types of revisions made by elementary school children (Cochran-Smith,
1991).  This study will describe fifth-grade formerly identified Title I reading students writing and revising behavior
as they begin a writing assignment with paper and pencil, make revisions during a student-teacher conference, then
proceed to the word processor, and their teachers' attitudes and perceptions about the use of word processing for
writing instruction.

                                                   Method

Setting

         The study takes place in the fifth-grade reading and writing center at an intermediate school, in a small
town in Northwestern Pennsylvania, fifty miles north of Pittsburgh. The total district enrollment, as projected in the
most recent Long Range Plan (1989) is 3,910 students. The school has been in operation since the 1988-89 school
year, when a district-wide consolidation occurred resulting in grades four, five, and six combining to form the
present intermediate school.
         The reading and writing center, which contains thirty Macintosh computers, began operations in September
of 1994.  It was developed as a pilot-study by the district coordinator for all fifth-grade students in the school as an
alternative to remedial education. Rather than fifth-grade students being "pulled-out" for remedial services, it was
determined that the formerly identified Title I reading students would accompany their class twice a week, once with
their language arts teacher, the other with their content area teacher, to the reading and writing center.

Subjects

         The students that participated in the study were all students from one fifth-grade class (in this instance
seven)-in which the language arts teacher utilized the three stage writing process-prewriting, writing, and revising
who scored at the 40th percentile or below on Form M, the reading comprehension section of the Metropolitan
Achievement Test (Prescott, et al., 1986) given by the Title I teachers at the end of the previous school year.    The
Title I teachers use the Metropolitan reading comprehension scores to identify students who are eligible to receive
Title I services.
         There were a total of fourteen teachers involved in the study, twelve classroom teachers and two Title I
reading teachers.   The gender break-down was seven males and seven females, all white. The average number of
years teaching was twenty-five years.

Design

         The study reported here involved the use of two types of observational methodologies to collect data -
participant observation (Slavin, 1992) and content analysis used after writing samples were collected (Fraenkel &
Wallen, 1990).     The researcher in this study participated by acting as a resource person in the reading and writing

                                                                                                                 363
center and responding to students' questions and concerns.       Content analysis was used to analyze students' text
characteristics (across and within each writing task) and the revisions students made on the original paper and pencil
draft (called here the "red ink" draft).

                                                     Procedure

         The research included all students who would qualify for Title I services from one classroom (7 students), a
classroom case study. Data collected     included each student's paper and pencil rough draft (also the "red ink" drafts
that indicated any changes {revisions} made between the pencil and paper draft and the word processing draft) and
their final word processed draft. Writing assignments were collected over a four month period.      These samples were
analyzed using the holistic scoring rubric created for this study, and the revisions ("red ink" draft) were analyzed
using Faigley & Witte's (1989) taxonomy of revisions.

Details of the Procedure

         Each student was observed for two sessions a week (40 minutes per session) over a period of four months.
The introductory session (week 1) was devoted to observing students' skills on using the word processor, and to
establish a collaborative working rapport with the students and teachers.  Over the course of the next four months,
students performed a number of activities for each writing assignment.   These activities included first, composing a
pencil and paper draft of all assignments. Next, the students worked with the language arts classroom teacher during
a student-teacher conference.     During    this conference, the teacher questioned the student      on such areas as
punctuation or verb form, revisions were suggested and made on the paper and pencil draft.          I have labeled this
student-teacher conference draft the "red ink" draft, primarily because it is the teacher who probed the student and
made the corrections on the paper and pencil draft with a red ink pen. The last step consisted of the students taking
the paper and pencil ("red ink" draft) to the reading and writing center where they wrote the text again using a
different writing instrument, the word processor.

Data Gathering Method

         Three areas were investigated by means of the procedure in this study.      The first area was classroom
observations. The class attended the reading and writing center twice a week, Monday and Friday.        During the 40
minute class period, I collected field notes using the created protocol.   The students were sporadically seated
throughout the center, so the first five minutes (from 9:45-9:50) were spent observing students 1, 2, 3, & 4. The next
five minutes (from 9:50-9:55) were focused on observing students 5, 6, & 7.       The field notes form was coded
accordingly and this process continued with myself acting as a participant observer for the entire forty minute class
period, and attending to any of the students who needed additional assistance.
        The second area I focused attention was the teachers, classroom teacher and the two Title I teachers.   The
same protocol was used. As I observed students 1, 2, 3, & 4, I also coded the actions of the classroom teacher (CT)
and the Title I teachers (Tl & T2). The same when I observed students 5, 6, & 7.
        Another area I focused attention was the collection of students' writing samples.          The method used to
collect and analyze data (students' writing samples) in this study was content analysis.   Writing samples were
collected from students as part of their school activities and not under experimental conditions.    Thus, the samples
were naturalistic as opposed to experimental data (Gundlach, 1981) of students' writing. A folder was kept for each
student and included: the initial paper and pencil draft (also the "red ink" draft), and the final word processed draft.
        A rubric was created using a holistic scoring strategy to assess the quality of the draft. The holistic levels of
performance students are expected to attain are described in each block of the rubric corresponding with a numeric
score. These descriptors tell the evaluator what characteristics or signs to look for in a student's work and then how
to place the work on a predetermined rubric (Hart, 1994).     When using holistic scoring, writing assignments are
given a numerical score based on the piece of writing as a whole.    The results, holistic scores for each student's
writing samples, were reported in tables and graphs.

Instrumentation

364
        The final area was student interviews and teacher questionnaires.    The seven students who  participated in
the study were asked questions in a one-on-one interview format,       choosing the majority of their answers from a
likert scale created for this project. Prior to asking students to choose a computer screen face, which corresponds
with a number on the scale, a mini-survey was taken,    using fifteen fifth-grade students. I wanted to ascertain how
students perceive each screen/number in order to establish continuity, to make sure there was understanding of what
each screen represented. The following responses occurred most often:

        1                        2                   3                4           5
        Terrible            Not So Good        Okay                  Good        Fantastic
         The teachers were issued a questionnaire that required them to analyze their perceptions of the reading and
writing center and to focus on specific questions related to students and writing, and students and technology.   The
questionnaire was sent to all fifth-grade teachers involved in the reading and writing center. I wanted all teachers to
participate because I believe that the attitudes teachers express towards the reading and writing center, the students
formerly identified as Title I reading, writing and technologies (specifically, using word processors for writing)
shape the degree to which they cooperate with the Title I teachers in the center and contribute to the amount of effort
put into the assignments that they give to students.

                                                        Results

       The paper and pencil drafts produced in the classroom, reflected the original thoughts and reactions of the
students during the prewriting and writing stages of the writing process. The holistic scores on the paper and pencil
drafts varied for each student. As a group, the lowest score on the paper and pencil draft was 7 and the highest was
15. The average paper and pencil holistic score for all seven students (35 writing samples) was 12.1 out of a
possible total score of 15.
       The language arts teacher provided each student the opportunity to review his/her writing assignments
during a teacher-student writing conference.  The "red ink" draft was the first opportunity for revision-an important
aspect of the writing process-for each writing assignment produced in the classroom.        The discussion about the
original paper and pencil draft (the "red ink" draft) provided an opportunity for students to revise, or go back to the
original paper and pencil draft and add more text to improve the quality of their paper and pencil draft before it is
taken to the reading and writing center.
       The word processed draft represented the final stage in the writing process for the student. Up to this point,
with each assignment, students progressed from the initial writing of the paper and pencil draft to a student-teacher
conference where a "red ink" draft with revisions is created and taken to the reading and writing center where the
student interacts with a word processor to create a final document.    En route to this final document, a spell check
may be conducted and a second opportunity for revision may occur here with either the classroom teacher (content
or language arts) or a Title I teacher prior to the final printing. As a group, the lowest holistic score on the word
processed draft was 13 and the highest score 15.      The average holistic score for all seven students (35 writing
samples) was 14.8, which is slightly higher than the 12.1 average for the paper and pencil draft, indicating that the
quality of the word processed drafts are higher than the original paper and pencil drafts.    The quality of writing
appeared to increase as a function of word processor use (Montague, 1990).
       Bickel (1985) found that remedial students tend to give equal weight to everything they read without
understanding the relative importance of the ideas presented, and similarly, their writing often consists of a loosely
related string of ideas (p. 41). I found this to be true when analyzing the original paper and pencil drafts.     The
teacher-student conference proved to be very beneficial to the students in this study, to tie together their thoughts and
ideas and to increase the quality of writing as is seen in the scores of the final word processed documents.
       The majority of revisions made were surface-level revisions, as confirmed by a number of researchers
(Monahan, 1982; Scardamalia & Bereiter, 1986) who studied the revisions of inexperienced or poor writers.
Students with limited ability may have the most difficulty learning to revise, primarily because revision requires
reading, more specifically rereading of what one has written (Barker, 1987).

                                                                                                                365
Teachers

         When asked on the teacher questionnaire whether or not they've noticed a change in students' writing skills,
7 out of the 13 respondents indicated yes, noting that students are more creative and able to express themselves more
freely when using the word   processor for writing. The teacher questionnaire also required teachers to respond to a
number of excerpts from conclusions in various research studies. For example:  When using the computer, students
wanted to write, wrote more, and were more willing to work with their writing.  This, in tum, carried over to their
reading. They took a keen interest in reading what others had written and their own writing more critically (Bickel,
1985).   The teachers' responses:  8% Strongly Agree, 54% Agree, and 38% Disagree.       Although much of the
research indicates that using a word processor increases the quantity of student writing, in this study as students
proceeded from the paper and pencil draft to the teacher-student conference ("red ink" draft) to the word processed
piece, the quantity (total number of words) decreased, which I believe resulted in an improvement in the quality of
the students' writing.

                                                    Conclusion

         This study    was descriptive in nature and based upon  the findings this approach can be     perceived as
valuable. However, this study should be followed by a comparative study to draw conclusions regarding the efficacy
of using a word processor versus other approaches to writing, e.g., paper and pencil. Research from previous studies
on writing and word processing consisted primarily of junior high, high school, or college students. Cochran-Smith
(1991), in her critical review of related literature found a relatively small body of literature that concentrates on
elementary school writers.   More research needs to be conducted with elementary students, primarily those who are
of limited or low ability.

366
                                                       References

Azarmsa, R. (1991).   Educational Computing Principals and Applications.  Englewood Cliffs:    Educational Technology
Publications.

Barker, T.T. (1987).  Studies in word processing and writing. Computers in the Schools, 4 (1), 109-121.

Bickel, L.L. (1985).  Word processing and the integration of reading and writing instruction. In J.L. Collins & E.A. Sommers
(Eds.) Writing-on-line Using computers in the teaching of writing (pp. 39-45). Upper Montclair: Boynton/Cook Publishers,
Inc.

Cochran-Smith,    M. (1991). Word processing and writing in elementary classrooms: A critical review of related literature.
Review of Educational Research, 61 (1), 107-155.

Dudley-Marling, C.C.   (1985). Microcomputers, reading and writing:   Alternatives to drill and practice. The Reading Teacher,
3.8 (4), 338-391.

Faigley, L. & Witte, S.P. (1989). Measuring the effects of revisions on text structure. In Beach, R. & Bridwell, L.S. (Eds.) New
Directions in Composition Research. (95-108). New York: The Guilford Press.

Fraenkel, J.R. & Wallen, N.E. (1990).  How To Design and Evaluate Research In Education.      New York:    McGraw-Hill
Publishing Company.

Geisert, P.G. & Futrell, M.K. (1990). Teachers, computers and curriculum Microcomputers in the classroom.     Boston:   Allyn
and Bacon.

Gundlach, R.A. (1981). On the Nature and Development of Children's Writing. In Frederiksen, C.H. & Dominic, J.F. (Eds.)
Writing: The Nature, Development, and Teaching of Written Communication Volume 2 Writing:         Process, Development, and
Communication (pp. 133-151).   Hillsdale: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Publishers.

Hart, D. (1994).  Authentic Assessment: A Handbook for Educators.    Menlo Park:  Addison-Wesley Publishing Company.

Long Range Plan (1989). New Castle Area School District.

MacArthur, C.A. (1988).   The impact of computers on the writing process. Exceptional Children, 54 (6), 536-542.

Monahan, B.D. (1982).   Computing and revising.  English Journal 71 (7), 93-94.

Montague, M. (1990).   Computers, cognition and writing instruction. New York:   State University of New York Press.

Owston, R.D., Murphy, S. & Wideman, H.H. (1992). The effects of word processing on student's writing quality and revision
strategies. Research in the Teaching of English, 26 (3), 249-276.

Prescott, G.A., Balow, I.H., Hogan, T.P. & Farr, R.C. (1986). Metropolitan Achievement Test MAT6.        Harcourt Brace
Jovanovich, Inc.

Scardamalia, M. & Bereiter, C. (1986). Research on written composition. In M.C. Wittrock (Ed.) Handbook of research on
teaching (3rd ed) (pp. 778-803). New York: Macmillan Publishing Company.

Sewell, D.F. (1990). New tools for new minds A cognitive perspective on the use of computers with young children. New
York: St. Martin's Press.

Slavin, R.E.  (1992). Research Methods in Education. Boston:   Allyn and Bacon.

Snyder, I. (1993). Writing with word processors: A research overview. Educational Research, 35 (1), 49-68.

Williams, N. (1992). Computers and writing. In C.S. Butler (Ed.) Computers and written texts (pp. 247-265). Cambridge:
Blackwell.

Acknowledgments

Dr. Rita M. Bean; Dr. Shirley A. Biggs; Dr. Douglas K. Hartman; Dr. E. Blanche Woolls - University of Pittsburgh
Michael E. & Donna J. Bucci

                                                                                                                            367
