                              How Tutors Characterize Students:
                            A Study of Personal Constructs in Tutoring

                                                     Sharon J. Derry
                                         University of Wisconsin-Madison
                                       Department of Educational Psychology
                                                     Madison, WI
                                                     608-263-3676
                                               sderry@macc.wisc.edu

                                                  Michael K. Potts
                                         University of Wisconsin-Madison
                                       Department of Educational Psychology
                                                     Madison, WI
                                                     608-263-3900
                                              mkpotts@students.wisc.edu

  Theoretical Framework
   Human tutoring provided on a one-to-one basis has been credited as the most effective form of instruction
   [Bloom, 1984];   [Cohen, Kulik, & Kulik,   1982]. It is not surprising, then, that efforts to isolate and describe the
   actions of expert tutors and the unique interactions that take place between tutor and tutee have intensified in
   recent years. Cognitive researchers, particularly those interested in developing intelligent computer learning
   environments, want to know how good tutors behave      and think during interactions with students.    Models   of
   human tutoring provide a rich source of ideas for system designers and developers.

   Through the use of verbal protocol and interaction analysis, techniques that focus on dialogue between tutor and
   tutee, current research is describing in great detail the nature of human tutorial interaction.    Conversational
   analysis of tutoring sessions, focusing on such issues as how tutors frame tutoring sessions, ask questions, aid
   students in problem solving,  and react to student errors, has been the dominant methodology         [Fox,  1993];
   [Lepper et  al., 1993];  [McArthur, Stasz, & Zmuidzinas,   1990]; [Merrill, Reiser, Merrill,    &  Landes,  1995];
   [Putnam, 1987].   Such studies have produced rich, detailed descriptions of tutoring in action. However, none of
   this work is directly addressing the question of what conceptual knowledge about students and tutoring is
   developed and used by expert tutors to help them in their task.   If designers of machine-based tutoring systems
   want to model students from a tutor's perspective, they need to know what constructs tutors possess and use to
   describe and think about their tutees, what behavioral evidence they observe in order to profile tutees in terms of
   these constructs, and how their tutoring methods are selected or changed in response to perceived student
   profiles.

   This study identified mental constructs used by five experienced tutors to help them characterize and tutor their
   students.  To isolate these constructs, we adapted a research method, the repertory grid interview, originally
   inspired by George Kelly's Personal Construct Theory [Kelly,    1955]. This method has been used frequently in
   expert systems development [Boose, 1985] but, to our knowledge, not previously applied in tutoring research.
   Kelly proposed that individuals live and operate within specific worlds or domains (or communities of
   practice?) that can be broken down into the major components or elements that comprise them.       An individual's
   perspective and understanding of that world can be described in terms of the constructs he or she uses to
   distinguish among and think about those elements.   Thus, in an experienced tutor's world of tutoring, the ways
   in which students are modeled by that tutor are largely defined by the personal constructs used to describe,
   categorize and think about them during tutoring.

   We  combined     Kelly's repertory  grid interview  methodology    with statistical analysis    to elicit a set of
   fundamental concepts that tutors used to describe and differentiate among tutees with whom they had recently
   worked and were very familiar. We also    acquired information from each tutor regarding which constructs were
   most important and how they were used in decision making within a particular sample of tutoring sessions.

368
Method

The Tutors

Five experienced tutors who practiced in a variety of educational contexts (i.e., across academic disciplines and
instructional settings) were studied.   Three of these five tutors were examined about their experiences tutoring
college students on a computer-based instructional system for improving mathematics knowledge and skill.
One of the computer-aided tutors worked with student dyads, while the other two worked with individual
students. In addition, to gain information about the variability or stability of tutoring constructs across settings
and subject domains, we studied two tutors who worked with college students enrolled in a special program
designed to support high-risk college students.     One of these tutors worked with students on their writing
assignments. The other remedial tutor helped students with math.

Data Collection Procedure

Sessions with tutors consisted of two phases, knowledge elicitation and rating grid.     Prior to the knowledge
elicitation sessions, tutors were asked to prepare a list of tutees with whom they had recently worked for a
significant period of time and who were very familiar to them.   The number of tutees listed by each tutor ranged
from seven to thirteen.    Tutors were advised to gather and bring any available notes and records of these
tutoring sessions to use at the knowledge elicitation sessions.

During knowledge elicitation, each tutor was presented with a series of triads, each triad consisting of three of
the names from the list of tutees known to that tutor.  The names in each triad, the ordering of triads, and the
sequencing of names within triads were randomly determined.      Triads were examined by the tutor one at a time.
For each, the tutor was told to think of the most important attribute that distinguished the two most similar
members of the triad from the third "outlying" member.   The distinguishing construct reported by the tutor was
recorded  along   with  what the  tutor provided as an opposing   construct (e.g., the construct       "involved"  was
recorded along with what the tutor believed to be an opposing construct, "uninvolved").     This presentation of
triads and identification of discriminating constructs continued until several constructs given by the tutor merely
repeated previously reported constructs and no new constructs were emerging.

Tutors were also asked to recall tutoring sessions as a basis for specifying what evidence they observed that
enabled   them    to discriminate among    students on the basis   of each  construct,  and to         state how  such
discriminations influenced their tutoring of these students.    Because this technique attempted to focus tutors'
retrospective recall on a particular set of tutoring sessions and tutees, and also provided tutors with various
memory aids (notes and records) to prompt specific memories, we believe the generated data fall within the
"many-to-one" category (one verbalization for many actions), as defined by verbal protocol theory [Ericsson &
Simon,  1984).    This theory supports the assumption that data obtained in this manner is veridical albeit less
dense than what think-aloud methods would provide.       The requirement to examine multiple tutors, multiple
tutees for each tutor, and multiple sessions for each tutee, made think-aloud methodology a virtual impossibility.

Once a representative list of personal constructs was elicited from a tutor, a rating grid was developed so that
the tutor could score all his or her tutees on all of the bi-polar constructs elicited by that tutor. A rating grid was
constructed with the list of students in a row at the top of the page, and the bipolar constructs in a column on the
left of the page. Each student was then rated by the tutor using a five-point semantic differential scale.      Not all
constructs were evaluative, but those thought to possess an evaluative component were arranged so that the
highest rating (5) was given for the most positive characterization (e.g., "Very Careful"), while the lowest rating
(I) would represent a negativejudgment (e.g., "Very Careless").

Analyses and Findings

Based on the knowledge elicitation procedure, an average of 18 bipolar personal constructs were identified by
each tutor as important to describing and discriminating among tutees.    Tutors each rated their tutees on their
personal construct scales, and these ratings were transformed into z-scores for input to SPSS for Windows.
Cluster analyses were performed for each tutor.      Cluster analysis is a statistical procedure that identifies
homogeneous groups or clusters of cases based on values given for a set of variables.

                                                                                                                 369
    Two types of cluster analyses were performed for each tutor.    One analysis treated bi-polar constructs as cases.
    Clusters of bi-polar constructs were the output, which helped identify basic, underlying dimensions of judgment
    used  to describe  and  rate tutees.  The  other analysis    treated students  as cases  and    thus created  clusters
    representing groups of students who were similar in terms of how they were perceived by the tutor.            Student
    clustering represented a search for naturally occurring student "types," or generic student "models" that might
    suggest distinctive instructional approaches or tutoring strategies.

    Cluster Analysis 1:  Dimensions of Judgment and Tutoring

    Cluster analyses of bi-polar constructs revealed that five different experienced tutors working in various settings
    all described and categorized their students in terms of two essential traits:    learning ability and motivation.
    Several  other minor   constructs were  used  by tutors   in describing  their students,   but  learning ability and
    motivation were dominant and universal clusters and were perceived by tutors as the most important.       However,
    even though these same basic traits were used by all tutors when assessing students, there were differences
    among tutors in how these traits were specifically defined.     For example, motivation for one tutor embodied
    academic assertiveness; for another it embodied cooperative attitude, and for yet another it involved sociability
    and friendliness. Learning ability for some tutors included considerations of competence with computers; for
    others, computer skills were a separate or irrelevant issue. For one (the most experienced) tutor, learning ability
    had a hierarchical structure and embodied both intelligence and cognitive effort.        For other tutors, learning
    ability was a simpler, almost unidimensional trait.

    Having judged and characterized tutees on the basis of their motivational state and academic ability, all tutors in
    this study reported adapting their tutoring accordingly.  Tutors reported many different techniques and complex
    strategies for adapting their  tutoring to students'  motivational    level and   learning ability.   The reasoning
    processes and tutoring decisions described by different tutors reflected noticeably different tutoring "styles"
    [Lepper & Chabay, 1988] that varied in terms of content, philosophy, and complexity.            Style variations were
    unrelated to student population, content domain, and instructional setting.       For example, similar styles that
    might be   described as indirect, therapeutic and   empathetic  were   exhibited  by a  female   writing tutor  in an
    authentic remedial setting and a male math tutor who worked with a computer in a laboratory setting.

    In contrast to findings of conversational analyses of adult human tutoring, the results of this study strongly and
    consistently support Lepper's  [Lepper  &  Chabay,   1988];  [Lepper  et al., 1993] idea   that student modeling   by
    human tutors involves consideration of motivational, as well as cognitive, states of students.    All tutors w atched
    for motivational indicators and adjusted their tutoring. Moreover, three of five tutors reported that judgments of
    motivational/affective states were more important for their tutoring than were judgments of cognitive ability.
    Examples of complex strategies for dealing with low-motivation problems included a method of questioning
    designed to draw unengaged students into active thinking about their problem solving, and another method
    whereby the tutor and tutee swapped roles. Examples of simpler techniques were responding to low motivation
    by shortening tutoring sessions and attempting to personalize problems or assignments.

    General    Student Types

    Analyses were performed to describe how each of the tutors naturally grouped students into clusters or types.
    [Fig. 1] through [Fig. 5] visually depict the student clusters for each tutor in terms of students' relative positions
    on grids representing the two main discriminating constructs (learning ability and motivation) that were similar
    across tutors.  To obtain these figures, each student's scores on ability and motivation were calculated by
    averaging their ratings (provided by their tutor) on personal construct scales associated with the ability and
   motivation clusters.  Based on these scores, each student was located on the grids shown in [Fig.         1] - [Fig 5],
    where each grid represents a separate tutor, the two dimensions depicted on each grid represent scaled measures
    of student motivation and ability, and each plotted number is a point representing an individual student.     Circles
    were drawn to indicate those students who were grouped together by the cluster analyses of students (the single
    cluster outlined by a dotted line represents a group with relatively weak cohesion).

    These figures illustrate some interesting similarities and differences among tutors with respect to how they
    grouped students as types.   All four math tutors [Fig. 1, 2, 3, & 5) possessed a "problem student model" for
    those who were both unmotivated and less competent.          No math student was perceived as having both high
   ability and low motivation. All math tutors also had a single, large "other student" category that subsumed

370
                          HIQh MotlvaUon

                      I.ow-                                                                                  Nega-Allact

 Figure 1:  How Female Math Tutor in Computer                 Figure 2: How Male Math Tutor in Computer
 Lab Setting Discriminated and Grouped Tutees                 Lab Setting Discriminated and Grouped Tutees

                          HIQhPalr
                         Engagement                                                                                                      HlghMotiv,,_

    0

0
                           Low Pair
                         Engagement                                                                                  1.ow-.11on

 Figure 3: How Male Math Tutor in Computer                    Figure 4: How Female Writing Tutor in Authentic
 Lab Setting Discriminated and Grouped Pairs                  Remedial Setting Discriminated and Grouped Tutees

                                                                                                                                                               371
                                                                         High--

                                                                        l.owM--

       Figure 5:  How Female Math Tutor in Authentic Remedial Setting Discriminated and Grouped Tutees

   several sub-groupings.   For tutors 2, 3, and 5,  "other students" were all motivated but were distinguished from
   one another roughly on the basis of competence.     Tutor  I differed from other math tutors in that a number of
   moderately   competent students were all perceived as being relatively less motivated.                For Tutor  I, this middle
   cluster was labeled "typical students."   The patterns for tutors 2, 3, and 5 suggest that a feasible strategy for
   designing intelligent computer-based instructional systems for mathematics would be to create a distinctive
   tutoring strategy assuming motivated students that could be modified on the basis of student competence.
   Another separate distinctive approach would be created for more difficult and unique students possessing both
   motivational and competence problems.     The pattern suggested by tutor                I also suggests the need for a distinctive
   "problem student" approach. How to deal with "other students" is not obvious, but one feasible design would
   involve  creating a "typical student"    tutoring strategy that                could be modified  on the basis of increases  in
   motivation and/or ability.

   Interestingly, the writing tutor [Fig. 4] differed from all math tutors by failing to identify any student as both
   unmotivated and incompetent, but by identifying numerous students as both competent and unmotivated.                        No
   math tutor viewed any competent student as unmotivated.                         Whether this deviation reflects a difference in
   domain, tutor perspective, or student samples poses an interesting question for further research.

  Summary and Conclusions

   Five experienced tutors representing several domains and settings all described and categorized their students
   with reference to the constructs, Leaming ability and motivation.                  Several other constructs were mentioned by
   tutors, but learning ability and motivation were dominant and universal and were primary discriminators for
   tutoring. However, there were between-tutor differences in how motivation and ability were defined.

   Tutors described various techniques and strategies for adapting their tutoring to students' motivation and ability
   level. Their reasoning and decision processes revealed between-tutor style differences that were unrelated to
   student population, content domain, and setting, supporting Lepper's idea that tutoring "style" is an important
   form of instructional variation.

   Comparisons   of  tutors with    respect to how   they clustered                students revealed  interesting similarities and
   differences. All math tutors, but not the writing tutor, possessed an implicit "problem student" category for
   those who were unmotivated and     not competent.   All math tutors also had a single large "other student"            model

372
that subsumed several sub-groupings defined largely by ability differences.                No math tutor identified any
student as both competent and unmotivated.        By contrast, the writing tutor [Fig. 4] tended to view most students
as competent, with the major discriminating factor being motivation.          For this tutor, "problem students" tended
to be perceived as capable but unmotivated.

In contrast to conversational analyses of adult human tutoring, results strongly suggest that student modeling by
human tutors involves consideration of motivational, in addition to cognitive, student states.               For three of five
tutors, motivational assessments were more important for tutoring than judgments about cognitive ability.

To the extent that the problem of intelligent tutoring is conceptualized as one of (a) observing evidence that can
be used to evaluate students in terms of constructs that are relevant to tutoring, and then (b) selecting tutoring
responses, styles, or strategies that are appropriately adaptive to those evaluations, this study offers several
interesting design suggestions for intelligent computer instruction.         For example, naturally-emerging student
groups suggest that systems might be programmed with distinctive tutoring styles for different types of students.

References

[Bloom, 1984).   Bloom, B. S. (1984).  The 2 sigma problem:   The search for methods of group instruction as effective as
one-to-one tutoring. Educational Researcher, 13(6), 4-16.

[Boose,  1985).  Boose, J. H. (1985). A knowledge acquisition program for expert systems based on personal construct
psychology.  International Journal of Man-Machine Studies, 23, 495-525.

[Cohen, Kulik, & Kulik, 1982].    Cohen, P.A., Kulik, J. A., & Kulik, C. C. (1982). Educational outcomes of tutoring:       A
meta-analysis of findings. American Educational Research Journal, 19, 237-248.

[Ericsson & Simon, 1984).  Ericsson, K. A., & Simon, H. A. (1984).    Protocol analysis:  Verbal reports as data.
Cambridge, MA:    MIT Press.

[Fox, 1993). Fox, B. A.  (l 993). The human tutorial dialogue project.   Hillsdale, NJ:  Erlbaum.

[Kelly, 1955].  Kelly, G. A. (1955).  The psychology of personal constructs: Vol I. A theory of personality.      New York:
Norton.

[Lepper & Chabay, 1988].   Lepper, M. R. & Chabay, R. W. (1988). Socializing the intelligent tutor:       Bringing empathy to
computer tutors. In H. Mandi and A. Lesgold (Eds.) Leaming issues for intelligent tutoring systems.        New York: Springer
Verlag.

[Lepper et al., 1993). Lepper, M. R., Woolverton, M., Mumme, D. L., & Gurtner, J. (l 993).   Motivational techniques o f
expert human tutors:   Lessons for the design of computer-based tutors. In S. P. Lajoie & S. J. Derry (Eds.), Computers as
cognitive tools (pp. 75- 106). Hillsdale, NJ:  Erlbaum.

[McArthur, Stasz, & Zmuidzinas, 1990].    McArthur, D., Stasz, C., & Zmuidzinas, M. (1990).  Tutoring techniques in
algebra.  Cognition and Instruction, 7(3), 197-244.

[Merrill, Reiser, Merrill, & Landes, 1995).   Merrill, D. C., Reiser, B. J., Merrill, S. K., & Landes, S. (1995). Tutoring:
Guided learning by doing.  Cognition and Instruction,   13, 1-372.

[Putnam, 1987).  Putnam, R. T.   (1987). Structuring and adjusting content for students: A study of live and simulation
tutoring of addition. American Educational Research Journal, 24, 13-48.

Acknowledgment

This work was supported by the Office of Naval Research Cognitive and Neural Science and Technology
Division, Contract N00014-93-0310, but the research reported is not necessarily endorsed by that organization.

                                                                                                                       373
