                                              Children Online:
                              Constructing Community Standards

                                                  Michele Evard
                                       Epistemology & Learning Group
                                               The MIT Media Lab
                                       Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA
                                              mevard@media.mit.edu

Introduction
 One  week   into her   design of  an  educational     video  game,   ten-year-old  Renee   asked   the   following
 question:
     How  do  you    make  words   appear     on the    screen   when   you reach    a certain     point   of
     the  screen     or   you  reach   a  shape   that     is on  the   screen?
 This  query  itself is unsurprising,     but the   fact that  this quiet  girl addressed    it to  the   combined
 populations  of  two   classrooms,   rather  than   to  a teacher  or one  of  her friends, is  unusual.    In the
 environment described in this paper, however, it was welcome and became a frequent occurrence.
 Seven  fifth-graders   answered   this question;    three  from  Renee's  class and   four  from  the  other.   Of
 these children,  four    were male    and    three  were   female;  three  were    African-American,     one  was
 Hispanic, and three were Caucasian.       Given that these two classes rarely had contact about academic
 matters, and that even among themselves, these boys and girls most often asked questions of friends
 of their own   gender,   these   responses   were    somewhat     surprising.   After   receiving   eight  helpful
 messages, Renee replied to her own question, saying:
     Stop  answering      this question.         #1,  I  have  too   many   answers,   and   #2,   I have
     solved   my  problem    and   am  using    something     else.    Thank-you     very   much.
 Two children replied to this message with additional information.
     Children can learn through both asking and answering authentic questions--questions which are
 personally important to them.       When asking a question, a child needs to articulate what he or she
 wants to learn or obtain.    If the response is not what was desired, the child has the opportunity to
 observe a different perspective on the question.       The child may also realize that a single statement of a
 question  may    provoke   different   reactions   in  different  people.   Similarly,   answering     a question
requires articulation of thoughts; in addition, it implies some interpretation of the question and what
 kind of answer was desired.        Although     these  might  not  be  conscious   processes   or ones   in which
 people  choose   to engage,   they   are possible   in  a question/ answer     scenario, particularly  when    the
 participants really want to communicate.
     To begin to study these issues, I provided a computer-based environment and activities in which
 children could communicate easily and feedback was valued.             The software I helped design and then
 used is called NewsMaker; it is a computer-based newsgroup environment similar to Usenet written
 by Mark Kortekaas [1994]. During my pilot project, I introduced NewsMaker to three classrooms of
fifth-grade and two of fourth-graders.
     The students were all given the ability to use NewsMaker to read, write, and modify articles, but
 were  not assigned    to use  it for any  particular    purpose.   Although    children  posted   many   kinds  of
 messages to newsgroups they created, most did not use the system to hold conversations.                  The ones
 who  did  were   those  discussing   particular  projects.   In particular, one group of children who were
creating educational video games had access to NewsMaker whenever they were at the computers,
and used it extensively.
     In this paper, I describe the game designers' development of community standards for messages.
They discussed the appropriateness of certain types of questions, the quality of the messages, and
rude behavior online. Even this preliminary study demonstrates what can happen when children are
 given the ability to exchange online messages about topics which are important to them.

374
A Context for Communication
My primary focus is how the children learn through communication with other people irrespective of
the particular   topic, but  the    nature of the  topic, as well  as  the environment   of  the participants,
strongly impact the development of communication.           In this case, the fifth-grade students' discussions
were about one particular project on educational video game design in a constructionist environment.
    Constructionism is based on the idea that people learn particularly well when making things
especially things which can be shared with others.         A strong emphasis is placed on created objects
being external   to their creator,   since  things  "in the  world"  can   be "shown,   discussed, examined,
probed, and admired" [Papert 1993].         Sharing a creation can result not only in its refinement, but also
in the learner obtaining a deeper understanding of other people's perspectives on the object and o n
the ideas to which i t i s related.
    Yasmin   Kafai  [1995]  developed      an environment    in which,  over  the course  of several months,
children design and implement educational video games for younger students.              During the project,
each child maintains a private notebook of ideas and plans, but these are not generally shared.          The
designers do discuss their projects with the others in their class, and also have the younger children
test their games and give them feedback.        These demonstrations, and the discussions which surround
them, are critical to the process of creating objects for others; they provide the designers with new
perspectives on their games.
    These discussions have generally been ephemeral; the children rarely have even taken notes on
what  their classmates   or  play-,testers  said.   Although   the verbal  articulation of ideas  about their
projects is an important step, it is important to think not only about what is said, but how it is said.
When reading the text displayed after a game player did something wrong, many of the designers
recognized the effects of the words they had chosen.         Their verbal questions or explanations, on the
other hand, have not been recorded in any way that would allow them to examine their own words.
    During   this pilot  project,    the  game   designers   were  given   unlimited access  to  NewsMaker
whenever they were at the computers.        Children from another fifth-grade class acted as consultants to
the designers, answering online questions.       These consultants had less frequent access to NewsMaker;
generally they could use it during the last 10 minutes of their daily computer period.
    The addition of a public communication space to the Game Design Project provided designers
with the ability to not only share their questions and ideas with more students, but to reflect on their
own words.

Appropriateness of Questions
Two types of questions were considered inappropriate by many of the students of this community:
those which the questioner could or "should" have looked up without help, and those for which the
NewsMaker    technology     was     not suited.  These  limits  to the children's  communication    were  not
formally dictated by any classroom rules, but were informally discussed (both in person and online)
and agreed upon by the students.
    The first in-class discussion of questions was the result of the following message by a designer
named Jorge:
    Subject:   How      many mammals       live  in the   ocean?
    --Jorge   X
A few minutes after this message appeared, a designer named Emilie came up to me and asked "how
many mammals are there in the ocean?"            When I asked her if she meant how many kinds or how
many of each kind, she did not seem to know.            We talked about it for a while, then she went and
looked up some things in one of the reference books.            She spent at least five minutes of the forty
minutes of computer time trying to answer this question, and finally returned to her computer to
send this reply:
    I DON"T   KNOW   THE   ANSWER       BUT  THERE  ARE   20 SPEICIES    OF   WHALES+DOLPHINS
    EMILIE
Another designer, Jaques, also spent some of his time searching for the answer to Jorge's question.
He found a poster in the classroom that listed several types of seals, whales, and dolphins, and typed

                                                                                                         375
 them all into NewsMaker.       He was quite persistent, and went back the next day to finish typing in  the
 list.   Jaques and Emilie could have simply spoken to Jorge, giving him the information they had
 found, but both of them chose to share what they learned with the entire community.
       These two students did not seem to take exception to Jorge's question, but others certainly did.
 One of the consultants, Isabel, posted this response:
       Dear   Jorge,
            Why   don"t  you  go  and  see  if you   can look   up your   question    somewhere   in  a
       book   or  ask  someone   else  okay.
 It is unclear if Isabel thought Jorge should not have asked on NewsMaker since she added that he
 could ask "someone else," but her tone seemed to imply that he should have known to try looking it
 up in a book. Most of those who considered the question inappropriate were students in the design
 class, who stated in a classroom discussion that ocean questions were things that they should search
 out answers to on their own.     The designers' teacher posted two    messages during the entire project;
 one was her response to Jorge, in which she said he was responsible for doing his own research.
       The distinction between the science content of their games and the questions related to Logo
 programming was the first line drawn by the students, many of whom mentioned the question before
 the teacher posted her message.
       Several students went beyond the ocean/programming distinction to say that there were some
 kinds of questions, such as those about the appearance of an image, for which the NewsMaker
 environment was not conducive.       This topic went beyond mention in one classroom discussion to      be
 incorporated    in  the children's  discussions, and  also in  later posts.  In his  post  entitled  "False
 Answers" as well as in conversation, Albert stated that questions such as those about graphic design
 "don't make sense" in plain text.
       There  were   some  answers   which  children chose  not to deliver   online, particularly when   the
 questioner    was  asking  for examples   of programming    code.    Some students included short code
 segments in their messages to demonstrate certain techniques; since there was no connection between
 Logo and NewsMaker, however, the sender needed to retype the code.               To avoid this problem,
 several of the students answered a question with a proposed meeting time, generally at lunch or on
 the bus.     For example, a consultant named Cheryl replied to one of Emilie's questions with this
 message:
       I  can't  write   out  the  whole   procedure   right  here  because    it's   too  long,  but
       maybe   I can  print   it  out  and  give  it to  you  on  the  bus.
 It was important for the children to be able to recognize the limits of the technology that they were
 using, and to work out other means of communication when necessary.
       Through exchanges such as these, the quality of questions became part of the discourse in the
 game designers' classroom.      Several times a student mentioned to me or to another student that some
 of the answers received were not helpful because the question was not worded clearly, or because the
 question simply was not appropriate in the NewsMaker context. These children began to be aware of
 other    students'  perspective  of their  messages,  and  recognized   that they   were   responsible  for
 communicating clearly to their audience. They also developed more of a sense of what was helpful to
 ask about in the given context.

 Clarity of Questions and Answers

 After    the children  had  some  experience  online, more  of  their messages   included   some   kind of
 evaluative content.    Many times students used phrases such as "it depends" or "I     don't understand"
 and then explained the ambiguity they saw.        For example, a consultant named Rachel replied to
 Jorge's mammal question by saying:
       Dear   Jorge,
       It depends    on  if you  mean   how  many  kinds  or  how  many   of each    kind.
 Sometimes misunderstandings or ambiguities were identified when the initial message (generally a
 question) was read, and then resulted in a conversation between two or more students.        For example,
 when Albert wrote:
       Does   anyone  know  how  to  reverse   a  shape:  make  the   black  part    white,  and  the
       white   part  black?

376
Lisa replied simply   "no," but Renee realized that there was an ambiguity in the question.    Instead of
answering one of the possible questions Albert meant,she responded by asking for clarification.
    What    do  you  mean?    Do  you  mean  on  the shapes    page?    Or on  the  screen?
After Albert replied  " The  shapes   page", Renee suggested a solution:
    Can't    you  just  click    space on   all  of the blocks    in  the  square   and  then  make
    the   picture by    clicking    again?    Then   the black   or  background    would  be  white
    and   the   picture   or  the  white  would be black?
    Renee
After this exchange, Renee and Albert talked in person about the problem.
    There were also ti.mes when students who responded would not realize they had· misunderstood
the question they were answering, but the questioner would see that the answer was not what had
been desired. In several of these cases,the designer who had asked the question stated that he or she
had not explained the situation in enough detail. Many of the students who asked questions clarified
their own words after reading the responses. For example,when Renee asked:
    How   do   you make   one  shape  fallow   another?     One  shape  moving by    the  arrow  or
    letter     keys,  the  other  moving by    computer,    following   the   other  shape?
Tina,who was new to programming,tried to help by replying:
    WELL   YOU   COULD  USE   YOUR FOUR   TURTLES,THEN     SEE WHAT   HAPPENS.
Renee did not seem to take offense at this vague response,but replied by restating her question more
clearly:
    I  could    use  four  turtles,   but   that  doesn't   answer   my question.     How  do  you
    make   a   shape  follow   another  shape   that  a  person   is  controlling?     How  do  you
    make   the   shape  that   is  following,    follow by    computer?
    Renee
During face-to-face conversations it seems very common for children of this age to assume that they
are not at fault if someone does not understand their words.    There is no need for them to clarify what
they said; after all,they already explained it once,so the other person must just be stupid.   Perhaps in
their minds they explained it; and because they cannot review their verbal communication, all they
have to go on is what they think they said.
    In this on-line  environment, however, children     could  go  back and  see what  they  had actually
said. This happened many      ti.mes during the project, and several children were  surprised to see what
they had really typed.   Children said  "oh, my question wasn't clear!" to others or just to themselves;
another comment they made was "I should've explained that I'd already tried that!"
    These exchanges demonstrate how the children learned to clarify their written messages for each
other, as well as to identify misunderstandings.    The quality of original questions also increased with
the children's experience.· Students who did not participate in evaluative or clarifying remarks did
not disparage these exchanges; rather, a community sense that such interactions were helpful began
to develop.

Rudeness Online: Duh!

Most  of the ti.me, the children  were not  rude in  their messages; although  there  were some  striking
exceptions, none of the messages approached the nastiness which some people might expect.             One
exception was this reply,written by Carrie:
    RENEE    I DON'T MEAN    TO BE   RUDE BUT   YOU'RE   ACTING   DUMB  AND  YOU'RE   NOT
    THINKING!!!!!!!!        GO TO   YOU'RE  TIME  LINE   AND   COPY  YOU'RE  PRECEDURE    THAT  DOES
    THAT!!!!!!!!!
    UN   NAMED
After repeatedly trying to delete her message, Carrie asked me for help, and said that the message
was too rude. This was the strongest message any of the girls wrote; there were a few blunt ones,such
as Emilie's  " Renee,   just   go  to  your   timeline!", but   these  were  not considered  rude  by the
children.
    Messages with    "Duh!"   in them, however, were   labeled  rude by  many  children.  For example, a
consultant named Ken sent this message in response to a question Carrie had posted about shapes:
    >  How   do you   make  a  round  circle   using  two   shapes?
    Make   a   semi-circle    on one  shape   and another     semi-circle   on  the  other.
    DUH!!!

                                                                                                      377
 Don, another consultant, chimed in "Yeah!"        Carrie replied by writing the only message from a girl
 that said "duh!" to someone:
     Don   I tried     that and   it  made  a skinny     oval   DUH!!!
     CARRIE
 Several  designers    considered  these  boys' messages    rude; no   one  said  that they  thought  Carrie's
 response was also rude.      Although four of the boys sent these kinds of messages very early in the
 project, many of the others were generally helpful and non-offensive.
     Emilie  dealt   with  the "duh"   responses   to her  questions   in a  different way.   She posted  this
 question initially:
     DOES    ANYBODY KNOW     HOW  TO MAKE   DIFFERENT    MUSIC   THAN    TONE  C ,TONE   B, ...
     EMILIE    B.
 Two of the male designers answered her the same day. Mark stated:
     Nooooooooooooooo!         Duh
 And Stephan wrote:
     Nope!!    You   can't.   DDDDUUUUUUUH!!!!!!!
 Emilie did not respond to their messages directly, but immediately put up a second question on the
 same topic:
     (STEPHAN     + MARK    DON'T ANSWER    THIS)
     DOES   ANYBODY    KNOW   HOW  TO MAKE MUSIC      ON THE  COMPUTER????????????
 Neither Stephan nor Mark responded to this query, although other children did assist Emilie.
     One of the girls, a designer, felt strongly enough about rude messages that she decided to post the
 following message:
     Subject:     Rude!
     I think    that   some   of the   answers    that  are  given     are  rude  and   impolite.
     NewsMaker      is not  a  place   to  talk   about  what  happens     during  the   day  ,  it is  a
     place   to   ask  guestions     and get  answers.    Some   of the    answer  that   we  are
     geting    are   rude  and   the people   that    write  them   should   stop.   People   should
     also   stop    answering    question   impolitely.     I think    that  if  someone   asks   a
     question     people    should   not answer   the  question     if  they  have   nothing   to  say.
     They   should     also not  end   the question writing       something     like   "Duh!"  they
     should    answer   it  with   something    like "And    that   is  how  you  do   it.".  So  please
     stop   thank    you.
                                                                    Whitney
 Three girls responded to this post, agreeing with Whitney.       The only boy to reply was Ken, who only
 typed lines of random characters.     He had posted various derogatory comments in other groups, as
 well as nonsense such as this, but none of his remarks were ever answered, and those to whom they
 were addressed continued to participate.       Although Ken was certainly not supportive of Whitney's
 message, he did not flame any of the girls involved, nor did he ever write "duh!" again.         fu addition,
 none  of the  children  ever  wrote  "duh"  or anything   similar  in their messages   after Whitney's   post
 [Evard 1996b].
     None   of the  teachers involved   with  the project gave  guidelines   about rudeness,   or talked with
 students about writing "duh!" to each other.     The students came to their own conclusions about such
 messages, and used their own means to make it clear that rudeness was inappropriate.

Conclusion

Many issues were raised during this pilot study and need to be considered in more depth.               fu this
paper   I have   introduced    the children's development     of  community     and  personal   standards  for
acceptable topics, responses to poor quality messages, and appropriate behavior.             Further study  is
required to treat the subject in appropriate depth, including a comparison with other studies of in
classroom development of community standards, but even a preliminary report has demonstrated
that these children began to develop standards over time.       They took increased responsibility for their
words, learned through and about their communication.
     At the heart of constructionism is the theory that learning involves creating personal knowledge
structures and that this is facilitated during construction of a public entity.    The process is active, and
self-directed.  While engaged with an object of his or her own creation, a child may seek out new

378
 information    "for a recognizable   personal  purpose"    [Papert  1980].   Sharing the   o bject with others
 allows the child to talk about the design process in a very concrete manner.
    The context of the children's communication was certainly critical to the success of the project.
 The fact that the game designers were each creating something which was personally important and
 which   they  would   be able to  share  with  others in   the school meant   that  each one  had   a personal
 interest in seeing their communication succeed.
    During     the course  of  this  preliminary   project, the  children's use   of the  online environment
 changed [Evard 1996a], and they demonstrated their interest in successful communication in many
 ways. Certainly e ach child had a reason to see his or her own messages understandable, and through
 clarifications and  rewriting  most   were  able  to achieve   some   coherence.   Many children displayed
 concerns beyond the individual level; not only did they try to answer questions for their peers, but
 they requested clarification when it was required.     The messages and discussions about rudeness also
 demonstrate    some   concerns    about their  community     as  a whole   rather  than  only  themselves      as
 individuals.
    Posting messages in this shared environment helped the students to think about the effectiveness
 of their choices when composing questions, furthering their learning about their own communication.
 Their experiences demonstrate that without adult intervention or pre-determined rules for topics or
 behavior, children can create online community standards of their own and abide by them.

 References

 [Evard 1996a]  Evard, M. (1996a).   A Community of Designers:    Learning through Exchanging Questions and
 Answers.   In Y. Kafai and M. Resnick (Eds.), Constructionism in Practice: Rethinking the Roles of Technology in
Learning. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
 [Evard 1996b]  Evard, M. (1996b).  "So Please Stop, Thank You": Girls Online. In L. Cherney & E. Weise (Eds.),
 Wired Women: Gender and New Realities in Cyberspace. Seattle: The Seal Press.
 [Kafai 1995] Kafai, Y. B. (1995). Minds in Play: Computer Game Design as a Context for Children's Leaming.
 Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
 [Kafai  & Harel  1991] Kafai, Y.  B. &  Harel, I. (1991).  Children's  Leaming   Through   Consulting:  When
 Mathematical Ideas, Software Design, and Playful Discourse are Intertwined.      In I. Harel & S. Papert (Eds.),
Constructionism. Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
 [Kortekaas 1994]  Kortekaas, M. (1994). News and Education: Creation of "The Classroom Chronicle." Master's
 thesis, MIT Media Arts and Sciences Program, Cambridge, MA.
 [Papert 1993] Papert, S. (1993). The Children's Machine. New York: Basic Books.
 [Papert 1991]  Papert, S. (1991). Situating Constructionism.   In I. Harel & S. Papert (Eds.), Constructionism.
Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
 [Papert 1980] Papert, S. (1980). Mindstorms. New York: Basic Books.

 Acknowledgments

 I would like to thank the children and their teachers for participating in this project and discussing their
· perspectives with me.   Mark Kortekaas   not  only  encouraged  this use of his software, but allowed  me     to
 participate in its design and supported my work with it; his aid was invaluable to me.   Yasmin Kafai was my
 mentor during my first two years at Project Headlight; without her support, this work would not have been
 possible. I would also like to thank Seymour Papert and Walter Bender for their support during this project and
 others.   The preparation of this paper was supported by the MIT Media Laboratory's News in the Future
 Consortium, as well as by the National Science Foundation (Grant# MDR 8751190), the LEGO Group, and the
 IBM Corporation. The ideas expressed here do not necessarily reflect the positions of the supporting agencies.

                                                                                                           379
