                                              A Poster Report
                                                   Presented at the
                         Second International Conference on the Learning Sciences

             Teaching Biology to Prospective Elementary School Teachers

       So as to Promote Transition from                       Receiver to Giver of Information

                                                   Kathleen Fisher
                    Professor of Biology, Center for Research in Mathematics and Science Education
                                    San Diego State University, San Diego, Ca. 92120
                                              kfisher@sciences.sdsu.edu

                                                          Stacy Gomes
                                 Graduate Student, Department of Educational Technology
                                    San Diego State University, San Diego, Ca. 92120
                                               sgomes@mail.sdsu.edu

    Introduction
        Advanced knowledge acquisition differs in important ways from introductory learning. Advanced
    knowledge acquisition refers to learning a content area beyond the introductory stage but before extensive
    experience and practice (Spiro, Coulson, Feltovich, and Anderson, 1988; Spiro & Nix, 1990; Jacobson &
    Spiro, 1995). At this stage, knowledge must be reasonably correct and active rather than inert. The goals of
    learning shift from knowledge    reproduction to      knowledge use. The  theory  was initially developed to
    describe the   instructional needs of advanced medical     students.  It  applies equally well  to advanced
    undergraduates who are nearing completion of their professional program.      In both cases, students need to
    attain a deeper understanding of content material, a sense of mastery over it, an ability to reason with it, and
    the fluency to apply it flexibly in diverse contents.
        Prospective elementary school teachers (liberal Studies majors) in their senior year of college are
    advanced learners.  Assuming that they gain admittance to a credential program, they are just one year
    away from being certified as practicing teachers.       These   students have spent their lives  assimilating
    information, often quite passively, yet they are about to be thrust into a situation where they are expected to
    be the expert, the giver of information, the organizer of ideas, the interpreter of events, the guide to
    understanding. As a group they seem to be located near the passive end of the passive - active learning
    continuum and to be less prepared than most students to assume the mantle of authority.

386
      In spite of the fact that these college seniors have spent 18-25 years engaged in formal learning, they
have rarely had any formal instruction in how to learn.        They have also rarely been encouraged to examine
or reflect on what they are doing or how they are doing it. Promoting development of these skills can help
learners progress along the transition from receiver to giver of information, from passive to active user of
information. Prompting active learning habits and cognitive flexibility in these students is particularly
challenging and requires multiple instructional strategies as described below.           The  biology   course we
describe   aims to  help  students   develop    confidence   in their knowledge,    become   skilled at  applying
knowledge in diverse ways, and become fluent in constructing their own representations of ideas.         In short,
the course  aims   to promote    cognitive  flexibility, independent  learning,  and personal  responsibility  for
learning in students who initially tend to resist and be confused by such efforts.

Strategies for Stimulating Cognitive Flexibility
      Our focus is helping to create a new cadre of teachers.      Below we describe the primary instructional
strategies by which we aim to achieve our goals.

I. Stimulate curiosity and elicit prior knowledge.

Prospective elementary students are often fearful of and hostile toward science.        We attempt to draw them
in, make science interesting to them, and arouse their curiosity by using everyday phenomena to illustrate
ideas and   serve  as  bases  for   discussion.    Students  perform   carefully   selected experiments  and   are
encouraged to reason about outcomes, especially those that fail to match their expectations.         In this way,
students gradually    assume  ownership     of ideas   being discussed, while   at  the same  time  the instructor
becomes informed about both. prevalent misunderstandings and useful prior knowledge upon which new
learning can build.

2. Prompt students to build runnable mental models through prediction & interpretation.

Making a prediction requires running a mental simulation of an experiment or building a mental model
(situation model)   of some   phenomenon       (Kintsch,  1984;  Scardemalia,   Bereiter,   McLean,  Swallow,  &
Woodruff, 1989; Brown, Collins and Duguid,         1989). If the outcome is contrary to prediction, there is need
for reworking the mental model, making revisions and running it again.              Predicting outcomes induces
learners to connect ideas together into functional schema.        Students also become more committed to the
experiment  and   more   interested  in its outcome.     Performing the experiment and observing results then
becomes, in part, an exercise in debugging their mental model.         When outcomes differ from predictions,
students tend   to assume    they did   something    wrong   (they maintain   their mental   model  and  attribute
unexpected  results   to failure  to conduct    the experiment    correctly).  To   overcome  this  phenomenon,
comparison of results with predictions and interpretation of outcomes involves a) informal discussions
among peers, b) input from instructor, c) examination of outcomes obtained by each group, and d) class
discussions. The multiple data sources and associated discussions provide impetus and support for students
to revise their mental models.

3. Promote conceptual change.

Conceptual change and learning increases as the quality of cognitive engagement increases (Hannafm &
Hooper,  1993). Cognitive    engagement     refers  to "...the intentional and  purposeful  processing  of lesson
content" (Hannafin,   1989). Engagement requires strategies that promote manipulation of information rather
than memorization.     Engagement       can be  induced   through  cognitive  dissonance,   posing argumentative
questions, requiring the development of a supportable position, and asking learners to generate predictions.
Three key strategies for promoting conceptual change are described below.

3a) Beliefcompetition.

                                                                                                                   387
   Some demonstration   tasks and activities are designed to disconfirm common alternative conceptions.     The
   goal is to produce cognitive disequilibrium and challenge students in such a way that they replace their non-
   scientific ideas with scientific ones.  For example, a prevalent alternative conception is that, when water
   boils, the bubbles are composed of hydrogen and oxygen.      One disconfirming activity is to collect and
   condense the water vapor, obtaining nearly the same volume of water as was lost during boiling.      This can
   contribute to but is often not sufficient to achieve the desired belief substitution - multiple activities are
   required.

   3b) Knowkdge ehiboration.
   Other demonstration tasks and activities are designed to extend scientifically acceptable ideas held by
   students.  For example, raisins are added to carrots and celery in a diffusion lab. The veggies become crisp
   in fresh water and limp in saturated salt water, while raisins absorb water in both situations.    In order to
   explain these contrasting observations, students must add a level of sophistication to their mental models of
   diffusion.

   3c) Ill-structured cases.
   At each class session, several students give reports about biology topics in the news.    This activity serves
   several purposes.  First,  students are  able to apply what  they are   learning     in the classroom to the
   comprehension of newspaper and magazine articles and television shows.   Second, they become aware that
   the media provide a steady stream ofbiology information for lifelong learning. Third, they are often able to
   use the news stories to enlarge their understanding of topics being studied in class.   Fourth, these specific,
   student-chosen cases enlarge our appreciation of the various contexts in which biology ideas are found.
   Fifth, they help students build connections between concepts and specific instantiations of those concepts
   (cases), thereby integrating both into overlapping and interconnected schema. Sixth, as each student stands
   before the class and presents material that they alone have interpreted, synthesized and organized, they
   move along the continuum from receiver to giver of information.

   4. Promote students' active learning.
   As von Glasersfeld (1993) noted, hands-on   activities do not in themselves promote meaningful knowledge
   construction.   Such activities must     be combined   with significant opportunities       for interpretation,
   knowledge-building, reflection, and revision.  We use a computer-based tool, SemNet®, to help students
   acquire the skills of meaningful knowledge construction (Fisher, 1991).   With SemNet, students create
   semantic networks of their evolving biology knowledge (Figure 1. SemNet®).           A semantic network is a
   model of how we organize denotative factual information in long term memory (Quillian, 1%7, 1968).
   Students' net-building activities both promote and reflect their internal knowledge constructions.       The
   emphasis is on building a robust and well-organized set of connections among important ideas.

   5. Provide scaffolding and support for student knowledge construction.
   SemNet    prompts students to connect their ideas together while mirroring and reinforcing those connections
   (Figure 1.). SemNet serves as an extender of short term memory, allowing students to review, reflect upon
   and revise their thinking. In addition, when students work in small groups to construct a semantic network,
   the collaboration stimulates dialogue and meaning negotiation. When students' review other students' nets,
   they gain insights into alternative ways of thinking about and representing the same idea.

388
          Figure 1.       Graphic display of a concept (meiosis) in SemNet®.

6) Diagnose & remediate underdeveloped cognitive skills.

With SemNet we can see how students are thinking at a level of detail heretofore impossible.  Some of the
most frequent errors we observe are quite surprising, such as the inability to distinguish and correctly use
simple relation rays like 'has part I is a part of. Since such relations are used again and again, it must be
difficult to learn biology when these relation meanings are misunderstood. Fortunately once identified, this
problem seems to be readily remediated on a relation by relation basis. Less surprising and also less easily
corrected errors include the inability to identify discriminating features of an idea, failure to organize
knowledge  systematically   and   hierarchically,   and a  tendency toward   paucity  of description and
interconnection of ideas.

7. Prompt students to identify central ideas.

Students are expected to identify the main ideas and give robust descriptions of them in their semantic
networks. The Knowledge      Core and  list of Concepts    by Embeddedness    display options in SemNet
summarize what students have actually done and allows them to quickly see if they have succeeded in
developing what they perceive to be the key ideas. Deep understanding of ideas involves having a large and
well integrated set of connections with relevant images and related concepts. Understanding something
means knowing the relationship to higher more inclusive ideas (Resnick, 1983).

8. Prompt students to integrate ideas.

We have developed strategies for prompting students to create functional knowledge organizations rather
than inert knowledge structures.  For example, in describing the circulatory system, students describe the
flow of blood through the four chambers of the heart    and the major vessels and organs of the body using
the relation: 'receives blood from I passes blood to .' It is possible, then, to follow the course of a single
platelet or red blood cell on its passage around the body by double-clicking through the net. Creating such a
pathway leads to a fairly deep understanding of a system.

                                                                                                               389
    9. Avoid oversimplification and over-regulation.

    Biology   is hmherently a messy and complex field of study.      An insh¤ctor walks a fme line in making that
    complexity apparent while not letting it become overwhelming. Our use of multiple familiar phenomena to
    illustrate each main idea, our analyses of ideas in multiple ways, our willingness to accept multiple correct
    representations of ideas, and our deliberate selection of labs that often give unexpected results      are some of
    the means we use to avoid oversimplification and over-regulation.

    10. Prompt students to construct multiple representations.

    Sehwet hxors students ideas and reflects their knowledge back to them in multiple ways including:
    graphic representations of each concept; temporal flows; lists of concepts, relations, and instances by
    various criteria; knowledge core; and hierarchies.     These multiple represenhtions of a single knowledge
    sh¥th¨e enhance students' appreciation of the robush ess of their knowledge. As peers review one another's
    nets they see additional and often sh£ngly different representations of the same ideas.

    11. Evaluation.

    Learners   periodically  review  their  hrs' work     and  seem      to gain  important insights from   doing    so.
    Evaluation, involving the comparison, critique or assessment of a body of work, is the said to be the highest
    of the cognitive skills (Blhm, 1953).      As learners engage in evaluation they acqh§e a new sense of
    mathªty and a new perspective on their efforts

    Conclusion

           Proshtive   elementary     schoh    teachers  have      spent years   engaged in   formal    leahing, often
    asshlilating information passively.     As they approach passage into the teaching profession, more active
   knowledge organih®tion is needed.        We describe a variety of strategies to promote and support this
    h¢nsition. Ideally, we should be building comprehension and reasoning skills from the beginning of a
    child's education and not relying on simplistic, non-productive exposure to and memohation of content in
    the early years (e.g., Driver & Erickson,  1983; von Glasersfeld,       1993; Tobin, 1993).  If this had been the
    case, efforts such as oh©s would not be needed.

                                                          References

    Bloom, B. J. (1956). Taxonomy.ofeducational objectives : the classification ofeducational goals. D. McKay Co., Inc.
      New Yoh.
    Brown, J.  S., Collins, A., and Duguid, P. (1989).   Situation Cognition  and the Culture of Learning.  Educational
      Researcher, 18, 1, 32-42.
    Dhver, R & Erickson, G.      (1983).   Theories-in-Action: Some   theohtical  and empirical  issues in the study of
      conceptual frameworhq in science.    Studies in Science Education, JO, 37-60.
    Fisher, K  M.  (1991).  SemNet A thl for hnal hoowledge construction.         In Jonassen, D. & Kommers, P., Eds.,
      Mindtools, Shnger-Verlag.
    Hannafin, M. J. (1989). Intehction sh¡tegies and emerging instructional design: Psychological pehhtives. Canadian
      Jouh of Educatioh} Communication, 18, 167-179.
    Hannafin, M. J. & Hooper, S. R (1993). Learning Principles. In Insthctional Meshge Design: Principles fhm he
      Behavioh and Cognitive Sciences. Ed: M. Heming and W. H. Levie. Educahonal Technology Publications Inc.
      Englewh Cliffs, New Jersey.
   Jacobson, M. J. & Spiro, R J.    (1995). Hypertext learning environments, cognitive flehbility, and the thsfer of
      complex hpowledge:     An empirical investigation. Manuscript accepted by he Journal ofEducational Computing
       Research.
    Kintsch, W. (1984). Methh and tactics in cognitive science. Edited by Walter Kintsch, James R Miller, Peter G.
      Polson. Ehbaum Asshates, Hillsdale, NJ.

390
Quillian, M. R.  (1967).  Word  concepts:   A theory and  simulation of some  basic semantic capabilities.   Behavioral
   Sciences, 12, 410-430.
Quillian, M. R. (1968).  Semantic meaning.    In M. Minsky (Ed.), Semantic information processing.    Cambridge, MA:
   MIT Press.
Resnick, L. B.. (1983). Mathematics and science learning: A new conception. Science, 220, 477-478.
Scardemalia, M., Bereiter, C., McLean, R. S., Swallow, J., & Woodruff, E      (1989). Computer supported intentional
   learning environments. Journal of Educational Computing Research, 5 (1), 51-66.
Spiro, R. J., Coulson, R. L., Feltovich, P. J. & Anderson, D. K      (1988).   Cognitive flexibility theory: Advanced
   knowledge acquisition in ill-structured   domains. In Tenth Annual Conference of   the Cognitive Science Society, pp
   375-383. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Spiro, R. J. &  Nix, D. (Eds.) (1990).  Cognition , Education, & Multimedia: Exploring Ideas in High Technology.
   Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Publishers.     Hillside New Jersey.
Tobin, K, Ed.   (1993). The practice of constructivism in science education. Washington, D. C.: AAAS Press.
von Glasersfeld, E (1993).  Questions and answers about radical constructivism.     In Tobin, K., Ed, The practice of
    constructivism   in science education. Washington, D. C.: AAAS Press.

                                                                                                                   391
