                  Learning English via Interactive Mathematics:
   Using a Multimedia Pre-calculus Program to Acquire Language Skills

                                              Bernard Gifford
                                              Mary Williamson
                                Education in Math, Science and Technology
                                    The Graduate School of Education
                                           University of California
                                              4533 Tolman Hall
                                             Berkeley CA 94720
                           gifford@academic.com, maryw@cogsci.berkeley.edu

                                     Patricia Constantakis-Vaides
                                              Academic Systems
                                     444 Castro Street, Suite 1200
                                           Mountain View CA 94041
                                           pconstan@academic.com

1.   Introduction

     A surprising and unanticipated use of a computer-based learning environment for pre-calculus was its
use by students who were already proficient in calculus but who were native speakers of Russian.       When
asked why they were enrolled in the course, the students told us that they were using the program to
improve their English skills.   What was it about the program that allowed it to be used this way?       We
believe that the answer lies in the fact that the program relies heavily on spoken language and all speakers
are native-speakers of English. For example, all text that appears on the screens is read aloud; video clips
of "peers" are provided to motivate and direct the pre-calculus student Both these elements of the program
were listened to repeatedly by the Russian students.  This paper takes a look at the pre-calculus program
and examines what it is about the spoken English in the program that affords practice in speaking.

     We can begin our investigation by drawing on insights from ethnomethodology.          Ethnomethodology
has described the discourse practices of speakers as they participate in a conversation or other speech event
Particular speech events have distinct and recognizable frames, or ground rules, and draw on distinctive
discourse conventions.    The   non-native  speakers of English were    using the     pre-calculus program to
participate in and practice speech events.

     Further analysis of this phenomenon can contribute to research into and development of cost-effective
computer-based learning environments which can teach content and support language learning at the same
time.    Further, the   development  of    similar learning environments   can      have social and  political
consequences.  For example,     non-native students who have poor language skills may drain educational
resources in remedial classes and still lag behind because of their lack of skills.

2.   Interactive Mathematics: Instructional environment for pre-calculus
2.1.  The instructional environment
     The  instructional environment  Interactive    Mathematics was     developed     by  Academic   Systems
Corporation as part of the development of modules for The Mediated Learning System.          At the time the
native-Russian speakers were discovered to be using the pre-calculus program, it had been used by about 300
students over a period of two years under the auspices of the University Consortium for Technology
Mediated Instruction and Learning, a consortium that includes the State University of New York, the
California State University and the City University of New York.

392
     The Mediaspej Leaming System approach to on-line instruction interleaves three factors in creating
instructional  environments:     the instructor (and   teaching assistants), the  textbook   and  the interactive
multimedia     courseware.    The  Mediated   Learning  System      approach reflects the   restructuring  of the
traditional instructional environment, in a manner designed to enable the learner to do the following:
          i)  navigate through topics and lessons over a number of distinct insspeqctional pathways, at his or
              her own pace, while spending as much time as is required working on any given topic, exercise,
              or problem, until the appropriate level of mastery has been achieved;
          ii) receive performance feedback when it is most useful, new instruction when it is required, and
              extra assistance when it is needed and practical;
          iii) receive individual achievement and progress reports on a timely basis, sufficiently despehled and
              directive that the student becomes more adept at monitoring and regulating his or her ospe
              learning progress;
          iv) receive support from faculty or teaching assistants that is informed by detailed assessments of
              the individual   student's strengths and weaknesses,   as  analyzed and  reported   by  a specially
              designed learning management sysspel; and
          v)  receive   more one-on-one  and small grospew tutoring from faculty and  teaching  assistants speon is
              feasible  in the learning   environment  dominated    by the   lecture-presentational  approach    to
              instruction.

     The pre-calculus program itself is a multimedia program composed of interactive modules.           There are
forty lessons, twenty-four for Algebra I and sixteen for Algebra II.         The program is introduced by a
module called The Tospex, in which students are introduced to the format for the programs and in which they
meet their "guide" and "peers."    The Tour is the focus of most of the discussion below.

2.2.  Use of the instructional environment by non-native speakers of English

     The City University of New York (CUNY) made the Interactive Maspenematics program               available to
students who enrolled in their remedial pre-calculus course dspezng the 1993-94 and 1994-95 academic years
in a lab component of the cospe|e.    (An updated version continues to be in use.)     Its use by students was
monitored by CUNY faculty and researchers from Academic System during periodic visits.              The research
team informally interviewed students about their use of the program and observed students as they used the
program.      Additionally, they had available the data from the students' on-line pre-test of their calculus
skills.   From  these   sources, the researchers   discovered that  Russian-speaking   students,  mostly   recent
immigrants,    were enrolling in the pre-calculus course even though they already had a solid background in
calculus.     The students explained their actions by saying that they enrolled in the course to practice their
English.     It appeared that there was an additional and unanticipated benefit might be inherent in the
Mediated Leaming System.          These Russian students could navigate through the pre-calculus learning
environment, where they knew the content but not necessarily the English with which it was presenspek, and
listen to naspepve speakers of English in different contexts using different speech styles.

     The multimedia pre-calculus program made much more English available to these students than would
have  been    available in a traditional pre-calculus lecspet class  (which  they would     not have enrolled    in
anyway).     Perhaps this was a use which could be extended to other modules of the Mediated Learning
System and to other instructional environments as well?

3.   An    analysis     of the   use  of the    multimedia      pre-calculus      learning      environment:
Insights from ethnomethodology

3.1.  Analysis I: Speech events and frame analysis

     Erving Goffman has described how individuals employ frameworks or "schemata" of inspemrespeion to
recognize an event and make it meaningful [Goffman 1974].         These frameworks will vary from culspeu to
cultspey. Fspe}, he points ouspef a cultural native is most likely to be able to unerringly use frameworks
appropriately   and simulspegneously   to be unaware    that  the   framework  exists  or   that  an  alternative
framework might be possible.      Frameworks might be employed to interpret the physical or social world,
but we are primarily interested in the lasperer and we are especially interested in frameworks existing in
and/or defming culspesl contexts.    For example, a simple occspe{ence like a teacher and a student who greet

                                                                                                                 393
one another is a common and culturally-specific rsch event which occurs in a classrkm serng and which
is used to "set the stage" for later classroom exchanges.     The initial exchange will closely resemble the
following:
                  Teacher:         "Hi, how are you?"
                  Student          "Fine, thank you."
                  Teacher:         "Good."
     At the beginning of this exchange, the speakers have expectations about what they will hear and if
these expectations are met, the speakers feel at ease. If they are not, they don't   A non-native speaker who
fails to respond  approprgately  may  violate  a number  of   cultural assumptions   contained  in  this simple
exchange concerning forjlity, reciprocity, r-rking, topic choice and eye conrt (assumptions which
may   show up differently in another language).    These assumptions aren't universal but interestingly    they
and others are prfnt in the narl language in Interactive Mathematics.

3.2.  The  guide:  An  opportunity  for frame  recognition

     Sound is used in Interactive Mathematics to establish a framework and various speech events.          The
Rurvian speakers could listen them, becoming sensitive to their implicit assumptions.      (We do not suggest
r this use was necesrmly conrnious on the part of the native Russian speakers.)            We'll illustrate ris
phenomenon with the text that introduces the Interactive Mathematics pre-calculus program, The Tour.
Spoken   English  is  used through the   entire  Interactive Mathematics    suite of lessons,   of course, and
presumably our observations about cultural frameworks and inrtation would be applicable to speech
events these events as well.  The Russian speakers didn't confine their practice of English to The Tour.   For
this paper, however, all examples will be drawn from The Tour.
     When the student selects The Tour from the Main Menu page, the roeen fills with text and a movie.
(We say more about the movie below.)      A female native speaker of English reads the text aloud [Fig. 1].
Several  aspects  of the text and  sound  serve  its function as  a speech  event  and  reflect its underhying
framework as an inruction.
     Erle 1:      A framework; Lerwns in Englirq begin rr an qpening sr~rmenr}
     The text which   introduces  The   Tour  sets the stage  for the  tour which  will follow     and the
     program itself.  It serves the function, for a native speaker, of the initial opening remarks by a
     lecrer on the first day of the course, previewing the course, making the initial contacts bereen
     teacher and  students and  creating the classroom   arosphere.     Pragmatically,  it signals  to the
     student that instruction will follow and indicates that the student should pay arention to what
     will follow.  In other words, it establishes a framework.

     Ere 2:       A r|ica,l ru event; The       rpanrc coherence of the rxt and sound r tQether
     tQ inrce a new event and information          In English, speakers listen for sr on the imporlnt
     inforiation. The first noun in a speech is stressed, indicating a new topic and other nor phrases
     may also be srssed, but less so, indicating an elaboration of the topic.      This is the parern in
     Inractive Mathematics.     The guide says:    "The TOUR ... an overview of how to USE IT and
     how to get the MOST from it"
     Example 3:   TQl>ic prof:Iession dnrin the rth ernt; Topic proresrron moves from eneral tQ
     specific and from primaiy r secondazy, This progression is typical of English [Tab. 1].
             General Topic:        "The Tour is         Primary Info:         "how to get
                                   designed to                                the most from
                                   provide you                                ... course"
                                   with an
                                   overview"
                                   "you will hear                             "each one has
             Specific Topic:       from  students"      Secondary Inf.:       things to share
                                                                              with you"

                             Table 1: Semantic progression in introductory text

394
Example 4;   Common American cultura,1 assm1112tions that aapear in the uide's speech;     There are several
assumptions about the context and content of conversations embedded in the guide's speech.

         Assumption:                                     Example:

         tour metaphor suggests stops across a          "proceed thorough the tour"
         domain
         people will help you                            "each one (a peer) has ideas to share with
                                                         you"
         people have many different reasons for          "each ... is ta1dng course for a different
         their actions                                   reasons"

                              Table 2: Cultural assumptions in the guide's speech

                               Figure 1:  Introduction to pre-calculus program

3.3. Analysis II: Language cues and cultural conventions

     It has been suggested in anthropology that culture may be defined as a set of "underlying standards by
which we judge behavior," a notion very similar to that of frameworks.     [Gumperz    1988).  Conversation
analysis has ferreted  out some  of the  underlying assumptions of English [Gumperz,    1988) and    described
their culturally-specific and lexical and semantic enactment [Gumperz 1982; Gumperz 1988).     For example,
even a native speaker of British English and a native speaker of Indian English may misunderstand each other
if the assumptions underlying their words aren't the same.

                                                                                                          395
     The following brief exchange illustrates this phenomenon.                                                 Speaker A is an applicant for a job course
and a native speaker of Indian English.                                                 Speaker B is a job counselor and a native speaker of British English.
Speaker B attempts to start the interview but Speaker A interrupts.
        SpeakerB:        Tell me what you want.
        Speaker A:      May I first of all request for the introduction please.
        SpeakerB:       Oh yes sorry.                                                   [Gumperz 1988]
In the British and American culture, we would expect a job counselor to set the pace and content of the
interview.  However,  Speaker  A, a                                                   competent speaker of English.              appears not to share  this assumption.
Further, Speaker A puts Speaker B into a position of needing to apologize, which would be considered bad
form by a native British (and American) speaker.                                                     Both Speakers A and B leave ill at ease.                Interactive
Mathematics   appears  to  have   provided                                                 the  Russian   speakers               with  a non-threatening    context for
"interacting" with native speakers in order to confirm and disconfirm their conversational assumptions.
3.4. The "other students": An opportunity to talk with peers
     In Interactive Mathematics students encounter simulated dialog situations in which native speakers of
English appear  as if they are in a                                                   conversational exchange with               the student using the program.    This
provided the Russian students with important verbal, prosodic and non-verbal contextualization clues to
how such exchanges normally take place in English.                                                   We'll provide some examples.
     Example 1: The student is  by a peer.                                                        On the first screen of the Tour [Fig.            l], the student
     watches a video. At first, the peers in the video are working (and there is background music).
     Then the video focuses on one peer who looks up, faces the student, the camera moves in, and the
     student starts to speak [Fig. 2-a].

                                                                                          }:r               ..... .и.и и и и и/t

                           и
                                  :;::::::::::::::::::=:::::::::::::::::::*::;:::-иии

                      r
                   Figure 2 -a: Speaker uses typical English verbal and non-verbal cues
     Non-verbal cue:   When the peer starts to speak, she fills the screen as if moving into the
     ''proper" distance from the student to begin a conversation and she maintains eye contact with the
     student while she is introducing herself, creating a friendly conversational presence.

396
     Prosodic cue:     The student says, "Hi, I'm Sarah Richards."         This is a typical introduction in
     American English -- the "hi" precedes the name, the name is given before any other information
     and the full name is given.
     Example 2:  The student listens to a peer,          During the tour, the student is introduced to the lesson
     format via video presentations of four "peers," similarly encountered in a video format
     Contextualization cues established:       In our video, the peer refers to the side of the screen, facing the
     student and follows a common pattern for establishing context in English.          He tells the student where
     to look on the screen ("on the left of the screen") and then moves down the screen, reading the list of
     buttons on  the   screen ("overview,     explain,    apply, explore,  evaluate,   and  framework"),    pausing
     slightly at each button to let the student focus on it
     Contextualization cues used:     After the peer has described the screen, he refers to it        It can now be
     presumed to be familiar to the student and has been established as a framework of interpretation for
     the entire program.

4.   Future directions
     Our analyses leads to several suggestions for future design of instructional environments.           First, since
it is important for all students to pick up the discourse of a community and since this has been shown
previously to be particularly important for non-native speakers of English [cf. Kramsch 1993], the designer
of an environment should supply sound and pay special attention to using speakers who are native speakers
of English.  Second,   non-native speakers can benefit from the opportunity           to hear the English spoken by
native speakers in learning environments not primarily designed for second-language acquisition and they
should be encouraged to use these environments even when they already "know" the content               Third, "peer
encounters" can give all students lots of opportunities to respond to natural, competent English.             Other
research has shown that   the way tutors manage language during tutoring sessions has a           significant effect
on tutoring effectiveness [cf. Person et al 1995].        The designer should construct tutoring opportunities,
using sound, which use English effectively.
     It should be noted that adding sound is a    change which is relatively minor in terms of production but
which can   have significant consequences for   creating software    to meet multiple goals.   Additionally, adding
sound addresses the needs of non-native speakers of English, an often ill-served and expensive community in
higher education in mathematics.      Fmally, adding a framework to instructional environments, such as that
established by The Tour, serve to set the stage for a lesson for all speakers and to familiarize the non
native speaker with an important speech event in English.

References
Goffman, E.  (1974).  Frame analysis: An essay on the organization of experience. New Yolk: Harper Colophon Books.

Gumperz, JJ.  (1982).  Discourse strategies. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Gumperz, JJ.  (1988).  Language instruction and cross-cultural awareness. Paper delivered at the conference "Language
     Study and Liberal Education," Midwest     Faculty Seminar,  in collaboration with the Consortium  for Language
   Teaching and Learning, April 15-17, 1988. Chicago, Illinois.
Kramsch, C.  (1993).  Context and culture in language teaching. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Person, N.K., Kreuz, RJ., Zwaan, R.A. and Graesser, A.C.   (1995).  Pragmatics and pedagogy: Conversational rules and
   politeness strategies may inhibit effective tutoring.  Cognition and Instruction, 13(2), 161-188.
Acknowledgments
   We would like to thank the Interactive Media Study Group at the University of California at Berkeley, the design
team for Interactive  Mathematics  at Academic    Systems   and  the instructors  and students who   used Interactive
Mathematics under the auspices of the University Consortium for Technology-Mediated Instruction and Learning for
their helpful insights, comments, assistance and support.

                                                                                                                 397
