                 Using the Internet to Enhance the Study of Dilemma
                                Cases in Professional Education

                                                 Josue M. Gonzalez
                                     Teachers College, Columbia University
                                               jg124@columbia.edu

Introduction
This presentation reports ongoing research on the use of Internet technologies and dilemma cases in a professional
education program for school leaders.    Dilemma cases are narratives of school problems for which there is not a
single consensual solution. Reflection based on tightly focused, contextualized situations is a strategy for examining
the nature  of educational leadership.    The primary focus is on administrator leadership.     Societal diversity is
broadly defined as the interplay of ideas, values, and perspectives that may be attributed to group membership. It
may manifest itself in linguistic, cultural, ideological, or experiential differences among groups.

School problems linked to diversity call for continuous reflection about the dominant culture in which the schools
are rooted.  Further, because   the  challenges  of diversity stem  from    real or  imagined  differences in  group
perspective, common solutions based on the rules ofthe dominant culture may be regarded as inappropriate by some
groups. This calls for professional development strategies that are participatory and reflective. Instead of relying
on managerial formulas or the customary "rules" of school administration, strategies must be designed through
which students of administration gain insight into social and educational problems that are defined, at least in part,
by the world view of which they themselves partake.        That world  view,  which    may  be  characterized  as the
"American national culture," is made up of assumptions, values, and traditions which define our hegemonic culture.
To grasp the significance of diversity and their role in it, participants must examine issues critically and along two
dimensions:  as  external   problems that can    be analyzed  and  resolved  professionally,   and as a   generalized
problematique created by the socio-cultural milieu of which they are a part.

Objectives

The considerations outlined above led me to design tools for studying diversity that practitioners would find realistic
and practical. I wanted the involvement of students in the affective as well as cognitive domains.    This goal was
mediated by other factors which became corollary objectives:

        1) Focus on adult learning. Use principles from the field of andragogy (adult pedagogy) to recognize that
        as learners, adults differ from children. Until recently, children have been the primary concern of research
        on teaching and learning.

        2)  Constructivism   preferred  over transmission  theory. Use  constructivist  teaching   strategies to help
        students construct their own knowledge and understandings.

        3)  Peer authorship  of learning  tools. I  wanted to collect and use    the work   of successive cohorts  of
        students to build a collection of authentic problems for subsequent groups to examine and compare with
        their own.

        4) Transposing theory and example. In traditional teaching, theory is presented first and examples are      then
        used to  illustrate theory.  In this instance I wanted  students  to create   their own  theories  about  the
        dynamics of diversity based on the case materials written by them and their classmates.

404
         5) Viewing diversity as non-pathological. In causal discourse "diversity" sometimes becomes a euphemism
         for social and family problems, low motivation to learn, or the problems of social integration experienced
         by immigrant students. I wanted to address the issues of diversity more neutrally allowing students to
         determine the locus and causes of negative patterns where they exist.

Andragogy and Constructivism
Andragogy and constructivism are related concepts derived from the study of learning, instruction, and cognition.
As proposed by Knowles (1983) andragogy is the knowledge base of assumptions and generalization that can be
made about the teaching of adults.    This concept is closely related to pedagogy   and has been used largely in studies
of teaching and   learning in children. 1  Adult  educators  emphasize   the   need  to accentuate  differences between
children and adults as learners. They posit that adult learners have distinct characteristics which influence their
, behavior as students, chiefly that:

          Adulthood brings with it more responsibility and an attendant self-directedness in education. To become
         older means we should become "wiser" hence, more judicious about the time, energy, and resources we
         invest in formal learning.

          Adult levels of culminated experience are resources with which to mediate new learning. Adults expect
         new knowledge and information to "make sense" in relation to what we already know and find useful. New
         information is considered in the context of prior knowledge and must be congruent with prior experience
         before it can be internalized.

          Adults are often pragmatic learners; we seek to fit new skills and knowledge into perceived lacunae in
         our personal or professional lives. Adults also want assurance the new learning will be in some way useful.

          Professionals have a strong desire to act competently and to avoid mistakes. They want new knowledge
         to increase their ability to be effective and efficient. because we want to be more competent and confident,
       the learning we undergo as adults must be practical, realistic, and targeted.

The principles  of constructivist education   are closely  related to those  of andragogy.   Constructivists  assert that
knowledge   and  insight are  embraced    or "owned"    in direct  relation to the  degree   that learners participate in
constructing their own knowledge or insight. Constructivists reject the "banking theory of education," the view that
knowledge is collected by an elite class of scholars and specialists who dispense it to others.2      In constructivism,
the role of teachers and professors is less oriented toward transferring information and knowledge.         Rather, they
regard themselves as collaborative coaches who bring students in contact with materials for constructing learning.
They help students organize their learning resources, encourage reflection, and help them distinguish between
important questions and less transcendent issues. A corollary to this change in role is a different view of the "correct
answer." For constructivists the correct answer may have greater flexibility and adaptability than is the case in
tractional conceptions of teaching and learning.

Traditionalists view learning as an    individualistic endeavor;   constructivists regard it as a  social and interactive
activity, as phenomena that occur in a social context.     In this approach "instruction" may be better defined as the
creation of learning environments or social laboratories for learning [Wilson, 1996). Finally, constructivists stress

       1 This distinction is tentative and is not used uniformly in the literature. Pedagogy is widely used without
regard to the age difference of students. Many scholars and researchers in this field have not adopted the term
andragogy in their own writings.

       2  The conception of traditional education as banking is often attributed to Paolo Freire, a Brazilian who
is also credited with leading the discourse on critical pedagogy. See [Freire, 1979).

                                                                                                                  405
that learning is not unidirectional. In an ideal learning community teachers too have opportunities to learn and gain
deeper insights into the subject of study.

The need to apply new ways of teaching adults becomes powerfully clear when the characteristics of adult learners
are considered in tandem with the principles of constructivist, critical teaching. The aggregate concept is especially
useful in the context of the multiple perspectives and values associated with diverse group membership.

Nature of Dilemma Cases
To make learning participatory, constructivist, and collaborative, and to give students a role in defining learning
objectives, I created a process based on dilemma cases.    Small work groups are formed to write and present cases
based on personal experience, newspaper accounts, or their own imagination.      The cases are presented to the class
in draft form for technical review. After refinement, they are again presented to the class for in-depth analysis and
reflection about the implications for leadership which they suggest.

Dilemma cases consist of short narrative stories at the core of which there is a professional quandary for school
leaders or policy makers. Cases include an introduction that explains the social, cultural and political context.  This
is followed by a description of a specific problem or dilemma in which school personnel are required to make a
difficult decision or take an action which may be resisted by one or more groups in the school community.          The
actions of the protagonist - a school principal, superintendent, school board, or other leaders - will impact on
students, teachers, parents, or some segment of the community at large no matter which option is selected.         The
options for resolving the case are such that no single option will satisfy all parties. They are made complex by
creating opposition factions who    hold  divergent moral, ethical, or religious positions.   To assist in     making a
selection or otherwise changing the situation to a more favorable one, the text provides information about the key
players in the case and the values, convictions, or beliefs which shape their positions on issues.

These are more than mere differences of opinion and the situations described are not amenable to a rational,
positivist solution, to managerial acumen, or decisive unilateral action. While the responsible party is generally a
school official or policy agent, the issues presented often go beyond the school and outside the normal range of
situations for  which the generic   tools of management    and administration   will suffice.  Dilemma   cases     often
accentuate  the differences  between formal   administrative practices  and the  equally  powerful   means     used  by
communities of interest in resolving problems.   They may include situations that require extramural solutions or
which highlight sensitivities born of religious differences, historical animosities, or differences in values. In many
cases a  common   theme   is the complexity   of the  human  experience    cast against the   narrow rules     of quasi
governmental bodies such as school boards.3

Using Dilemma Cases
Dilemma cases have proven to be useful tools in the education of education leaders who equate the high level of
professionalism of their craft with a command-and-control interpretation of leadership.   Dilemmas are a powerful
reminder that education occurs in a complex matrix of social, religious, and familial activity.      In these broader
settings the cultural and affective side of being human may be very different from the socio-cultural orientation of
the schools since the latter are commonly bound up in the dominant culture.  Students soon realize that, as diversity
increases many school problems cannot be fully resolved inside the walls of the schools or without considering
effects of diversity in shaping the perspectives of stakeholders. They also realize that there is not a single correct
solution to many problems.

    3 To review a sampling of dilemma cases described here use a       gopher client or World Wide Web browser.
The uniform resource locator or URL is <gopher://pluribus.tc.columbia.edu > .

406
This insight is critically important for those who believe that the practice of administration embodies a set of rules
for making correct choices and decisions or that the exercise of leadership is knowing what to do in all situations
however complex.     Through the study of dilemmas leaders confront the need to make judgements in tandem with
managerial decisions.    They learn that a reflective, culturally sensitive approach to judgement making is a valuable
tool of effective school administration.

Students were given only these broad guidelines for preparing cases:

         1) Whenever possible, use facts and personal experiences as the basis of the case and build on
         those. Factual adherence   to historical events may not strengthen a case presentation and is often
         necessary   to embellish a case  to achieve   the level of complexity  that  will make  it useful as a
         learning tool. Often, it is advisable to forego fidelity to a real life event or situation in the interest
         of creating a situation the could have happened.

         2)  Do not be concerned with how the situation was resolved in real life. This information is
         generally not germane. If there is, or was, an obvious "correct solution' the case will not generate
         rich discussion or reflection. Further, there is no guarantee that the real-life solution was the best
         one; that there is one best solution; or that the same solution will be appropriate at a different time
         or place.

         3) If the solution for one case can be found in published administrative procedures, institutional
         regulations, or in a collective bargaining contract the dilemma ia not as forceful. The case may
         be an interesting administrative problem but there is no genuine dilemma when a prescribed
         remedy exists. In many dilemmas there are negative consequences for the protagonists no matter
         what solution they choose. conversely, the rewards for making a good choice are more likely to
         be intrinsic.

         4) In  terms   of information   content, cases  must    stand alone. There   will not be   any further
         information provided beyond that presented in the written cases.

Dilemma cases may vary in focus from one semester to another.          For example, one class chose to address issues
of access and   equity while another focused on the integration of immigrant students. As might be expected, the
quality of case writing varies widely.   While the literary quality varies, the total effect of reading and discussing
a number    of cases is  powerful.    Student reaction,  elicited through   anonymous    written evaluations,  has    been
overwhelmingly   positive  about  the degree  to  which    cases help  them   focus on the non-prescriptive   aspects   of
administration and the leadership skills needed to work effectively in complex settings. To improve the structure
and format of their cases, students are offered the opportunity to present them to classmates in draft form and to
seek suggestions in class and via e-mail on ways to improve them in both form and substance. When the author
teams are satisfied with the quality of their work, the cases are turned in on diskette for posting to the Internet as
well as on paper for comments by the professor.

Author teams are asked to refrain from suggesting a solution to their classmates only to identify all feasible options.
They are also responsible for collecting and summarizing the substantive interactions generated by their case. The
material is presented as part of the semester's work along with their observations about the degree to which their
case accomplished    the desired  objective of creative,   participatory learning   with applicability to the world     of
administration. Online discussions are captured on diskettes and submitted in that medium.

Pluribus Unum Internet Gopher
Internet "gophers"   or  "gopher  sites" were one  of the  earliest and  most  successful  components   of the      Internet.
Gophers facilitate the posting of text documents which can be accessed via a user-friendly text menu.         While not
as sophisticated as World Wide Web sites, gophers have two important advantages. They are inexpensive and easy

                                                                                                                     407
to create and maintain.  The Pluribus Unwn Gopher,      the gopher site used in this work, was installed on a personal
computer.    The gopher software is a non-commercial package developed at the University of Michigan and made
available free of charge to educational institutions [Gonzalez, 1996].

The gopher site is used as the repository and source of dilemma cases along with other resources dealing with
diversity and leadership.    Students are encouraged to retrieve practice cases from the gopher.    Cases created by
previous classes also serve as models and discussion starters for class discussion.    By contributing to the body of
literature in the field, students have a sense of participating actively in the construction of the knowledge base of
this field.

Conclusion
Four requirements have been identified to effecting deep educational change to the point that the change become
fully accepted as mainstream practice.    The requirements are:

            proof of concept, to show that a significant alternative to existing practice is possible;

             a  driving force,  to provide   the  historical energy to carry   innovations through     to full
         implementation;

            a moving social vision, to legitimate the costs incurred with change and to inspire the efforts
         needed to effect it;

             a tangible institutional leverage,  to enable   new practices to provide a framework     for the
         mobilization of disparate elements, transforming them from within [Reihe!, 1994].

After four   semesters,  the  work  reported  here has demonstrated    the  viability of using dilemma     narratives in
conjunction with e-mail  and  an Internet gopher as instructional tools in  graduate and professional education.  This
constructivist learning environment meets the first of the requirements noted above, proof-of-concept. Further work
and more extended research is needed to assess the degree to which the other requirements can also be met.

References

[Freire, 1979]. Freire, P. (1979) Pedagogy of the Oppressed. New York: Seabury Press.

[Gonzalez, 1996]. Gonzalez, J.M. (1996) "An Internet 'Gopher' to Support Graduate Education and Professional
Development for School Administrators " Journal of Technology and Teacher Education. 4 (1).

[Knowles,   1983]. Knowles,   M. (1983)   The Modern   Practice   of Adult Education:  From Pedagogy    to  Andragogy
(revised and expanded). Cambridge: Adult Education.

[Reibel, 1994]. Reibel, J. H. (1994) The Institute for Learning Technologies: Pedagogyfor the 21st Century. URL
http: www.ilt.tc.columbia.edu/

[Wilson, 1996].  Wilson,  B.G.   (ed)  (1996) Constructivist  Learning Environments:   Case    Studies in  Instructional
Design. (Englewood Cliffs, NJ, Educational Technology Publications.

408
