 Scientific         Visualization        as   an        Interpretive        and       Expressive      Medium

                                               Douglas N. Gordin
                                               Daniel C. Edelson
                                                     Louis M. Gomez
                          Northwestern University, School of Education and Social Policy,
                                  2115 N. Campus Drive,        Evanston IL, 60208

Introduction
     As a powerful technique for the visual representation of complex data, scientific visualization offers the
potential to help secondary school science students learn through active inquiry.     Over a period of several years, we
have been conducting research in the design of scientific visualization environments that support inquiry-based
learning. The goal is to support students in a multi-stage learning process that culminates in open-ended research
projects.  In the early stages, learners should gain familiarity with scientific visualization techniques and the
phenomena depicted.  In the later stages, students conduct investigations that use scientific visualization techniques
to explore open-ended questions.  Through the process of conducting inquiry with scientific visualization students
can gain an understanding of its usefulness for originating and answering scientific questions.
     The use of scientific visualization, like other media, can be divided into two categories: interpretive and
expressive.    In interpretive use, the user is primarily a viewer who is attempting to extract meaning from
visualizations.  In expressive  use, the user is     an author who      is attempting to convey meaning   through the
construction of visualizations. In the course of this research we have come to recognize the importance of both
interpretive and expressive activities for learners. This paper traces our design of software and activities as we have
shifted from a primary emphasis on the interpretation of visualizations to one that integrates interpretation and
expression.   Our initial software enabled students to view visualizations and our activities called for students to
compare and contrast these images.    Following a set of experiments in which we observed students drawing
visualizations by hand, we have developed new software and activity designs that address some of the limitations of
the initial design by incorporating expressive activities and a wider range of data.  The more recent software design
enables students to create data by "painting" visualizations, communicate a point by customizing the appearance of
visualizations, and explore hypothetical scenarios by both creating and interpreting visualizations.
     The setting for these activities is an investigation into global warming.         The controversial nature of this
subject can serve to enhance student motivation and demonstrate the dynamic quality of scientific knowledge [Linn &
Songer 1993].   In addition, investigations of global warming can be substantially aided by scientific visualization,
since these investigations requires analyzing large detailed data sets.
     In    the  remainder of this paper, we present      some  experiences    with design  and  use  and explore their
implications.  First, we discuss our observations of the interpretive and expressive uses of visualization by students
who were engaged in a unit on global warming.        Second, we present three additional design goals based on these
experiences.  Finally, we describe our most recent design that attempts to achieve these goals.      The observations
reported in this paper were made in classes that were engaged in a unit on global warming as part of their
participation in the Learning Through Collaborative Visualization (CoVis) Project [Pea 1993].

Interpretive     Use  of   Visualization
     Supporting student inquiry in global warming led to the design of the Greenhouse Effect Visualizer (GEV)
[Gordin, Edelson, & Pea 1995] and introductory activities.      The GEV was designed to give students access to
atmospheric data describing the earth's energy cycle.    The introductory activities focus on the current state of the
atmosphere. These activities ask students to explore climatic processes through the interpretation of visualizations.
In this section, we describe the design of the GEV and provide an example of its use.

                                                                                                                 409
The Greenhouse       Effect  Visualizer

      The GEV was designed to provide students in a large number of classrooms meaningful access to a collection
of visualizations depicting the connections between the earth's energy cycle and climate.     It was also designed to
scaffold students' interpretation of visualizations and to support them in the interpretive activity of comparison.
      Some of the variables used by the GEV to describe the earth's energy cycle are incoming solar radiation,
reflectivity of the earth-atmosphere system, surface temperature, and retention of energy due to greenhouse effect.
These variables describe the process by which the earth's incoming and outgoing energy seek to attain dynamic
equilibrium. These data are helpful to investigate global warming, since global warming will occur if this cycle
results in a persistent net gain in energy The variables are highly inter-related through cause and effect relationships
that can be investigated by comparing visualizations.
    Delivering visualizations to a large number of classrooms was accomplished by implementing the GEV as a
World Wide      Web forms-based  application 1 . This allowed any classroom with Internet-access to obtain these
visualizations. The GEV scaffolds novices' understanding of visualization by making underlying representations and
geographic context explicit.  For example, numerical values are always displayed together with their units, an
overlay is provided that shows continental outlines, and a legend that displays the mapping from colors to values
accompanies every visualization. In addition, the GEV provides a variety of spatiotemporal resolutions (e.g.,         by
2.5° square or 20° square and by month or season) and access to the underlying data values.  Meaningful comparison
between visualizations is enabled by consistent rendering (e.g., all surface temperature visualizations were rendered
using a scale from -40°C to +40°C).
   The GEV      achieved its goal of providing wide access to its visualizations. During the 1 994-95 school year,   the
GEV served thousands of requests by middle and high school classes, university students and researchers. In addition,
it has been included on lists of notable WWW-based Geoscience and educational resources.
Interpretive    Use of  the  Greenhouse       Effect  Visualizer

   In addition to the GEV software itself, we designed a set of structured activities designed to support the early
stages of the multi-stage learning process described above, i.e., familiarization with scientific visualization and
scientific phenomena.  These activities encouraged students to match their understanding of climate to the patterns
they saw in the GEV's visualizations. In the example below, a researcher and student discuss the cause of seasonal
differences in a high school environmental science class. The class is working on a worksheet that asks students to
compare visualizations from winter and summer. One question asks students to compare the amount of solar energy
reaching the earth in January versus July.    Brenda's answer surprised one of the authors (Gordin), leading to the
following conversation2.   Brenda had written, "The insolation in July is higher than in January, since July occurs
during the summer-time."
   G: "But, which one of them has higher values?     Which is brighter and has more red in it?" (Pointing to the two
       visualizations.)
   B: "January." (Pointing to the brighter one.)
   G: "Right, and why do you think that is?"
   B: "I don't know."
   G: "Come on, take a guess.   Why do you think it might be?"
   B: "Maybe, because the sun is closer then?"
   G: "Yes, that's right. The earth is somewhat closer to the sun during January than July, so it gets more energy
       then."
   B: "But, if it's closer in January, why would it be summer in July? I guess I don't know what causes the
       seasons.... What does cause the seasons?"
   The visualizations allowed Brenda to answer the initial question by investigating data, rather than being told
facts. The overall line of questioning was designed to counter the common misconception that seasons are caused by
the earth's distance from the sun. The strategy is to have students use this explanation (i.e., distance from the sun to
account for varying energy) to correctly explain why more energy is received in January than July.  When students
have used this explanation to account for more energy arriving in January, it is difficult for them to turn around and
use the same explanation for why it is summer in July.    Initially this strategy failed, because Brenda apparently

[2]The Greenhouse Effect Visualizer can be accessed at http://www.covis.nwu.edu/gev.html.
[3]his conversation is reconstructed from memory and was not recorded.

410
answered the question based on her beliefs, rather than what is shown in the visualizations.      However, after her
careful examination of the visualizations, Brenda becomes dissatisfied with her explanation of the seasons.     This
realization accomplishes a fundamental step in inquiry-based learning: understanding why a question is interesting.
        While we judged the GEV and the interpretive activities it supports to be successful in engaging many
students in inquiry learning, we identified two specific shortcomings of it. The first is that we found the GEV to be
less successful in supporting the sort of open-ended projects that make up the later stages of our model of inquiry
based learning.   In particular, we observed that students had difficulty finding questions that could be profitably
explored using the GEV's data sets and capabilities. We are attempting to address this challenge in a number of ways
that are discussed in [Design Implications] and [The Integration of Interpretation and Expression in the Global
Warming Visualizer].   The second shortcoming is that the activities failed to engage students that might best be
characterized as difficult to reach. This shortcoming led us to introduce a new, expressive activity.

Expressive       Use  of     Scientific   Visualization
        Two settings in which we observed the GEV and its activities fail to engage students were with younger
(elementary school age) students and in inner city schools. The challenge of reaching these students led us to design
an activity in which students drew their own visualizations with crayons or colored pencils on paper.     While these
students had stared blankly at the visualizations in the GEV, we found them to be avid and imaginative drawers of
their own visualizations. The instructions and materials were simple: Draw a visualization of any variable you like
on a blank map of the world, using a small range of colors, and indicating the mapping between colors and numeric
values.   No data sources were provided, instead they were asked to based the visualizations on what they knew or
could infer. The first choice for students was what variable they would draw.     The variables chosen by students at
two Chicago schools are listed in Table 1.      We found it very significant that students prefer to draw variables
depicting human geography and describe in Sections 3 and 4 how we have used that observation to inform our more
recent software and activity designs..

           Videogames                             Crime                            Temperature
          Peoole starving                         Biomes                              Pooulation
    Number of hurricanes                         Elevation                    Ranta Virus outbreak
       Unemployment rate                         Books read                         Pneumonia
       Teenage ore!!1lancies                     Aills virus                    Best looking men
   Years basketball existed                 Per caoita income                  Worlds best women
                      Table 1. Students choice of what variable to render as a Visualization.

          These hand drawn visualizations can provide significant insight into students' thinking.       For example,
Figure  I shows a student's rendering of the world's population drawn without reference to data.      This visualization
reveals the students' qualitatively accurate understanding of population distribution with, for example, China and
India clearly appearing as most populous.  In a variation on this activity, we asked students to draw visualizations of
the earth's surface temperature on a blank map using only their own knowledge and reasoning ability.           While
students did not initially find this activity as engaging as when they were given a choice of what to draw, they
appreciated the value of being able to compare their work to visualizations of actual data on the computer.

          Our positive experiences with students' drawing visualizations on paper helped us realize the potential of
expressive scientific visualization activities. The expressive activity engaged a  wider variety of students than the
interpretive uses of scientific visualization and gave students a creative outlet. The drawings that they produced
helped provided data to help us better understand what kind of variables students find most interesting.

Design     Implications
        These interpretive and expressive uses of visualization suggest three implications for the design of scientific
visualization environments and activities: first, incorporate human geographic data sets; second, encourage students
to engage in expressive activities by drawing visualizations; and third, integrate interpretive and expressive activities
together  by using  student-drawn  visualizations    as a means  to allow    them  to explore hypothetical  scenarios
scientifically. In general, we are trying to help students see visualization as a communication medium.      As such,
they need to see the interplay between expression and interpretation and how both are influenced by audience and

                                                                                                               411
problem. Finally, this mode of inquiry has to be motivated by issues they understand, like those that come from
human geography.
Human    Geographic       Data  Sets
The idea that students should study human geography before physical geography has a long history (Mitchell, 1934).
Our experience with student drawn visualizations attests to this point (Table 1). When we discuss visualizations of
human population with students they soon find questions that interest them (e.g., Students at one school asked: Why
does Nigeria have so many more people than other areas of Africa?).       This is important, since a critical part of
fostering open-ended student inquiry is helping students to find a question to investigate. Answering questions about
human geography will often lead students into issues of physical geography because patterns in human geography
are often determined by patterns in temperature, precipitation, and terrain.  Because students have more intuitive
understanding    of these  sensible variables, working    with them may   serve   as a helpful  intermediate step to
understanding more abstract and less experiential ones, such as energy.

                           Figure 1: Student hand drawn visualization showing global population.
Expression      through    Drawing
       Beyond its ability to engage students more than interpretive activities, drawing visualizations is a good
beginning activity because it gets students to commit to paper what they believe.           This articulation of their
knowledge and beliefs can help to reveal gaps or conflicts in their understanding and can provide the basis for a
discussion of their beliefs. Once they have articulated their beliefs, students have a new motivation to engage in
interpretive activities. The record of their beliefs on paper provides them with a committed perspective from which
to view visualizations based on measured data, compare their drawings to them, and to explain the differences they
observe.  For example, a student who drew a temperature visualization as horizontal bands, would see that she
doesn't show different land and ocean temperatures.
Persuasive      and Hypothetical     Visualizations
       Once students have had the opportunity to engage in both expressive and interpretive activities, they should
have the opportunity to combine them in the form of authentic scientific inquiry.    The skills that students gain in
drawing and interpreting visualizations should allow them to engage in another expressive activity, the creation of
persuasive visualizations.   As students draw visualizations they will find the same data can be rendered in various
ways.  Also, as they interpret visualizations they will find some patterns easier to discern based on how the
visualization has been rendered.    Over time students may realize that no one rendering is best for all uses, rather
visualizations need to be crafted to fit the use for which they are intended. This crafting uses expressive technique
while taking account of how others will interpret it.     For example, to aid a presentation a student will want a
visualization that helps them to persuade their audience.
      The ability to create data through drawing leads to a second way to integrate expressive and interpretive use of
visualization.  Students should be able to explore hypothetical scenarios by creating new data and then analyzing it
scientifically. Computational modeling provides a mechanism to achieve this.    Students can describe a hypothetical
scenario by drawing it and then run a model to evaluate its consequences.   Visualizations can be used to express a

412
hypothetical   scenario and to  interpret and present    the results.  As students iteratively express and interpret
visualizations they are engaging in scientific inquiry.

The Integration of Interpretation and Expression in the Global Warming
Visualizer
        The experiences and design implications described above have helped shape the design of our most recent
visualization environment, the Global Warming Visualizer (GWV).        Like the GEV, the GWV is an environment for
exploring data related to climate and global warming.       It provides access to the same data that is available in the
GEV and supplements it with data corresponding to physical geography and human activity. The newer environment
supports both interpretative and expressive use of visualization by providing a browsing and authoring environment.
The first version of the GWV, called ClimateWatcher, is currently available, and the second version, EarthWatcher,
will be available in June 1996.
Human    and Physical     Geography   Data

        The GWV contains a larger number of data sets and provides an improved interface to access data sets.     While
the GEV contained only atmospheric data sets and provided access to the data through a list of names, the GWV
contains additional data sets describing physical and human geography and provides access to the data through
schematic diagrams indicating relationships between variables.        The new graphical interface is designed to help
learners to place individual variables in the context of larger processes. The additional data sets are designed to better
support students in conducting open-ended inquiry. Because they represent physical and human processes, these data
sets can help students to connect atmospheric processes to phenomena with which they have experience.        They also
are designed to help students relate atmospheric processes and concerns about global warming to social issues.     The
additional data sets include population, carbon emissions due to burning fossil fuels,   elevation, ground cover, and
vegetation type. The inclusion of these data sets is designed to enable students to conduct investigations that relate
human and physical geography.
Expressive     Use of   Visualization

        The Global  Warming     Visualizer supports     the expressive use   of visualization in two ways.    The first
reproduces the experience of drawing a visualization on paper by enabling a user to "paint" a visualization on the
screen. The second allows the user to customize the display of a visualization in a number of ways.         The GWV
provides an interface that allows students to create new data using a standard paint program interface.   Students can
"draw" on existing data sets or create new ones from scratch.    The advantage of a computer interface is that 1) the
resulting visualizations support direct visual comparison with actual, measured data; and 2) students can use built-in
analytical operations, such as subtraction, to perform mathematical comparisons.
        The second expressive capability that the Global Warming Visualizer provides is the ability to customize the
display of any particular visualization.   Students may change the magnification, the spatial resolution, and the
mapping from numeric values to colors for any visualization.      This ability supports interpretive use by enabling
students to identify particular features that may be less visible at different settings, but it also supports expressive
use by allowing students to highlight features that they want to emphasize in order to support an interpretation they
are trying to communicate others.  An example of this crafting of visualizations is the modification of the color
scheme (the mapping from values to colors) to signify qualitative changes in a variable by hue discontinuities in the
color display. Kuipers (1986) refers to such values at which qualitative changes take place as landmark values.     For
example, 0°C and 100°C are landmark values for the temperature of water, since at are those values water freezes and
boils, respectively. Locating hue discontinuities at landmark values afford certain readings of a visualization.
Modelin g

        The  most  significant  enhancement   in the    Global  Warming      Visualizer is the   ability to investigate
hypothetical climate change scenarios using a simple climate model.    This facility will be available in EarthWatcher,
the second version of the Global Warming Visualizer.     Modeling in the GWV integrates expressive and interpretive
use of visualizations by allowing students to create hypothetical data using the data creation interface and then use
that data as input to the climate model to see how the new values affect other variables. For example, a student who
wanted to explore the effect of a hotter sun could increase the incoming solar energy by drawing a higher insolation

                                                                                                                  413
and then running the model to inspect the altered surface temperature.   Similarly, a student could simulate a rise in
atmospheric CO2 concentrations by increasing the percent of energy retained in the atmosphere.     In this use of the
model, students cycle between expressive activities to set the initial conditions for a scenario and interpretive
activities to analyze the results of running the model. This interpretation can lead to formulating another scenario or
revising the initial one, and so on. The ability to conduct open-ended investigations provided by modeling is a
critical element of the GWV' s attempt to support open-ended inquiry projects.

Conclusion

        We have explored the conjecture the scientific visualization can be an effective means to encourage inquiry
learning on the part of science learners: The central question of this work is how to provide dynamic scientific media
to students to promote scientific inquiry. This informal evaluation has provided some insight.   First, we have seen
that scientific visualization can promote inquiry conversations on the part  of students. Further, we see from   our
interactions with students that visualization can be construed for them as both an interpretive medium and an
expressive medium.
        These early observations of student use of visualization environments have suggested several new design
ideas to us for   subsequent  visualization  environments.   It  is our hope that these   ideas will make   our new
visualization environments more complete for    student inquiry and communication.     They will be both interpretive
and expressive. They will also provide more data sets in an effort to help students see a tighter coupling between the
world as they experience it and more abstract systems like global warming.   The new designs described here will be
the subject of continued formative design evaluation in school settings and elsewhere.  As we proceed we will learn
more about:
   ·      How is visualization appropriated in school settings?      For example, what mixture of interpretive and
          expressive activities do teachers and students choose?
   ·      How are visualizations used in the conversations that students have with peers and others?   For example,
          what are the key features of a visualization or the set of experience that students have with them that
          make it possible for them to use visualizations as a prop in explanation or argument.
   ·      Where in the process of doing projects (e.g. developing a question, reporting results) do visualizations
          have the most value to student?    And, where do they fail to add any value. In this effort we will continue
          to look carefully at student artifacts to see where students make productive use of visualization and where
          they do not.

        The infusion of new media in school, or any other setting, is a slow process of design and redesign informed
by use. Here we have just started down that road to help visualization find its appropriate role in supporting inquiry
learning for students in science classrooms.

References
[Gordin, Edelson, & Pea 1995] Gordin, D.N., Edelson, D.C., & Pea, R.D. (January, 1995). "The Greenhouse Effect
         Visualizer: A tool for the science classroom," Proceedings ofthe Fourth American Meteorological Society
         Education Symposium.
[Gordin et. al. 1996] Gordin, D.N., Edelson, D.C., Gomez, L.M., Lento, M., & Pea, R.D. (January, 1996).
         "Student conference on global warming: A collaborative network-supported ecologically hierarchic
         geosciences curriculum," Proceedings ofthe Fifth American Meteorological Society Education Symposium.
[Kuipers 1986] Kuipers, B.J. (1986).   Qualitative simulation. Artificial Intelligence 29(3), pp. 289-338.
[Linn & Songer 1993] Linn, M., & Songer, N.B. (1993).  How do students make sense of science?      Merrill Palmer
         Quarterly, 39(1), 47-73.
[Mitchell 1934] Mitchell, L.S. (1934).    Young Geographers.   Reprinted in 1991 by Bank Street College of
         Education.
[Pea 1993] Pea, R.D., (1993). Distributed multi:-media learning environments: The collaborative visualization
         project. Communications of the ACM, 36(5), 60-63.

Acknowledgement
This work is based on research supported by the National Science Foundation's Programs in Advanced Applications
of Technology (AAT) and Networking Infrastructures in Education under grants number RED-9453715 and RED-
9454729.  The Climate Watcher software has been developed by Brian Clark.    We would like to thank our colleagues
from the CoVis Project and its community for extended discussions of these issues, and continual useful feedback on
design, rationale, and pedagogical issues.

414
