INTERACTIVE MULTIMEDIA DEVELOPMENT AND
COGNITIVE TOOLS

                       Barry Harper, John Hedberg, Robert Wright and Robert Corderoy
                  Faculty of Education, University of Wollongong, Wollongong, Australia, 2500, email:
                                                    b.harper@uow.edu.au

Introduction

Learning is a complex process and one that has a variety of theoretical views to explain and predict the outcomes.
Cognitive scientists seek to develop these theoretical views so that instructional processes can be enhanced and
fully understood. This is a relatively new field of study and there is a great deal of argument about the fine details
of many of the theoretical views. However, there is a consensus on the general lessons learnt and there is now a
large body of knowledge about   learning, with constant research helping to refine and clarify that knowledge.   The
research has shown us that children's natural learning processes are very much in the realm of experimentation and
reflection, not instructionalist modes so prevalent in classrooms and yet the schooling process is very much based
on an economic imperative rather than an educational imperative.      Pilot studies of a great variety of instructional
modes and forms have proved them to be highly successful, and yet they have not been introduced into the broader
schooling system.   Much of the evidence about the lack of success of such programs in large scale schooling not
only relates to economics, but also to teacher attitudes and beliefs about education and learning and to teachers
perceived workload and opportunities, i.e. the type of individual learning support that cognitive scientists are
telling us can improve the learning process is beyond the physical capability of most classroom teachers, at least
for sustained periods of time.
Introduction of information and telecommunication technology, and specifically computers, into the educative
process has been heralded as a panacea for the woes of education. The technology offers teachers the opportunity
to individualise instruction, place children in open ended student centred investigations, and to shift from their
traditional instructor role to mentor and co-learner.  The panacea however, like past revolutions in education, will
go the way of previous technologies unless changes to our schools and the tools provided with computers occur,
such as a shift in teachers'   pedagogical approaches   and    software that supports the modes  of instruction  that
cognitive scientists are telling us are appropriate
Bork(1995) has argued these points strongly in his critical review of the failure of computers in schools and
universities and also supports the development of an extensive research base of empirical evidence to support the
changes that we instigate in learning environments.
One of the most extensive longitudinal studies on the effect of the introduction of information technology in
classrooms has been carried out under the Apple Classroom of Tomorrow (ACOT) program ( Dwyer, 1995).             The
ten  year research and development   collaborative    program focused on how teaching and learning change when
teachers and students have routine access to technologies. One of the key elements of this program was a belief
that technology    should be   used as a   tool for   learning   and  a medium   for  thinking, collaborating,   and
communicating. The outcomes of the program have been summarised by Dwyer (1995)
      .... technology plays a catalytic role in opening the minds of teachers to new ideas about
      children, learning, and their own role in the education process.
Dwyer   also claims that  without this form  of     reflection and subsequent changes  in professional practice, the
promise of technology will never be realised. This premise supports the criticisms of Bork (1995) and Schank and
Cleary (1995) of our current modes of education.

                                                                                                                 415
The Potential of Interactive Multimedia

Current interactive multimedia technologies can represent ideas in almost any mediated form, and provided we can
generate a comprehensible   metaphor      for organising our functional options    and the underlying  knowledge
structures, the student can roam through the resources, creating their own meanings and understandings of the
phenomena they encounter, ie creating their own form of the learning environment rather than one generated by
their teacher or by the package designer. When raising the idea Florin (1990, p30) saw
    information landscapes, ...as virtual towns, or intellectual amusement parks. The analogy
    is quite intriguing and helps us to visualise many abstract concepts within a single
    metaphor.
This form of representation of information supports students' learning processes advocated by researchers like
Schank and Cleary (1995) who have argued strongly for          the use of such technology to support students in
following their own interests or questions. This rich context has the potential to allow the novice to work with
authentic problems and practice.
However, within this context, designers of multimedia learning environments have tended to be narrow in their
view of how users will interact with the rich array of multimedia resources once a challenge, in the form of a
problem to solve, has been posed.   Once the material has been presented to user(s) and they have interacted in the
ways envisaged by the instructional designer (and often in new ways not considered by the designer) the user is
left to ponder and present their conclusions using more routine presentation technologies, such as pen and paper.
Increasingly, users have access to the same multimedia technology but have lacked access to the rich digital media
resources embedded in the learning environment. Additionally cognitive tools to support the user have been shown
by Jonnasen and others to enhance the learning process and to support the users' investigations. If students are to
truly create their own meanings and understandings of the phenomena they encounter, designers need to not only
incorporate user tools which will enable them to present their findings using the full array of resources contained in
the packages, but also support their investigations with powerful cognitive tools.
The lack of intriguing learning environments embedded in much of the commercial interactive multimedia
products currently available cannot be entirely attributed to the lack of understanding of the results of cognitive
science research by developers. The challenge for researchers is to not only conceptualise new types of learning
environments, but also demonstrate that process so that developers of educational software produce products that
support learning in the most effective ways.

Interactive Multimedia and Cognitive Tools

There is some evidence now that cognitive scientists are attempting to narrow the gap between the learning
environments portrayed   in many    commercial     interactive multimedia packages     and  the  sorts of learning
environments that will truly enhance learning. Schank and Cleary (1995) have described a set of innovative
interactive multimedia packages based on their conceptualisation of realistic learning situations and what they
describe as learning architectures. These packages illustrate the general lessons of cognitive science research
through the design models adopted.
The innovative use of cognitive tools in interactive multimedia learning environments has also been reported by
Lajoie and Greer (1995). The package Bio-World (Lajoie,    1993) is an interactive learning environment designed
to support the acquisition of scientific reasoning skills in high school students and integrates a variety of cognitive
tools to assist in scaffolding scientific reasoning activity. Users of this package are engaged in explicitly justifying
hypotheses with evidence; organising, categorising, and rating evidence; and constructing a final summary
argument on the topic of bacterial and viral infections.   One of the proposed developments for this package
incorporates an authoring mode for students to generate new scenarios for their peers to investigate. This
enhancement    will  support      the     powerful  augmentation     framework        design  of  the    package.

416
EXPLORING THE NARDOO AND STUDENT DRIVEN INVESTIGATIONS

With an understanding of the shortcomings of much of the commercially generated learning packages, we sought
to combine the ideas of situated learning and problem based learning from information landscapes to form the
basis for effective design. Within this context we also sought to incorporate a range of cognitive tools which
would support the learner.   The detail of this design process and the theoretical position has been reported in
Hedberg et. al. (1994). The resulting package, Exploring the Nardoo, provides an information landscape of
resources based on ecology. The information landscape uses a geographic metaphoi; which contains a Water
Research Centre and a navigable river environment.

                                                          Col. Bacteria 112ppm½
                                                          Phosphorus   234mg
                                                          Temperature  22°C

                                Figure 1: The Personal Digital Assistant Notebook
 It incorporates problems that challenge students to become active participants in the learning process and
simulators that allow the user to ask questions and investigate possible answers to those questions. By providing
a metaphor relating to the real world, students are encouraged to apply scientific concepts and techniques in new
and relevant situations in this ecology-based application. In so doing, the learner is likely to become more
interested in developing questions, ideas and hypotheses about the learning experiences encountered. Exploring

                                                                                                                  417
  the Nardoo provides the student with a flexible set of tools made available through a personal digital assistant
  (PDA), Figure 1, to assist in the investigation process.
The process of using source material within the package in support of an investigation has facilitated by allowing
the student to:
·  Decide precisely on the quantity and selection of text to be copied into their notes.       This is either through
   making a selection and then 'grabbing' it into the PDA or by using a 'drag and drop' technique where the target
   text is selected or highlighted and 'dragged' into the notes module of the PDA .
·  Use marker buttons as pointers to video, audio or picture information which can be displayed within the PDA's
   viewer along with any linked information.
·  Gather video    material, place 'in'  and 'out' point    markers within it and display  it   within the PDA  thus
   increasing the student's ability to be more selective in what they choose to use in response to an investigation.
·  Manipulate marker buttons and text within the notes areas, via 'drag and drop',   to facilitate the re-ordering of
   ideas in the process of building an investigative response in the form of a report, explanation, procedure etc.
·  Use text style tools, within editable text notes, providing the opportunity to use font colour, style and size as
   organising criteria within the notes.
The package also provides the ability to record thoughts and impressions 'on-the-fly' whilst examining media
stories. This provides the potential for students to reorganise or revise their thoughts to better 'make sense' of what
they see and hear.  Students are able to document their emerging ideas in support of an investigation or problem
solving exercise whilst viewing different media. This provides support in the formulation of new schemata in the
process of accommodating the new information.
The multimedia collection, editing and presentation facilities offered within Exploring the Nardoo are extensive
and present a great potential for students to become manipulators of multiple media.  New avenues are opened for
expression for those who choose to use the facilities within the package. We are aware however, as Schroeder and
Kenny (1994) point out "learner's not accustomed to this technique and multimedia facilities will require
instruction in its use" before they become proficient with the technique but once accustomed to it the student has a
powerful process at their disposal to gather, organise and illustrate their ideas. Support for teachers and students in
the use of these features will be modelled using walk-through movies made available through the help system and
also detailed in support notes available in reference books within the package.

SPECIALISED SUPPORTIVE             TOOLS FOR EXPLORATION

Exploring the    Nardoo contains   two   specialised tools   aimed  at providing support at   a deeper  level for  the
exploration process, namely,  a simulator (containing three interactive simulations) and a presentation guide which,
together with support for note taking methods and suggestions on filing of materials, contains a series of genre
templates. The three simulations available in Exploring the Nardoo are, an algal bloom simulation, a whole
catchment level water demand management simulation and a personal, home based water use simulator. Each of
these simulations is a powerful exploratory tool, which provides support for the solution to one of the embedded
problems by mimicking a 'real world process' which forms an integral part of one of the problems encountered in
the Nardoo River Catchment. They greatly enrich the 'quality' of the problem solving process for students by
providing the   student with  unhindered   access    to act  and become   immersed   in  a 'real' situated  process,
manipulating the various causal parameters and testing hypotheses without a 'real' consequence or risk and in a
time frame which is convenient to them. (Figure 2). They promote the adoption by the student of the active learner
mode and in so doing support the active construction of knowledge by the student during the process of solving a
problem.
  The simulations complement the problems embedded in a complex information landscape by providing links
  with the 'real world' experience and by creating an environment in which the user may practise skills.
  More able students are provided with the facility to solve problems at a deeper level through the testing of their
  own "what if' scenarios. This can, during the course of solving problems, facilitate more detailed exploration
  and learning by:
  ·allowing the user to take readings at a sight and study the changes as the simulation runs,
  ·allowing the monitoring of all parameters while the simulation is running, with the aim of exploring the
  relationships between them (Corderoy, et.al. 1993, p 126)

418
                                 Figure 2 A personal water use simulator

A necessary skill in problem solving is the ability to collect and manipulate and analyse many different forms of
data and then present them in a meaningful and useful way to any of the many different discourse communities.
The genre template tool in the presentation guide provides a suitable mechanism for the support and development
of this skill.
The student support for the collection of this data in the form of note taking and the resulting solutions to problems
needs to include modelling of the various styles of discourse used in different communities.
The use of the notebook metaphor can be carried through to the creation of multimedia presentations. The
notebook can be used as an organiser for drafting the presentation and should make the transition to a finished
multimedia product seamless. Templates such as the genre templates within a notebook can be used as advanced

                                                                                                              419
organisers for the learner, especially those with little prior knowledge. The templates also provide a framework for
gathering information and stimulating recall of prior knowledge.
By making such templates available and encouraging their use, we are assisting students through a modelled form
of outlining. Identifying concepts within their notes that bear some relationship to part of a template structure
requires high order thinking skills which
    "a) causes focusing on important points, b) helps students gain familiarity with text
    structure, c) aids retention, d) generates useful alternative texts to supplement materials
    read, and e) causes active participation in learning " (Bianco and McCormick, 1989 in
    Schroeder & Kenny, 1994, p966)
The value of this modelling process is not faculty, learning style, level of school, or type of writing dependent.

CONCLUSION

The development of innovative interactive multimedia packages that support student driven exploration and
investigation has not been a priority for the multimedia industry. Design models and examples of such products are
now being presented by researchers to not only support the research endeavour in this field, but also to support
more commercial design of educational products. Exploring the Nardoo       is an example of a product which
provides a range of cognitive tools in an information landscape to support student investigation. Simulations and
support tools which allow multimedia reporting are embedded in the package and are supported by several
metacognitive tools for the writing process. These tools not only include details about genre but also scaffolding
templates to support the learners. The extent to which problem solving and student centred learning goals are
achieved will be investigated and reported upon when the product is released to schools.

REFERENCES

Bork, A,(1995) Guest Editorial: Why Has the Computer Failed in Schools and Universities?, Journal of Science
  Education Research, 4(2), pp 97-102
Corderoy, R.M., Harper, B.M., & Hedberg, J. G., (1993) Simulating Algal Bloom in a Lake: An interactive
  multimedia implementation. Australian Journal Of Educational Technology. 9(2). Summer: pp.115-129.
Dwyer, David (1995), Learning for the 21st Century: Lessons from Apple Classrooms of Tomorrow, Proceedings
  of the International Conference on Computers in Education, Ed. Jonnassen,D., and McCalla, G, Singapore;
  December 5-8. ppl-11
Florin, F. (1990). Information Landscapes. In S. Ambron, & K. Hooper, (Eds). Learning with Interactive
  Multimedia. Redmond: Microsoft. pp 28-49.
Hedberg, J.G., Harper, B., Brown, C. & Corderoy, R. (1994) Exploring User Interfaces to Improve Learning
  Outcomes, International Federation for Infonnation Processing Working Group 3.2 Computers at University
  Level: Interactive Multimedia in University Education: Designing for Change in Teaching and Learning,
  University of Melbourne, 6th-8th July, pplS-29
Lajoie, Suzanne P., and Greer, Jim E. (1995), Establishing an argumentation environment to foster scientific
  reasoning with Bio-World, Proceedings of the International Conference on Computers in Education,Ed.
  Jonnassen, D., and McCalla, G, Singapore; December 5-8. pp89-96
Lajoie, S.P., (1993), Computer environments as cognitive tools for enhancing learning.     In S.P. Lajoie and S.
  Derry (Eds.) , Computeres as Cognitive Tools, pp.261-288., Hillsdale, NJ.,Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Schank, Roger C., and Cleary, Chip (1995), Engines for Education, Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Hillsdale, New
  Jersey
Schroeder, E.& Kenny, R., (1994). The Integration of Learning Strategies in Interactive Multimedia Instruction,
  Paper presented at the AECT National Convention and INCITE'94 International Exposition, Nashville, TN,
  February 961-979.

420
