    The        Development            Of     Self-Directed  Learning           Strategies         in
                                 Problem-Based           Learning
Cindy E. Hmelo                                          Nathalie C. Cote
Georgia Institute of Technology                         Vanderbilt University
Atlanta GA 30332-0280                                   Nashville TN 37221
ceh@cc.gatech.edu                                       cotenc@ctrvax.vanderbilt.edu

Introduction
Students often leave school without the skills needed for lifelong learning. This is particularly problematic in
technical fields such as medicine and engineering where the knowledge is continually changing and advancing
[Tuten, et al., 1996). To prepare students for the lifelong learning required for success in such fields, students
need to have experience in self-directed learning (SDL) while in school. An innovative approach to learning that
explicitly does this is problem-based learning, an educational methodology that applies cognitive science theory
to the real world setting of education by having students learn in the context of solving complex problems.
Problem-based learning is being used at many medical schools and is increasingly being applied to other settings
[Barrows, 1985; Williams, 1993). Because the problems used are complex, students work in groups, where they
pool their expertise and experience and together grapple with the complexities of the issues that must be
considered. Facilitators guide student reflection on these experiences, facilitating learning of the cognitive skills
needed for problem solving and SDL. Because students direct their learning, skills needed for life-long learning
are also acquired, as they manage their learning goals while coping with the problems they are trying to solve
[Barrows, 1985).  In this paper, we present a model of self-directed learning and the results of a study that
examines components of this model in the context of medical education.

Self-directed learning is initiated in PBL as students are faced with a problem that they do not have the
knowledge resources to solve, as indicated in Figure 1. In medical education, the problems are taken from actual
patient cases.  As the students identify gaps in their understanding, they set goals for learning.   In PBL
terminology, these are called learning issues (LI). This step is necessary but not sufficient for self-directed
learning to occur. The learner also needs to generate a plan to address the LI by identifying and using various
information resources. These resources may be texts such as internal medicine or pathology references or they
may be expert physicians in the case of medical education. The learner then needs to integrate the information
from the resources into their understanding and bring it to bear on solving the problem faced. In addition, the
learner needs to evaluate the success or failure of their information search and determine whether or not there is a
need to iterate through the SDL cycle again.

Although this model discusses the importance of SDL, it does not provide direction as to the nature of a good
strategy. There is little empirical research that clearly defines the nature of good SDL strategies but cognitive
science theory offers some suggestions  [Bassok & Holyoak, 1993). Bassok      and Holyoak suggest   that SDL
which proceeds in a hypothesis-driven manner should lead to more flexible knowledge, as compared with a data
driven strategy. Data-driven learning requires that students make generalizations from multiple examples. The
learners do not engage in deep analysis of principles and may end up knowing sets of correlated features
(including some that are irrelevant). A search that proceeds by investigating the significance of isolated data
(e.g., symptoms) may not effectively narrow the search space. In contrast, when one has a hypothesis, choosing
to search for information in a hypothesis-driven manner may be more efficient than a search that is data-driven.
Hypothesis-driven le:illling depends on prior knowledge of the domain coupled with active learning strategies
that allow the learner to make principled judgments about the importance of features to the learner's goals. To
the extent that hypothesis-driven learning enables learners to successfully identify relevant but nonobvious
features of a problem, more flexible transfer will be promoted [Bassok & Holyoak, 1993; Patel & Kaufman,
1993). Students may have fragmented domain-knowledge though and need assistance in directing their attention
to goal-relevant information.

                                                                                                           421
  In the PBL curriculum implemented in medical schools, the students are encouraged to think about the patient
  problems with the underlying scientific principles in mind rather than just collecting sets of features. As cases
  are connected to domain principles, the learner can begin to understand how knowledge can be applied to solving
  problems [Chi et al., 1989]. In this study, we examined how medical students in a PBL curriculum assess their
  learning needs and develop plans to address those needs. In addition, we examined the students' perceptions of
  how successful their learning has been. We expect that self-directed learning that proceeds in a hypothesis-driven
  manner should lead to more flexible knowledge.

          Assess       knowledge               relative                   to problems
          being     faced

                                                 ,

 .---            Formulate              learning                 issues

                                                           1

             Develop        and         implement                 plan       to address
             learning          issues

                                                           1J

             Use   new         knowledge                      in problem-solving
                                                 ·
                                  r                                 ....,
                  No                       Goals                              Yes             Problem
                                            Met?                                              Solved
                                     '-                                ,
  Figure  1.  Self-directed  learning    model

 Methods

  Students from two medical schools participated in this study. At School A, a midwestem medical school, 35
 first-year students participated. Sixteen students were from the school's traditional curriculum and 19 were from
 the PBL curriculum. The students in the traditional curriculum spent approximately 40 hours a week in lecture
 and laboratory courses in the basic biomedical sciences, whereas the PBL students had two 3-hour sessions for
 their PBL group meetings and a third optional 1-hour session a week where resource faculty were available to
 answer questions. At School B, a southern medical school, 39 first-year students participated.      Of these, 19
 students were in a PBL elective and 20 students were in a different (non- problem-based) elective. In School B,
 these electives were i n addition t o a traditional curriculum.    The actual PBL group meetings were very similar at
 the two schools except that the School A students had a much more intense PBL experience than the School B
 group. Students were paid $45 for participating in 3 two-hour sessions during their first year of medical school.
 The sessions took place before the start of classes, after 3 months, and after 7 months of medical school.

422
The students' task was to generate pathophysiological explanations, in writing, for the mechanisms underlying a
medical problem. At the end of each problem, the students were asked to identify additional knowledge that they
needed to understand the patient problem (the learning issues) and to develop a plan to address those learning
issues. They were also asked to rate their scientific and clinical knowledge relative to the problem using a Likert
scale. Six different problems were used that covered a variety of body systems and disease processes. Students
were randomly assigned to 6 different orders that were counterbalanced across conditions. At each session, the
subject received 2 problems. The problems were presented in a format similar to those used in the PBL classes.
Although the nonPBL students had not seen this problem format, they had been exposed to patient cases used to
illustrate various biomedical concepts.

The protocols were coded as to whether the students' learning issues were hypothesis-related or data-related. The
particular resources mentioned in the learning plan were also categorized.     A random sample of 20% of the
protocols was scored by a second independent rater blind to condition. Interrater agreement was 96%.

Results
The learning issues (U) the students identified fell into two categories: hypothesis-related or data-related.
Hypothesis-related (HR) learning issues included issues related both to diseases and basic-science mechanisms.
An example of a disease-driven HR learning issue is the student needing to know more about "complications of
diabetes." A basic-science driven HR     learning issue might be learning about "acid-base physiology."      An
example from the second category, data-driven LI, is needing to learn about the significance of an elevated
respiratory rate. Additional examples from the students' protocols are displayed in Table 1. If the students' SDL
strategies are consistent with their reasoning strategies, the PBL students should generate more disease-driven
and basic science LI because the PBL students tend to learn      hypothesis-driven  reasoning strategies [Hmelo,
1995]. In other work, we have found that this distinction between data and hypothesis-related SDL strategies
discriminated between PBL and nonPBL students [Hmelo & Gotterer, 1994).             For analytical purposes, the
subjects' responses were classified into 3 patterns of learning issues: those which did not involve any or only
vague issues; those which involve strictly hypothesis-related LI; and those in which the LI referred to data.
Because the differences between the schools were minimal and were not related to the hypotheses being tested,
the data reported here are collapsed across the two schools.

 Category                               Example
 Hypothesis-related
   Basic Science                        "..the physiology    of  the adrenal gland: what are  the
                                        compounds   which     it synthesizes, and   what are  the
                                        systemic effects of their release into blood in abnormally
                                        elevated levels?"

   D isease                             "What are the risk factors which disposed Rosie for
                                        disseminated Mycobacterial infection?"

 Data-related                           "What were those crystals in his ankle, where do they
                                        come from and what do they do?"

Table    1. Examples  of Learning       Issues

The LI that the students generated after working through each case were counted and classified in terms of their
content. The PBL    students initially generated more learning issues (M=3.34; SD=l.84)       than the nonPBL
students (M=2.03, SD=l .15) but they decreased the number of LI generated over the course of the year so that at

                                                                                                             423
  the end of the year, there was very little difference in the number of LI between the two groups (Time 2:
  PBL:M= 3.00,SD=l.69; nonPBL: M=l.93;                SD=0.94; Time        3: PBL M= 2.25,  SD=l.00;        nonPBL    M=2.0l,
  SD=l.04;      F (1,68)= 14.11, p<.001, MSe=l.40).            This puzzling result can be better understood by examining
  how the subjects' qualitative patterns of LI changed over the course of the year.                    Initially the PBL students
  started out by having many data-related LI but over the course of the year, they switched to more hypothesis
  related LI, as indicated in Figure 2 (X2 (4)=16.82, p<.005). The nonPBL students did not change much over the
  year. The change for the PBL students may reflect the expectations that they had about using patient cases. It is
  likely that they expected an emphasis on clinical issues as part of PBL.           It may also be that over the course of
  the year, the PBL students realized that researching isolated data (i.e., signs and symptoms) is less efficient than
  using their hypotheses as the context for their search. As we show in the following section, the qualitative
  results from the students' learning plans suggest that the latter explanation is more likely.

                                Hypothesis-Related      Learning       Issues

                 70u.=,60--------_________-a._ ... _                            --- ----c
             Ul  50c0.om.,,40                                                                             ---PBL--a--- nonPBL
                 30

                 20+------------------------
                  Time 1                                 Time 2                                 Time 3
                                    Learning   Issues  Referring       to  Data

                70

      =g  :;;   60
     .en 0      50cg'4030---------                                                                       -a- -PBL--o---nonPBL
                20-1------------------------
                 Time 1                                 Time 2                                 Time 3

         Figure          2.  Distribution of   learning         issues

  Generating LI's is the first step toward SDL, but, as shown in Figure 1, the students also need to determine
  what resources they will use. We predicted that given their experience, the PBL students would be more facile
  with choosing the learning resources for this task. However, the nonPBL students also have considerable
  experience in writing papers and using the library.          Thus, we made no predictions about which group would use
  more resources but we did expect them to use different resources.

  The learning resources that the students used were counted and categorized into basic science textbooks, clinical
  textbooks, unspecified textbooks, and use of expert consultants. The PBL students (across all time periods) used
 more resources than the nonPBL students (PBL M=2.96; nonPBL= 2.53; F(l,68)=4.95; p<.05; Mse=3.85) but
  there was no change over time.    The qualitative results are more informative in understanding how the students'
 learning plans changed over time.

  Although the students' learning plans clearly differed at the beginning of year, there were differing trends for the

424
2 groups (see Table 2). At the beginning of the year, the PBL students were more likely to use science texts and
experts. A substantial number of them used nonspecific texts although a not as many as the nonPBL students.
Over the course of the year, the PBL students became more likely to use clinical and science texts and less likely
to use experts and nonspecific texts whereas the nonPBL students became more likely to use experts and
unspecified texts (clinical texts: x2(4)=11.54 p<.05; science texts: x2(4)=9.38,   p=.05; experts: x2(4)=10.05,
p<.05; nonspecific   texts: x2(2)=15.30,  p<.001). This    suggests  that the PBL students developed a better
understanding of the range of resources available. Although the students' goal for the first year of medical school
was to learn science, given a patient case, many PBL students wanted to first look in a clinical textbook such as
Harrison's Internal Medicine.      Such a textbook, although emphasizing clinical information, also contains
information about the causal mechanisms of the illness as well. In contrast, the nonPBL students only seemed
to have undifferentiated plans about how to get started.

          Time 1                           Time 2                             Time 3
                                    Unsp                             Unsp                                Unsp
          Clin      Sci     Expert  Text   Clin   Sci      Expert    Text     Clin  Sci    Expert        Text
PBL       24%       46%     55%      27%    61%   61%       40%      16%      57%   59%    37%           9%
nonPBL    21%       24%     57%      41%    18%   27%      83%       46%      24%   38%    57%           31%
Note: "Clin" refers to clinical texts, "Sci" refers to basic science textbooks, "Expert" refers to human
consultants, "Unsp text" refers to textbooks that did not have any descriptors that would allow it to be classified.

Table  2. Percentage      of  Students   using  Different    Learning     Resources

The students' success at their SDL was indirectly measured by their knowledge ratings following each case. Both
the PBL and nonPBL students increased in their self-perceived science knowledge over the course of the year
(overall mean rating at Time 1: 2.22 out of a possible 5, Time 2: 2.82, Time 3: 3.29,F(l,68)=72.87,p<.001,
MSe=l.19) but only the PBL students grew significantly in their self-perceived clinical knowledge (Means: PBL
Time 1: 1.75, Time 2: 2.82 Time 3:    3.10 nonPBL Time 1: 1.74, Time 2:       2.00, Time 3: 2.49; F(l,68) =9.06,
p<.005; MSe=.62).    Although the evidence is indirect, a possible explanation for the PBL students' greater
growth in self-perceived clinical knowledge is that, in the problem-based environment, students          learned to
integrate basic science with clinical information. For example, they may have been more likely to learn about
the contexts in which particular scientific concepts are likely to be relevant and the symptoms through which
they are manifested.

Conclusion

In this study we provided evidence that PBL is effective in facilitating the development of SDL strategies.
Specifically we have shown that:
   · PBL students are likely to identify hypothesis-related learning issues.
   · PBL students are more likely to develop a well-specified starting point for their self-directed learning in the
   plans they generate.
Dolmans (1994) suggests that there may be additional dynamics involved in SDL.     She found that what students
planned to do was not necessarily related to what they actually did while pursuing independent study. This
suggests that the model in Figure 1 is incomplete and that  there may be additional cognitive activity between
developing a plan, implementing it, and using the new knowledge-- and that the linear model may be an
oversimplification.  She suggests that there is a complex relationship between student-generated learning issues
and the subsequent activities and resources used.  Some of the factors identified as influential include: the
availability of relevant literature, the breadth of the learning issues, motivation, self-assessment tests, and other
examinations. In addition, Dolmans' results suggest that utilization of learning resources may be a dynamic
phenomenon and that, while perusing the literature and having discussions with experts, additional issues may
arise that receive the learners' attention. This still suggests that where students start their learning (i.e., what

                                                                                                                     425
  resources they initially use) will influence subsequent learning.We note that the students' initial learning plans
  are likely to evolve from where they start as Dolman's (1994) work has shown. However, having a definite idea
  of where to begin should still help the PBL students more efficiently direct their learning. Clearly, further
  research needs to be done to test this last hypothesis as well as to examine whether a hypothesis-related strategy
  for directing one's learning is more effective. Examining the dynamic nature of effective SDL strategies is
  important in order to understand how to facilitate the development of effective strategies.

  Finally, we have yet to evaluate the last step in the SDL model involving the integration of new knowledge
  into existing knowledge frameworks that students use to solve problems. These are important issues both for
  cognitive science and for education. PBL is a rich example of an                  educational innovation that provides an
  opportunity to inform (and learn from) cognitive theory.

  Preparing    students   to    become   lifelong   learners  is an  emphasis    in many    cognitively-informed       curriculum
  innovations [Bereiter & Scardamalia, 1989; CTGV, 1994]. This is particularly important in medical education
 .given the rapid advances in medical knowledge.              As the medical students mature into physicians, they are also
  developing the attitudes and strategies needed for lifelong learning. It remains an empirical question to determine
  if the effect of PBL on SDL strategies persists throughout an individual's career. Future work is planned to
  address this question.

  References

      [Barrows, 1985] Barrows, H. S. (1985). How to design a problem-based curriculum for the preclinical years. NY:
  Springer.
      [Bassok & Holyoak, 1993] Bassok, M., & Holyoak, K. J. (1993). Pragmatic knowledge and conceptual structure:
  Determinants of transfer between quantitative domains. In D. K. Detterman & R. J. Sternberg (Eds.), Transfer on trial:
  Intelligence,  cognition,  and  instruction.  (pp. 68-98).  Norwood NJ:    Ablex.
      [Bereiter   &    Scardamalia,   1989]   Bereiter,   C., &  Scardamalia,   M.  (1989).    Intentional   learning as a goal  of
  instruction. In L. B . Resnick (Ed.),      Knowing,     learning, and  instruction: Essays    in honor   of Robert   Glaser,  (pp.
  361-392). Hillsdale NJ:    Erlbaum.
      [Chi  et   al., 1989], M.  T.  H., Bassok,    M.,  Lewis, M.  W.,  Reimann,   P., & Glaser,   R.  (1989). Self-explanations:
  How students study and use examples in learning to solve problems. Cognitive Science, 13, 145-182.
      [CTGV, 1994] Cognition and Technology Group at Vanderbilt. (1994). From visual word problems to learning
  communities:   Changing       conceptions  of cognitive  research.  In K.  McGilly    (Ed.), _Classroom    lessons:   Integrating
  cognitive theory and classroom practice, (pp. 157-200). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press/Bradford Books.
      [Dolmans, 1994] Dolmans, D. (1994). How students learn in a problem-based curriculum .. University of Limburg,
  Maastricht, The Netherlands: University Pers Maastricht.
      [Eden et al., 1996] Eden, H., Eisenberg, M., Fischer, G., & Repenning, A. (1996). Making learning a part of life.
  Communications      of the ACM,    39, 40-42.
      [Hmelo,    1995]    Hmelo,     C.  E. (1995).  Problem-based     learning: Development       of  knowledge   and   reasoning
  strategies. In  Proceedings     of the  Seventeenth    Annual  Conference   of the  Cognitive    Science   Society. Hillsdale NJ:
  Erlbaum.
      [Hmelo     &    Gotterer, 1994]   Hmelo,  C.   E., & Gotterer,  G. S.  (1994,  June).    Self-directed learning  outcomes  in
 problem-based learning. Paper presented at Problem-based learning: The state of art.           Ontario, Canada.
      [Patel &   Kaufman,    1993]   Patel, V.  L.,  &   Kaufman, D.  R. (1993). Development       of knowledge-based    reasoning
  strategies with medical training (TR CME93-CS3): Cognitive Studies in Medicine: Centre for Medical Education.
      [Williams,      1993]  Williams,   S. M.  (1993).    Putting  case  based  learning  into  context:    Examples  from  legal,
  business, and medical education. Journal of the Leaming Sciences, 2, 367-427.

 Acknowledgments

 This work   was   supported    by a  Vanderbilt  University    Dissertation Enhancement    A ward,   an American     Psychological
 Association Dissertation Research Award,            the  Rush   Medical College   Alternative   Curriculum    project and  by  the
 EduTech Institute through a grant from the Woodruff Foundation.We thank Doug Holton for his helpful comments.

426
