                       Scaffolding         Causal,      Diagnostic          Reasoning
             in  a   Case-Based          Learning          Environment          in     Medicine

                                               David Jonassen
                                              Instructional Systems
                                         Pennsylvania State University
                                        University Park, PA 16802-3206
                                               jonassen@psu.edu

             Abstract:    Medical   diagnosis  is a  critical skill that is usually    developed   with
             experience   in interacting with, diagnosing,    and   managing  patients.   Computer
             delivered, case-based learning environments can be developed to provide students with
             valuable diagnostic experiences prior to dealing with real patients.      Diagnostic skill
              requires physicians  to understand    and  use  causal  reasoning in     order  to make
             predictions.    That causal reasoning may be scaffolded in the design of those
             environments. This paper describes the scaffolding of causal reasoning in making
             initial diagnoses, determining etiology, and making differential diagnoses in platelet
             related problems.

Introduction:       Problems      in  Reasoning
An important purpose of the third year of traditional medical school programs is to bridge the gap between the
classroom-based, basic science instruction and clinical requirements of clerkships and residency beginning in the
third year. The basic sciences approach, with its emphasis on the inculcation and regurgitation of information,
too often results in conceptual misunderstanding of important concepts and oversimplified knowledge when
attempting to deal with the conceptual complexity of medicine (Feltovich, Spiro, & Coulson, 1989).          Faulty
and oversimplified understanding of biomedical principles results in the inability to diagnose complex and non
trivial cases because biomedical content is more complex than the instruction reflects, and the instruction is
decontextualized  and   not  properly   anchored    to the practice   of medicine.      Spiro,   Vispoel, Schmitz,
Samarapungavan, & Boerger (1987) claim that the emphasis in the basic sciences on memorization and
simplification are antithetical to the development of transferable diagnostic and management skills that are
needed by physicians in practice. Biomedical practice requires advanced knowledge acquisition which can most
effectively result from instruction that reflects the complexity of the content and embed that learning in the
context of solving real-world medical problems (Jonassen, Ambruso, & Olesen, 1991)
         In order to bridge this gap, it is necessary to present medical students with authentic, case-based
problems to solve, problems that represent the ill-structured nature of knowledge in biomedicine and that require
the physicians in training to apply and transfer that knowledge in realistic settings. Ill-structured knowledge has
no general rules that describe how to solve most of the cases so there are no defining characteristics to determine
the most appropriate action (Spiro et al, 1987).  In ill-structured knowledge domains, there are no prototypic
cases or they are misleading, that is, certain aspects are differentially important in different cases, in part because
of the different context in which each occurs. Each case is novel because of the interactions of symptoms and
effects. How is it possible to provide all medical students with these complex case experiences?
         Medical schools currently use a variety of methods to teach and assess clinical expertise.       There are
Patient Management Problems (PMP) which are delivered by workbooks, traditional lecture, simulated patients,
and computer-aided instruction (CAI)    Case-based learning environments provide a means for engaging medical
students in diagnostic, problem solving activities. They provide a more realistic approach than either PMPs or
traditional testing methods and are less expensive and dangerous than using regular patients (Solomon, Osuch,
Anderson, Gruenberg,   Kisala, Milroy, & Stawsky, 1992).      They also provide greater flexibility in representing
problem situations.  That is important, because medical problems tend to be heterogeneous in nature (Palchik,
Wolfe, Cassidy, Ike, & Davis, 1990).
         Two problems can occur when using case-based learning environments to simulate clinical experience.
First, medical problem  solving   tends to be  domain-specific  and   ill-structured   rather than represented by a
generalized process.   There is a high degree of uncertainty involved in the process of medical problem solving
Console & Torasso, 1990). Diagnostic reasoning skills have not been practiced in the first two years of medical
school, so students have not developed medical diagnostic scripts. Given the medical students' lack of experience

                                                                                                                  439
 in diagnosing clinical problems and the complexity of the knowledge required to solve problems on different
 rotations, it is necessary to scaffold the required diagnostic reasoning in the learning environment.
        Expert physicians have "illness scripts" which they use to diagnose new patients.       They have a rich
 store of past patients' histories and diagnoses which they have used to build these scripts. They then compare
 new patients to specific scripts in order to diagnose them. They use pathophysiological reasoning only when
 they encounter a patient with a new set of symptoms they have not encountered before.       This idea of "illness
 scripts" is similar to the idea of using a hypothesis derived from a plausible solution as a way to solve problems
 (Simmons, 1992). Thus there is a link that is formed between computer based expert systems which are used to
 solve clinical problems and the way in which "expert" physicians solve similar clinical problems.      It is possible
 to design computer-based learning environments that incorporate the same causal modeling techniques used in
 expert systems as a method to teach medical students clinical problem solving skills.
        Computer-supported case-based learning environments simulating clinical practice are powerful means
 of providing students with these experiences because the high-speed computational capabilities of computers can
 manipulate a large range of variables in order to represent the natural complexity in a real-world system.
 Among the most effective types of computer-based instruction is the hypertext-based learning environment
 (Spiro & Jenhg, 1990). A fundamental advantage of hypertext for creating a variety of learning environments is
 the malleability of its associative structure (Jonassen, 1991). It is possible to map a variety of models onto the
 hypertext, including semantic relatedness, frames (e.g. problem/solution, functions/uses, action/consequences),
 cognitive flexibility and complexity models (Spiro, & Jehng, 1990), and also causal modeling.

 Causal Modeling
 Causal modeling is a generic title for a group of statistical techniques that facilitate the specification of causal
 linkages among correlations. Causal modeling is used when a decision-maker/problem solver must deal with
 trying to "resolve questions about possible causes by providing explanations of phenomena (effects) as the result
 of previous phenomena (causes)..." (Asher, 1983).
        Causal judgments involve uncertainty.      Uncertainty     in judging   causality may arise    from several
 sources: an individual's causal knowledge may be incomplete; an individual may lack complete information on
 the conditions that are present; or more than one alternative may be the cause.    Unlike a functional relation
 which permits bi-directional inferences, a causal relation is asymmetric. Causal relations can be thought of as
 working assumptions (hypotheses) of the decision-maker or problem-solver, involving hypothetical statements
 of the "if-then" variety. Systems of this kind can be found readily in engineering and physics, and, to a lesser
 degree, in social, psychological, and economic systems in order to satisfy deterministic functional relations of
 the same kind (Asher, 1983).
        Causal modeling techniques have been used primarily to represent problem-solving and decision
 making in the fields of social science, political science, and physical science due to the cause-and-effect nature of
 the relationships of the various variables involved in each respective system. For example, the causal modeling
 approach has been used to analyze variable relationships in the areas of urban unemployment, financial exchange
 rates, employee turnover government expenditures and national income, student achievement and curriculum
 evaluation, ethical decision-making behavior; and a number of medical applications such as fatigue syndrome;
 breast cancer, Alzheimer's disease.   Causal models have also found wide application in the fields of artificial
 intelligence and expert systems.
        In the mid 1970s causal modeling was first used in expert systems that attempted medical diagnosis by
 applying what was called a deep diagnostic approach.    Deep diagnostic approaches in expert systems are
 constructed by representing the ontology of a system, using its genesis to complete a formal methodology for
 diagnosing a fault within the system. Causal modeling approaches used in such expert systems have a common
 ground in that they model cause and effect relationships within the system.
        Probabilistic causal models may also be applied to systems which require levels of complexity that
 cannot be adequately represented, since the levels may be either too difficult or impossible to quantify fully.
 Probabilistic causal models can be used in arenas where the physician does not have adequate knowledge of all
 the domains involved in the diagnosis, e.g. they may have a limited knowledge of biochemistry when they are
 dealing with a case where such knowledge might be needed.   Probabilistic causal models can be used where some
 data are missing or impossible to collect or where there are differences in an individual's perception of symptoms
 related to the underlying disease or in the variations in laboratory results associated with a disease. For instance,
 where immunity to a particular infectious agent can vary across a population because of genetic differences
 within the population.    In describing newer expert systems, humans often use associative models when they
 have incomplete information (Console, & Torasso, 1990).         Simmons (1992) also uses an associative model
 which is combined with causal reasoning to create Generate, Test, and Debug (GTD), a paradigm for problem
 solving which allows for observable features to be associated with a solution to a problem. The solution then

440
 becomes the hypothesis to be tested. If the hypothesis is incorrect it is then debugged using causal modeling
 strategies. Rather than performing the causal reasoning for the medical student, such as with expert systems,
 this paper proposes that we model the causal reasoning process in the instruction, thereby engaging the learner
 in the reasoning. A probabilistic causal model was adapted for use in the learning environment described in this
 paper.
Scaffolding     Diagnostic    Reasoning           in      Learning   Environments
 Learning environments can be produced that scaffold causal, diagnostic reasoning.         Scaffolding provides
 temporary   frameworks  to support   learners in  their    "zone of    proximal development" Vygotsky  (1978).
 Scaffolding enables learners to do what they could not do without the support.      Scaffolding may assume the
forms of modeling cognitive skills and providing systems of notation, skill development embedded in the design
 of computer tools, inquiry and alternative assessment (Lehrer, 1993). Research has shown that such scaffolding
 can supplant deficient reasoning skills and later transfer to new problems (Salomon, 1979)..
         Solving medical problems requires modeling the uncertainty of each decision point, that each decision
· has many options and that each option has a different likelihood of occurring, based on previous decisions.
 According to Kuipers (1985), a "...causal model of a disease process and its evolution over time provides
 additional constraints that allow incompatible combinations of hypotheses to be excluded."    The complexity of
 the problem solving task and the uncertainty of the content are a natural part of the required causal reasoning and
are best learned in learning environments that emphasize flexible learning by the learners and that initially model
or scaffold the causal reasoning required to solve the problem.
         When trying to make a decision or solve a problem within a particular disease context, physicians need
to evaluate and understand the causal connections between a number of different variables acting simultaneously
to produce the disease symptoms.  However, it is usually impossible, except through a lengthy research agenda,
to collect the data that would permit a precise specification of the effects of variables on each other and their
interactions. Those data often are impossible to collect and they tend to provide correlative relationships but not
causal ones. However, based on research in the field, we can model the cause-and-effect relationships necessary
to accurately  describe the diagnostic problem-solving process in any medical domain.     Causal modeling is an
appropriate tool for representing this reasoning.

Using    Causal     Modeling   to   Scaffold      Diagnostic      Reasoning      in  a  Case-Based    Learning
Environment      in   Transfusion Medicine
As more and more knowledge is accumulated in the field of medicine, practice of specialty areas becomes more
complicated.   An area where this is especially true is transfusion medicine.    In the past, teaching of transfusion
medicine has not been well represented in medical school curricula, where it has traditionally been taught to
medical students as part of a hematology course, or as an addendum to specialties where transfusions were often
needed.   Transfusion medicine includes those disciplines in medicine which are involved with the collection,
processing, and storing of cellular and acellular components of blood, the administration of blood components
and products, and the survival and function of the elements in transfusions.         The field is very broad and
encompasses a number of basic sciences, including biochemistry, immunology, physiology, and clinical areas,
such as hematology, surgery, internal medicine, and pediatrics.    This module focuses on the role of platelets in
controlling bleeding, disease states in which platelet counts are low or function is abnormal, and platelet
transfusions are required to treat these diseases states.
         While solving clinical problems in the learning environment, the student must:
· Define a cause for a patient's bleeding with the choices being: anatomic (due to blunt trauma, laceration, or
   bleeding from a surgical wound, decreased number or abnormal function of platelets, or plasma procoagulant
   activity such as diminished coagulation factors.
 · Describe the etiology of the disease in terms of an understanding of the processes leading to low platelet counts
   or abnormal function.
 · Diagnose the specific disease state(s) responsible for the bleeding.
 · Provide a strategy for patient care, follow-up, and treatment (e.g. transfuse platelets or not transfuse platelets).
         Each of these steps entails a different set of causal factors which had to be identified in the analysis
phase of the project. In order to provide feedback to learners at each stage, a causal model of the entire process
 was developed (space will not permit an illustration of this model, which will be presented at the conference, if
the paper is accepted). For instance, if the student selected a particular etiology, they would be told that based
 upon medical research, there was a certain percentage probability that their selection was correct. Our attempt
 was to reflect the uncertainty in the causality of the diagnostic process. However, medical research has provided
 mixed research results regarding each of these decision factors, so attributing specific regression weights or

                                                                                                            441
probabilities to each cause-effect relationship is impossible. Therefore, causal-effect decisions were separated
into four classes of probability (not a cause, possible cause, probable cause, definitely a cause).                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        At each
decision point while working through the case, learners were required to select a cause, etiology, or diagnosis
and then to support their choice by identifying the causal agents. This is the part of the diagnostic process that
was most directly scaffolded.     Learners were required to justify their decision based upon causal reasoning by
selecting the probable features that led to their decision, much as they would be required to do in rounds.

Mapping            Causal Models  onto Cases
       For each of five cases in the hypertext, learners are first presented with a case history and the results of
a physical examination.        They next have the option of ordering lab tests, reviewing that information, or
selecting an initial diagnosis.   If they choose to order labs, they are presented with a series of options (Fig.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1)
and receive coaching along with test results if they select anything but hematology tests at this early stage in
the diagnostic process. If they select hematology tests, they receive information about both the normal
                      ·········.. . , ,,,.,.,.,. ..... .. . . . ,.,.. .. ... .................,,. ,.,... . . ................ ,,, ., ... ..i:  What do I need
      i Killer Headache: Hematology Laboratories (1 of 2)                   ll                                                                   to knov'?
     ! !I i·1----------------------------1!l l.! · ·Ww·a·b· ·ni· ·c·t ·m· ·t· e· ·seht ·t·/·s·}· ·T·oe· ·s·>t'·;·?·u·c·o·w·1·ua· ·mn· ·tn· ·t·ot· ·oo· ·s·u·d·en· ·url · ?· ·a·t·Ce· ·l·oi·cr· ·kd·e· o·r·:·mr_·i·tg· h·.·e· ·t·e· ·s·t·i·s· · · · · · · · you · · · · · · · ·1111 Test I CBC: Normal Value Result jj ! Consult Textbook I:::R:e::v:i:e::w::C::a::s:e:::H::is::t:o::r:yI- IRniew Physical EX811ll I ReYie· Labs Ordered I
    ji1iI ··· WBC :=:J:ti:.HHRcPBtC%.. P/dl P.················ il1 RMOCWH...%gl.41....... PLT Li -- - ·ML.YP..VMPfHl,...%........... I · · ··· M· ONO % 1 ······-·-····c;RAN % ..·.... : ?-ff ); ..J4424.. 78:--:-0156208._l-(((MMM1M0))),:·8;,318.402710.2---419-9765.4(((FfF(..)f)F.)=... 3113.-5 3-711.5 .21Z.50,.10. .5.:0..-.l0. P501.4-. 1400 000 1.7 - ·42.2 -9.735.2 .J_..S.Q.·.1.§7J!J) IIii- !Revi- ew Yo- urD- ecisi- onsl .4156.33 .g:6 33.1 ·· ·-· 1i1i1i1i1 What can I do'? To More Hematology I .13.2 .439,.000 ........)i ·'27?·4'4?1·'·?····----i\11\'l Where am I'? Help
            ::::.                             Fig. I. Lab tests

values and the patient's results. With this information, they are ready to select an initial diagnosis from a list of
options including anatomic, platelet, or plasma procoagulent proteins.   Following their selection, they must
support their diagnostic reasoning by identifying the case findings that support their decisions, that is, that were
causal agents of the bleeding episode(s) (Fig. 2). This causal reasoning process is what we determined was
important to scaffold in novice diagnosticians.  Such scaffolding requires communicating the process to the
learners, coaching it, and eliciting articulation the ideas (Guzdial, 1994). These activities are operationalized by
having learners click on the radio buttons that indicate the degree to which various pieces of evidence (darkened
buttons) support their diagnosis.  That is, they have to justify the causes that lead to their diagnosis.                                                     They then
receive expert feedback on their selections and an expert summary of the diagnosis. We communicate the process
through instructions to "defend" their thinking. We coach their performance through a simple interface and
expert feedback.        The entire process requires that the learners articulate their thinking that resulted in their
diagnosis.         Another important feature of scaffolding is fading, so that students learn to perform without
scaffolding.        Scaffolding in our case-based learning environment is accomplished by removing the causal
prompts in the last two of six cases.
       Following the initial evaluation, the learner proceeds to determining the case etiology, whether (in this
case) the (platelet) problem resulted from increased destruction or reduced production of platelets. As always, the
learner may review the case history and physical examination information, order additional labs, consult the
textbook, or get help.     Following review of the facts of the case and cause of the bleeding, the learner is once

442
   il Killer Headache:              Select·the degree to vhich the                                                                                                                                                                                                          What do I need
      \l follovi ng case fin.dings support platelets as the cause1/0;:;f: =b:;l:::;e;::e; d= =i:;::ng -=========:;:;:;:;====::;:;:::==!HI                                                                                                                                      to knov'?Consult TextbookI
  ir leengc::::::.,;. ... medications that effect platelet . . ..;,:.··O :;;·O >;;;;:·. E :!;::0/number and function.                                                                                                                                                    :.::-,:.:·::: I ReYie· Labs Ordered I
         11                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                IReYiew Your Decisions!
     1! · Petechiae and purpura w ere:lpresent and diffuse.                                             0    0                                      0    E
  lII · Bleeding occurred w ithout trauma or sspuorngetarnye,oaunsdly involved more than one location.  0    0                                    0                                                                                                                         What do I do'?E!see Expen·s Su111111aryl
  IIl ·· Platelet count was normal, but bleeding time w as prolonged. Screening coagulation studies     0    0@                                           E                                                                                                                  Where am I'?0Help
     I.... ..:..····....-.............................. ....................................................................·.·····:.....
                                          Fig. 2. Defending causal reasoning.

again required to support their reasoning for a specific etiology, thereby scaffolding the etiology diagnosis
process. Having defined the etiology of bleeding, the student determines and defends the differential diagnosis of
the specific disease, then proceeding to treat the case.                                                     In addition to preventative care and general support, the
learner may order a transfusion of platelets (Fig. 3).                                                       At each point in the diagnostic process, including the
ordering of blood products, the student must justify their decision or action.                                                                                                                                                                                              Following their prescription,
learners have the option of changing their treatment, ordering additional platelet transfusions after reviewing
labs, physical and history.        Or the learner may simply close the case, at which time they receive a medical
summary of the actions and causes present in the case.
                        ·:·:·:·:·:·.·.·.·.·.:.·:·:·:·.·.·::.·:.·.·.·.·.·.·.·.:.:.:.::·.·.·.·.·.:.:.:.:.:.·.·:.·.·.:.:.:.:.:.·.·.·.·.·.·.·.:.·.:.· .                                                                                                                         What do I need
            Killer Headache: Write Transfusion Order                                                                                                                                                                                                                     I    to knov'?Consult TextbookI,
   ;;;;1i.--..!T......o!._,..\..,w_,,.._Q,r.._i.J,t.!P.e_Y_ _.ryQ_oeo_ _duspru_ _ecoc_tr.i,._fd._,T,i._e.c.y:r_..:p_,:_ ce_ l_i_ c_ k _ o_ n_ _ _y_o..u,,·_r__ 1_c0h_ _ mo_ Ai_lc/.,m_e,.s.g_.o..__b.,u(.e_.i.n nl_otf_w/a- V_n._to,- lc_uh..mi._l..-(.e!.).__._.-___·-··-.-,1.,;1111 -·AQ/.tY.Q!tg_mp_?/.tible ·.Random donor concentrate............ ····- 5apubneitrses(i9s....r.v..o_qlwum.li.ey)ajim.t::;..--1;,i ...ii:rle donor anheresis · 10 units (Qr...g_yj.valent -Ji.Lh.-matched ap!Jg.r...?.!S 1.nlatelet concentrates ·--P.-r-1?..i.?..Y.Qlm:pg)_____rn 1 ReYie· Case History I, IReYiew Physical EXU1!1 I ReYie· Labs Ordered I IRniew Your 1' Decision,
                  Length of Time                                                                            Filter Type                                                                                                                                                     What can I do'?·· 350mmiinnuuteteinifnufusisoion'-n-----·.-12-6"0-o"--2."7-mct='r0omn imcricornobaglogond!gate ·--II· 1 hour infusion..-1J!Q)Jr infusi.Q;n.· leukodenleti=o=n,_______--1;e1Rewrite OrderTreat 0_iseaseI,1,' ,
    ii                 Your Platelet Transfusion Orderl!i .:J;:i: ···:·p:·:·r::;:o;-:·d:·:·u:·:·c:·:t·:=::·.:.·:A·!·:·B:·:::O:::.-:/-:t·:·y:·:=p:=:=em:=:.=.:-si:,n:l-:!=:e·:=c:·:=i:=f:..:.:i::,c:-:,::*;:;:;:a.:i.:mo;:;:n:,o:·:.·.u:*-::n:.:.:f:t::i/;:;lv,:t,:o:e;,;lr:;u:;::.;:.m;.2: e0:...m_Si. ucnriotns·.·.-..·.·.·.Where am I'?Help
                                           Fig. 3. Writing transfusion order.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             443
         The causal modeling is embedded in the options presented, the selections made, and the diagnostic
reasoning is scaffolded in the justifications required at each decision point in the case.          The causal reasoning is
made an overt process rather than the covert process that most experienced physician go through. Extensive use
 of reasoning in simulated cases will transfer to less related cases in the future.
         This environment has been used in a third year medical education program at a medical college in the
west. For political reasons, it has been impossible to date to conduct research on its efficacy.

References
Asher, H.B., (1983).   Causal Modeling. Beverly Hills, CA: SAGE Publications, Inc.
Feltovich, P.J., Spiro, R.J., & Coulson, R.L. (1989). The nature of conceptual understanding in biomedicine: The deep
   structure of complex ideas and the development of misconceptions.         In. D. Evans & V. Patel (Eds.), The cognitive
   sciences in medicine. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Console,  L.,  & Torasso,    P. (1990)   Hypothetical  reasoning   in causal models.  International  Journal    of Intelligent
   Systems, 5, 83-124.
Jonassen, D.H. (1991). Hypertext as instructional design. Educational Technology: Research and Development            39(1),
   83-92.
Jonassen, D.H., Amruso, D.R., & Olesen, J. (1991). Designing a hypertext on transfusion medicine using cognitive
   flexibility theory.  Journal of Educational Multimedia and Hypermedia, 1(3).
Kuipers, Benjamin (1985). Expert causal reasoning and explanation. paper presented to the: American Educational
   Research Association, 1985 annual meeting.ERIC #ED258993.
Lehrer,  R.   (1993). Authors   of knowledge:   Patterns   of  hypermedia design.  In S.   P. Lajoie & S.   J.  Derry (Eds.),
   Computers as cognitive tools (pp. 197-227). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Lyon, H.C. Jr., James Healy, James Bell, Joseph O'Donnell, Edward Schultz, Margeret Moore-West, Robert Wigton,
   Frank Hirai, & J. Robert Beck, PlanAlyzer, an interactive computer-assisted program to teach clinical problem
   solving in diagnosing anemia and coronary artery disease. (1992). Academic Medicine. 67, 821-828.
Palchik, Nancy   S.,  Frederick   Wolfe,  James Cassidy,    Robert Ike, &    Wayne  davis.  (1990). Comparing    information
   gathering strategies of medical students and physicians in diagnosing simulated medical cases. Academic Medicine,
   65,   107-113
Salomon, G. (1979). The interaction Leaming, cognition, and instruction. San Francisco: Josey Bass.
Solomon, D.J., Osuch, J., Anderson, K., Gruenberg, J., Kisala, J., Milroy, M., & Stawsky, W. (1992). A pilot study of
   the relationship between expert's ratings and scores generated by the NBME's computer-based examination system.
   Academic Medicine, 67, 130-132.
Simmons,    Ried G.   (1992) The   roles of  associational and causal resoning in  problem  solving. Artificial Intelligence,
   53,   159-207.
Spiro, R.J. & Jehng, J.C. (1990). Cognitive flexibility and hypertext: Theory and technology for the non-linear and
   multi-dimensional    traversal  of complex  subject matter.  In D. Nix &   R.J. Spiro (Eds.), Cognition, education,  and
   multimedia: Explorations in high technology. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Spiro,  R.J., Vispoel,  W.,  Schmitz,    J., Samarapungavan,     A.,  & Boerger,   A. (1987).  Knowledge    acquisition  for
   application:  Cognitive   flexibility  and transfer in   complex   content domains.   In B.C.  Britton (Ed.), Executive
   control processes. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Vygotsky, L. (1978). Mind in society. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

444
