   Mathematical           Manipulatives           as    Designed       Artifacts:      the        Cognitive,
                      Affective,        and     Technological           Dimensions

                                                Michael Eisenberg
                      Department of Computer Science, Institute of Cognitive Science, and
                                     Center for LifeLong Learning and Design
                            University of Colorado, Boulder CO USA 80309-0430
                                              duck@cs.colorado.edu

                                                  Julie DiBiase
                       Department of Computer Science and Institute of Cognitive Science
                            University of Colorado, Boulder CO USA 80309-0430
                                              jules@cs.colorado.edu

               Abstract.  Mathematical    manipulatives-tangible     objects  with a pedagogical
               purpose-have become popular tools in mathematics education. But typically, the
               notion of a "manipulative" carries with it a number of additional assumptions: that
               these objects are designed for elementary (as opposed to advanced) mathematics
               instruction; that they have little in the way of emotional meaning for their users; and
               that they are relatively simple, "low-tech" objects. In this paper we challenge these
               assumptions. Drawing on our experiences in two related projects in educational
               computing,  we   suggest  that   manipulatives   may  be  designed  for advanced
               mathematical topics; that they may offer creative (and thus affectively important)
               opportunities for students; and that they may be designed in ways that accompany or
               incorporate computational media.

1. Introduction:        Mathematical      Manipulatives          as Objects   of   Design
 Mathematical manipulatives-broadly speaking, tangible objects with an explicit pedagogical purpose-have a
 venerable presence in American elementary education. Early examples, such as the blocks used by Maria
 Montessori [Montessori 1912] and the well-known Cuisenaire rods [Pl], have over time been succeeded by a
 still larger set of beautiful objects: Geoboards      [P2], Polydrons [P3], and so  forth.   Undeniably,   many
 mathematics teachers express positive views of such manipulatives (for instance, the NCTM Standards
 document recommends their use in K-4 classrooms ([NCTM 1989], p. 17)). Still, as [Resnick & Omanson
1987]    have  observed in arithmetic   classrooms,    children do not always  succeed in     linking  the use of
 manipulatives t o the mathematical concepts or operations that these objects are supposed t o illuminate; while
 [Ball 1992], describing the popularity of manipulatives in mathematics education, writes that they "have become
part of educational dogma: Using them helps students; not using them hinders students. There is little open,
principled debate about the purposes of using manipulatives and their appropriate role in helping students learn."

This paper is intended to contribute to the discussion whose absence is noted by Ball. The continuing popularity
of manipulatives suggests that mathematics teachers do find value in them; but the occasional cautionary voices
suggest in turn that the use of manipulatives is hardly a guarantee of educational success. Creating high-quality
mathematical manipulatives is, in fact, a design task worthy of study in its own right. This paper will explore
several usually unheralded aspects of this design task, with a view toward articulating what we feel are important
themes and principles in the construction of mathematical manipulatives. Our discussion will focus on several
interrelated "dimensions" of manipulative design:

          · The cognitive dimension (i.e., what types of learning or reflection the manipulatives
          are intended to promote);
          · The technological dimension (i.e., how--or whether-the advent of new technologies
          may open up intriguing new directions in manipulative design);
          · The social/affective dimension (i.e., how manipulatives function in the social or
          personal lives of both children and adults).

44
In exploring these ideas, we hope not only to inform (and share our own experiences with) the creators of novel
manipulatives, but also to suggest new avenues of assessment and observation-new ways of interpreting the
uses of manipulatives in both school and home settings.

The observations in this paper derive primarily from two related research efforts that we have pursued at the
University of Colorado. The following (second) section outlines these two projects and describes the types of
manipulatives employed: briefly, the first project centered on the use of manipulatives to illustrate important
concepts in higher mathematics and functional programming, while the second has focused on allowing students
to design and create customized polyhedral models through the use of a computer program. The third section
the heart of this paper-will enumerate issues regarding the creation and use of manipulatives that have come to
light in our own experiences within these two projects. Some issues are more closely associated with the first
project, and some with the second; but in total, they frame a coherent perspective regarding the pedagogical
value of mathematical manipulatives. In the fourth section, we summarize this perspective and outline what we
feel are promising directions for future research in the design and use of manipulatives.

2.  Two    Research     Projects    Involving    the    Use       of Manipulatives:            A Summary
2.1   Understanding     Higher-Order   Functions
The first project [DiBiase 1995a, DiBiase 1995b, DiBiase & Eisenberg 1995] was geared towards studying
students' abilities to master higher-orderfunctions [Abelson et al. 1985, Eisenberg et al. 1987]-a notoriously
difficult concept   whose explicit treatment is typically     first presented   in college algebra   ( or functional
programming) courses.    Eighteen students, ranging from 10-21 years of age, volunteered for the project.    During
the course of the 10 week (average) curriculum, students used a computer application named SchemePaint
[Eisenberg 1995] to write graphics programs employing higher-order functions.           At the same time, concrete
manipulatives-literally, small felt pillows-representing data objects in the programming language were
available as illustrations of this somewhat abstract concept. Pillows of distinct colors (representing distinct data
types) and associated textual contents were used to represent data objects such as numbers and procedures. The
basic idea behind the construction of these manipulatives was to respond to the specific difficulties and
misconceptions that students tend to exhibit in dealing with the notion of functional data objects; that is, the
physical representation needed to embody valid characteristics of functional data while at the same time
contradicting the most commonly-encountered misconceptions.

2.2   HyperGami
The second project involves the use of a program named HyperGami[Eisenberg & Nishioka in press] to
introduce students to the domain of solid geometry. The central notion behind HyperGami is that it permits
students to create solid (polyhedral) shapes, viewing them in three-dimensional form on the computer screen;
these shapes may then be "unfolded" by the system to produce two-dimensional patterns (or folding nets) which
in turn may be decorated by a variety of means; and finally, the newly-decorated folding nets may be sent as
output to a color printer, after which they may be cut out and folded into paper polyhedral models.

Several   features of HyperGami deserve special  emphasis      in   this brief outline. First, the system-like     the
aforementioned SchemePaint-is a programmable application, combining elements of direct manipulation
interfaces (e.g., for choosing colors and viewing solids) with a "domain-enriched" version of the MacScheme
programming language [P4]. Second, the system does not limit users to a pre-defined set of polyhedral models,
but rather allows users to create new, customized polyhedra (often employing "classical" shapes as starting
points). [Fig. 1] shows an example of this notion: here, a tetrahedron is truncated at each of its (four) vertices,
then "stretched" along the z-axis to produce a new polyhedron; this shape is then unfolded to produce a net,
which is decorated with solid colors and patterns; the resulting two-dimensional may now be printed out and
folded into a model. As a final point it should be noted that, in practice, HyperGami is used not merely to create
abstract mathematical models, but as a tool for creating more elaborate paper sculptures. [Fig. 2] illustrates the
idea: here, a paper turtle has been created from several polyhedral "building blocks": e.g., the turtle's shell is a
portion of a truncated dodecahedron, his eyes are icosahedra, his tail is a stretched tetrahedron, and so forth.

                                                                                                                    45
    Figure 1: (Top   row)     A tetrahedron is truncated,  then stretched. (Bottom row) A folding  net  is
    produced for the new shape; this net is then decorated with solid colors, patterns, and turtle graphics.
    The decorated shape may now be printed and folded into the desired solid.

               Figure 2: A polyhedral turtle created using HyperGami's customized shapes.
HyperGami has been employed on a long-term tutorial basis with sixteen (volunteer) elementary- and middle
school students during the past three semesters; these students have typically worked with us for approximately
one semester at a time on a weekly or biweekly basis, either in individual tutorials or in pairs. In the course of
this work, children have created a wide variety of polyhedral models and sculptures with the software, including
(e.g.) stellated forms, a personalized polyhedral "die", a paper brontosaurus, Christmas ornaments, polyhedral
chocolate candies (using the HyperGami forms as molds), and many others. (See [Eisenberg & Nishioka in
press] for more description of students' work with the system.)

3. Issues in the Creation and Use of Mathematical Manipulatives
The previous section outlined    two projects  that have,  for  us, served as springboards for thinking about
mathematical manipulatives as designed artifacts. In fact neither of these projects originated as an explicit
investigation into manipulative design; but within both projects, a number of interesting (and often unexpected)
issues have emerged that have caused us to rethink our received notions on this subject. In this section we
describe the most important of these issues, focusing in turn on the cognitive, affective, and technological
"dimensions" defined earlier.

46
3.1   Cognitive     Issues

Self-constructed      manipulatives
Typically, mathematical manipulatives are designed and marketed as fully-formed objects-number blocks,
balancing scales, wooden solids-that are pre-assembled and ready for students to use. In slightly less pre
digested form, one sometimes finds manipulative "kits" (e.g., plastic pieces with which to assemble certain
types of polyhedra); while these involve some measure of creative participation on the part of the student, the
set of "constructible" objects is still relatively constrained. In contrast, our experiences with HyperGami have
suggested that-rather than presenting students with fully-formed objects, or kits of pieces-there may be
special value in providing students with tools for constructing their own personalized manipulatives. Thus,
rather than presenting students with a geometric construction kit, the HyperGami software allows students to
create a (potentially infinite) set of never-before-seen polyhedra, and to decorate those polyhedra in ways that are
mathematically revealing (e.g., by using geometric patterns to highlight certain symmetry operations) or simply
aesthetically appealing.

There are several potentially beneficial consequences to this notion of providing students with "manipulative
creation tools" rather than with manipulatives themselves. One of these consequences-the fact that the created
objects have status as artistic creations, and thus may be invested with pride and affection by their creators-will
be discussed shortly, as a reflection of the "social dimension" of manipulative design. Another possible benefit
arises from allowing the student to participate not merely in the use of manipulatives but in their creation, and
thus to have the opportunity to reflect upon the creative act of designing mathematical objects. Indeed, the
writings of mathematicians such as [Fomenko 1994] and [Hadamard 1949] imply that for some mathematicians,
it is the ability to create or tailor personalized visual representations of abstract concepts (rather than simply the
ability to recall the representations of others) that proves crucial to mathematical understanding. (See also the
quote from Sfard later in this paper.) If this is true, then students should arguably have practice in crafting-and
not merely employing-manipulatives.       More  broadly,      this suggestion  reflects the general   outlook of
"constructionism" as advocated by Papert and his colleagues [Papert 1991]-an educational philosophy that
stresses the value of allowing learners to participate in the creation of mathematically rich objects and
representations.

Of course, not all manipulatives need be created by students; and there are undeniable benefits to the use of
traditional "pre-assembled" manipulatives. Such pre-assembled objects may be especially convenient or labor
saving for teachers; or perhaps the construction of these objects by students might involve such a high level of
skill, or tolerance for drudgery, as to render the entire enterprise counterproductive. Nonetheless-as with all the
issues described in this paper-our purpose in discussing this particular issue is not to advocate that all
mathematical manipulatives    must  be  student-constructed,    but rather to advocate   that this is one of  the
possibilities that designers ought to routinely consider.

Manipulatives     for Higher    Mathematics
Traditionally, mathematical manipulatives are regarded as "children's objects", rather like stuffed animals; indeed,
virtually every commercially available manipulative is explicitly targeted at elementary school students. This
fact ought to be surprising: since manipulatives are so popular with elementary school teachers, one might ask
why the "culture" of manipulative use has not spread to high schools and universities. Indeed, the question is
particularly vexing in the light of the difficulties that students of higher mathematics reportedly encounter: why
are there no manipulatives designed for students of calculus, or non-Euclidean geometry, or field theory, or
Fourier transforms?

The answer may lie, partially, in the "technological dimension" to be discussed shortly: that is, it may be the
case that constructing adequate manipulatives for some of these advanced topics requires technological
sophistication that is only now beginning to emerge. Or one might argue that the answer lies in the "social
dimension": since manipulatives are associated with children's work, older students are reluctant to employ
them. Notwithstanding     the circular element in this     last argument,  it is our belief   that mathematical
manipulatives may in fact be especially valuable in presenting advanced mathematical topics. This conviction is
largely a result of our experience in the "higher-order functions" project: for some students, even the presence of
a simple tangible "function object" apparently assisted in understanding the use of (e.g.) functions as arguments
to other functions [DiBiase 1995a]. [Sfard 1992], in a discussion of students' difficulties with the concept of
function, writes:

                                                                                                               47
       The   Ideal mathematician,  according     to Davis    and Hersh (1983,  p. 35), studies  objects whose
       existence is unsuspected by all except a handful of his fellows.     Even the strangest abstract entities,
       while scrutinized and manipulated, seem to the mathematician as unquestionably real as the pen with
       which he or she writes papers...     Shortly after being introduced to [the notion of function, the
       student] is expected to analyze and manipulate the new entity with a confidence which can only be
       achieved by those who can treat it as if it were a real thing. Many of our students, however, seem to
       be lacking this ability. [Italics in the original.]

 Sfard's observations, together with our own experiences, suggest that this ability to "reify" the notion of a
 function may be supported by the growth of a "culture of manipulatives" for these concepts. Plausibly, the same
 argument applies to other abstract mathematical concepts-transforms, groups, and so forth.

 3.2  Social/Affective    Issues

 Manipulatives     as  "social currency"
 In the previous discussion, we alluded to the value of permitting students not merely to use manipulatives, but
 to create them.   One of the  themes     that emerges     from this notion is that student-created mathematical
 manipulatives-such    as HyperGami       polyhedra-may      take on   far richer social roles than do  traditional
 manipulatives. Repeatedly we have seen students employing their HyperGami constructions as elements in their
 social lives: one 13-year old girl placed her newly-created polyhedron on display at home; a 13-year-old boy gave
 one of his more elaborate constructions as a gift to an adult; a 10-year-old girl made a polyhedron as a wrapper
 for a Christmas treat for her father; an 11-year-old girl gave a nickname to one of her polyhedral creations.
 (Indeed, we ourselves have used HyperGami sculptures as gifts and displays in much the same way; and if truth
 be told, several of our own constructions have nicknames as well!)

 Such tales are of course "anecdotal evidence"-and their sheer profusion and variation defy easy statistical
 summary-but in our experience there is a noticeable consistency to the way in which HyperGami constructions
 have attained what we have called "social currency" in the lives of our students and ourselves. Constructions are
 exhibited, played with, donated, photographed, anthropomorphized. It is important to point out, in this context,
 that very little in the mathematical experience of students ever attains this status: one cannot (e.g.) give a
 completed workbook page or number-block construction as a gift. It is thus precisely because student
 constructed manipulatives have a personalized, unique, and aesthetic side that they are capable of acting as much
 more than "mere" mathematical illustrations.    And there is still another side to this discussion: because some
 HyperGami constructions have been created by teams or groups of students (e.g., one pair of girls created, in
 partnership, a mutually-decorated great stellated dodecahedron), the resulting objects take on still another sort of
 "social currency"-joint ownership. Such objects become symbols, for each contributor, of the participation and
 personalities of his or her colleagues.

 Our observations   of  the uses of      HyperGami  constructions     echo  in part the  discussion  provided     by
 [Csikszentmihalyi 1993] in his study of the manner in which people invest physical objects with personal
 importance:

      "Artifacts help objectify the self... [they] reveal the continuity of the self through time, by providing
      foci of involvement in the present, mementos and souvenirs of the past, and signposts to future
      goals. ... [they] give concrete evidence of one's place in a social network as symbols (literally, the
      joining together) of valued relationships. In these... ways things stabilize our sense of who we are;
      they give a permanent shape to our views of ourselves that otherwise would quickly dissolve in the
      flux of consciousness." (p. 23)

For designers of mathematical manipulatives, the crucial message here is that manipulatives are, first and
foremost, physical objects; and as such, they ought to be (though rarely are) capable of taking on the roles that
Csikszentmihalyi describes.

Age-  and    gender-related    aspects    of manipulative       design
As noted earlier in this paper, mathematical manipulatives are generally associated with use by younger children;
thus the problem of creating manipulatives that may be used by students of widely varying ages rarely arises in
this traditional context. However, our recommendation for introducing manipulatives into higher mathematics

48
implies, in turn, that we must begin to examine the ways in which manipulatives are used not only by
elementary school students, but also by teenagers and adults.

These reflections have arisen, in large part, from our observations of students in the higher-order-function
project-in particular, how students of different ages responded to the tangible "function objects" created for that
project. Broadly speaking, students below the age of 12 enjoyed using the function manipulatives (one turned
manipulative use into his own game). Students above the age of 16 acknowledged the role of the manipulatives
in learning the concept of higher order functions, but were generally uninterested in extended use of the objects.
Between these demarcation points-between the ages of 12 and 16-we observed that students were extremely
resistant to the use of manipulatives, particularly when their work was likely to be observed by peers. In one
scenario, for instance, three tenth-graders worked with our curriculum as a group; but a noticeably higher level
of effort was exhibited when one or two students were absent. In another scenario, a tenth-grade (male) student
responded to the manipulatives with the exclamation, "Oh, not the puffy objects. I hate the puffy objects."

HyperGami constructions have met with a similar pattern of response in our experience: elementary and middle
school students (up to about the age of 13) and adults (beyond the age of about 18) have responded positively to
the constructions; but high school students-especially boys-have been noticeably less interested.

Again, these are anecdotal observations; and they have emerged gradually, over time spent working within our
two projects. These experiences have sensitized us, however, to the issue of designing manipulatives with an
eye toward students' sense of dignity (for lack of a better term). It is a common observation (cf. [Eckert 1989],
[Csikszentmihalyi et al. 1993]) that students of high school age in particular are acutely sensitive to how they
are perceived by their peers; designing educational objects for students at this age is thus not simply a matter of
tailoring the manipulatives' content to higher-level subjects, but of tailoring their style and appearance so as not
to appear embarrassingly childlike. Similarly, the distinct "cultures" of male and female students at this age may
result in certain styles of manipulative design being perceived (whether rightly or not) as inappropriate (the male
tenth-grader's aversion to "puffy" felt objects may be illustrative here); designers of manipulatives for older
students may discover that it is important to create "male-appropriate" and "female-appropriate" versions of
manipulatives (or t o make special efforts t o create "gender-neutral" manipulatives)-an issue that does not come
up with objects made for younger children. Clearly these are topics that merit much longer discussion; for now,
our point is again that mathematical manipulatives are not merely physical    and educational but also social
objects-objects that reflect the social identities of their users-and must be designed with a perspective that
goes beyond their role as cognitive aids.

3.3  Technological  Issues

Traditionally, mathematical manipulatives in the classroom are envisioned as relatively "low-tech" objects
e.g., wooden blocks, or plastic tiles. (It is interesting to note, for instance, that the authors of the NCTM
standards, while advocating the use of calculators and computers in mathematics education, do not to our
knowledge ever describe these instruments as "manipulatives". As an illustration, see the discussion in [NCTM
89], pp. 67-8: here, manipulatives, calculators, and computers are all recommended as classroom materials, but
are classified as separate bulleted items.) Our experience in both projects suggests the value of a more catholic
view of manipulatives, in which "high-" and "low-tech" qualities are combined. In the case of the higher-order
functions project, tangible manipulatives were used to represent computational objects; and computational
processes enacted with the manipulatives were then compared with running programs. In HyperGami, the
structure of students' activity is one in which abstract computational work-the design of new polyhedra-is
followed by periods of patient craftwork-the assembling of models. The very same abstract "object", then, is
experienced both in its computational and tangible form in the course of a single project. It is precisely this sort
of varied activity, moving between representations, that may prove an important element of manipulative design
generally; embedding manipulatives within (partly) technological environments may serve to alleviate the sorts
of difficulties in integrating mathematical representations noted earlier in the realm of arithmetic by Resnick and
Omanson. Similarly, our advocacy       of  student-designed   manipulatives reflects a belief in the value    of
computational tools such as HyperGami; the advent of more (and more powerful) tools of this nature should,
over time, render manipulative design into something more closely approaching a craft for children and adults,
rather than an educational industry.

                                                                                                              49
 4. Summary;         Future   Directions
 In this paper, we have conveniently labelled our observations as corresponding to the cognitive, social/affective,
 and technological "dimensions" of manipulative design. Life is, of course, not so easily compartmentalized; and
 in fact, the themes discussed in this paper are deeply interrelated. A move toward incorporating technology into
 mathematics education leads naturally toward providing computational "construction kits" such as HyperGami;
 it likewise leads toward the notion of designing manipulatives for computational topics such as higher-order
 functions. In turn, our first efforts in these directions alert us both to unexpected roles that manipulatives can
 play-as sculptures, gifts, or souvenirs-and to unexpected problems in designing manipulatives-e.g., that
 they may embarrass their older users. And we are led still further, into considering what it may mean to design
 manipulatives for topics in higher mathematics.

 Over time, a richer definition of "manipulative" may be in order in mathematics education. If the role of a
 "manipulative" is to embody a mathematical idea, visibly and interactively, within a tangible object, then such
 objects may well be designed through computation, or reflect mathematical ideas derived from computation.
 Indeed,  as in  the case of Resnick's programmable  LEGO/Logo     "creatures"   [Resnick 1993], mathematical
 manipulatives may themselves include computational elements built within them. Treating manipulative design
 as a technologically-enriched craft leads to still other directions of work-for instance, we have recently used
 HyperGami polyhedra as molds for materials such as wax and plaster, and have incorporated them into home
 made mobiles, science-kit objects (e.g., a kaleidoscope and balancing toy), and paper machines. Going still
 further, the placement of manipulative design tools into new social settings afforded by technology (most
 notably the World Wide Web) could have major consequences for the "affective dimension" of manipulative
 design; for instance, if a student can publish her own design for a mathematical object to a wide community, she
 may be more inclined to think of that object as an artistic performance (and at the same time, she may be more
 likely to find a supportive peer group for her work). And finally, the notion of "mathematical manipulative", in
 this view, may come to reflect a wider perspective than one that focuses on designing pre-assembled products for
 teaching individual concepts to young children. Rather, we may see manipulatives as objects that embody both
 abstract and concrete notions, and both "adult" and "children's" mathematics-and ultimately, perhaps, objects
 that combine the cognitive benefits of a scientific demonstration with the emotional resonance of a birthday
 present.

Acknowledgments
 This work owes much to the influence of Hal Abelson and Gerald Jay Sussman. The HyperGami program was
 developed with the collaboration of Ann Nishioka and the assistance of Zach Nies and Jay Smith. We would
 also like to thank Gerhard Fischer and the members of the Center for LifeLong Learning and Design at the
 University of Colorado for wonderful conversations. This work is supported in part by NSF grants RED-
 9253425, by a Young Investigator award IRI-9258684, and by NSF and the Advanced Research Projects Agency
 under Cooperative Agreement No. CDA-940860. Finally, we would like to thank Apple Computer, Inc. for
 donating the machines with which this research was conducted.

References
 [Abelson et al. 1985] Abelson, H. and Sussman, G. with Sussman, J. (1985). Structure and Interpretation of
    Computer Progarams. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
 [Ball 1992] Ball, D.L. (1992). Magical hopes: manipulatives and the reform of math education. American
    Educator(Summer), 15-18;46-47.
 [Csikszentmihalyi 1993] Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1993). Why we need things. In S. Lubar and W. D. Kingery
    (eds.), History from Things. Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution Press.
 [Csikszentmihalyi et al. 1993] Csikszentmihalyi, M.; Rathunde, K.; and Whalen, S. (1993). Talented
    Teenagers. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
 [DiBiase1995a] DiBiase, J. (1995). Building Curricula to Shape Cognitive Models: A Case Study ofFunctions
    as Data Objects. Doctoral dissertation, University of Colorado, Boulder.
 [DiBiase 1995b]   DiBiase, J. (1995). Examining the Difficulty with Thinking of Functions as Data Objects:
    Misconceptions ofHigher-Order Functions.     Report No. CSCI-791-95, University of Colorado, Boulder.

50
[DiBiase & Eisenberg 1995] DiBiase, J. and Eisenberg, M. (1995). Mental imagery in the teaching of functions.
    Proceedings of the National Educational Computing Conference (NECC), Baltimore, MD, June 1995.
[Eckert 1989] Eckert, P. (1989). Jocks and Burnouts. New York: Teachers College Press.
[Eisenberg et al. 1987] Eisenberg, M., Resnick, M., & Turbak, F. (1987). Understanding procedures as objects.
    In G. M. Olson, S. Sheppard, & E. Soloway (eds.), Empirical Studies of Programmers: Second Workshop.
    Norwood, NJ: Ablex, pp. 14-32.
[Eisenberg & Nishioka in press] Eisenberg, M. & Nishioka, A. (In press). Creating polyhedral models by
    computer. Journal of Computers in Mathematics and Science Teaching.
[Eisenberg 1995] Eisenberg, M. (1995). Programmable applications: interpreter meets interface. SIGCH/
    Bulletin, 27:2, 1995, pp. 68-83.
[Fomenko 1994] Fomenko, A. (1994). Visual Geometry and Topology. Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
[Hadamard 1949] Hadamard, J. (1949). The Psychology of Invention in the Mathematical Field. New York:
    Dover.
[Montessori 1912] Montessori, M. (1912). The Montessori Method. New York: Schocken Books (1964
    edition).
[NCTM 1989] National Council of Teachers of Mathematics (1989). Curriculum and evaluation standards for
    school mathematics. Reston, VA: Author.
[Papert 1991] Papert, S. (1991). Situating constructionism. In Harel, I., & Papert, S. (eds.)Constructionism:
    Research Reports and Essays. Norwood, N.J.: Ablex.
[Resnick 1993] Resnick, M. (1993). Behavior construction kits. Communications of the ACM, 36:7, pp. 64-
71.
[Resnick & Omanson 1987] Resnick, L.B. and Omanson, S.F. (1987).     Learning to understand arithmetic.  In
    R. Glaser (Ed.), Advances in instructional psychology (Vol. 3, pp. 41-96). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
[Sfard 1992] Sfard, A. (1992). Operational origins of mathematical objects and the quandary of reification-the
    case of function. In G. Harel and E. Dubinsky (eds.), The Concept of Function. Washington, DC:
    Mathematical Association of America.

Products
[Pl ] Cuisenaire Co. of America. Cuisenaire rods. White Plains, NY.
(P2] Cuisenaire Co. of America. Geoboards.White Plains, NY.
[P3] Cuisenaire Co. of America. Polydrons. White Plains, NY.
[P4] LightShip Software. MacScheme. Palo Alto, CA.

                                                                                                               51
