    Bootstrapping          a   Community              of   Practice:        Learning      Science      by
                 Doing         Projects      in a     High      School      Classroom

                                               Joseph Polman
                                            Northwestern University
                                      School of Education and Social Policy
                                              Evanston, IL 60208
                                            polman@covis.nwu.edu

Introduction
Researchers and theorists have extolled the promise of learning achieved through participation in the activities of
a community of practice.   Although he did not  use    the term "community   of practice" in his seminal      work
Mindstorms, [Papert, 1980) described intergenerational learning that takes place in the preparation for a Brazilian
festival. Experienced adults work with novice children on teams over an extended period of time,   supporting
learning and passing on expertise naturally through the construction of displays and the production of street
theater.  Similarly, [Lave & Wenger, 1991) describe how apprentice tailors gradually learn their craft by aiding
master tailors in ever expanding portions of work they are hired to do. [Brown, Collins, & Duguid, 1989) have
described the general    processes of modeling, coaching, and   fading as   important means   by  which       more
experienced members of a community help novices learn to contribute to activities.
For educators interested in fostering meaningful learning in school classrooms, however, models such as the
samba school and classical apprenticeships can seem frustratingly distant from any reality they face or can create.
In this paper, I describe the "bootstrapping problem" for teachers interested in making novel approaches to
teaching work in classroom communities of practice.      Then, I briefly outline the school setting where this
research was conducted, as well as my research methods. In the main portion of the paper, I explore a range of
scaffolding strategies adapted to the school setting by one teacher, and the results and implications of his efforts
to enable students to construct scientific inquiries. Two initial problematic strategies are examined. Then, a
constellation of more successful strategies the teacher developed to support student learning are discussed.
The    "Bootstrapping      Problem"
For teachers' and students' daily work in high schools, the most salient community is found in the individual
classrooms that change on a period-by-period basis. One obvious difference between traditional apprenticeship
models and classroom communities is that the group which the teacher leads is entirely reconstituted at the
beginning of each year.  At any one time in an apprenticeship, most of the members of the community have
some experience and a few are novices.     In a high school class at the beginning of the school year, only one
person in the classroom has experience in the specific practices of that specific class-the teacher.         As one
teacher put it, "when you start out a new year you have a whole new group of kids, and they have no idea what
happened the last year."
Although the classroom group may be new at the beginning of the year, students are familiar with common
school practicesfrom previous years' experience. Thus, teachers who conduct their classes in the most typical
fashion can take advantage of the shared experiences students already have, even though they don't know the
students.  Such teachers using the most    "typical"  pedagogy will have  an easier time at establishing shared
understanding of what is expected in the class than those whose pedagogy departs from the norm.  Teachers who
"swim against the flow" not only lack the shared understanding of how school works that more traditional
teachers use-they must also actively resist students' assumption that the class is or should fit their accustomed
model.
The lack of experts and the opposition to the standard culture of schooling create a unique problem for teachers
leading reform-oriented classrooms:   they must create an  environment   in which students can  take actions to
begin to "pull themselves up by their own bootstraps."       Strategies for creating and maintaining such an
environment are the subject of this paper.

474
The Research Setting and Methods
Rory Wagner teaches earth science using project-based methods in a high school where most science teaching
follows a traditional ''lecture-lab-demo" model.     In the fall of 1992, Rory was    introduced to  the idea of
conducting a project-based science by members of the Leaming Through Collaborative Visualization (CoVis)
project at Northwestern University. CoVis created a testbed of intemetworked classrooms in       which   students,
teachers, and other adults collaboratively conduct authentic scientific inquiry [Pea, 1993].        Rory became
interested in students ''learning science by doing science," rather than simply learning facts about what other
people have done in science. For the past three and a half years, he has been trying to help his students to work
together in groups on research questions that they have posed themselves.    He wants his students to learn to
work with scientific data, and use that data to support a claim about how the physical world works.
I will use data from a larger ethnography I am conducting on Rory Wagner's earth science class to describe the
range of design issues and choices faced by educators interested in introducing project-based science to students in
a standard format high school.  Given the problems discussed      above of creating a classroom community     of
practice outside the norm, I believe valuable lessons are learned from Rory's experiences.
I have been working with Rory during the past three years. During the first one and a half years I acted as an in
class technical assistant and interestedresearch colleague, and in the subsequent one and a half years I have acted
as a participant observer specifically conducting this study. My participation in the class during the study has
primarily been in the form of conversations with students and teacher about the progress of their work and plans,
but it has also included sharing knowledge and advice on issues related to the use of computers and the Internet.
My participant observation during the 1994-95 and 1995-% school years (completed in February) has included
half-time attendance at one of Rory Wagner's Earth Science classes, recorded with handwritten field notes and
periodic videotaping; four formal and more than 50 informal interviews with Rory about his history of project
teaching, issues of running a project-based classroom, and the guidance of specific student projects; two formal
interviews with each of six students in the class being observed in 1995-% about their understandings of and
reactions to project-based science; and informal interviews about ongoing project work with all students in
classes I observed during both years of the study.  My analysis also includes handouts created by Rory, written
assignments created by his students, and written feedback on those assignments given by Rory.

Setting the Students Free
Rory Wagner, a teacher for nineteen years, tried many variations of the standard science class format of "lecture
lab-demo." He "really hadn't been feeling for a long time that lecture-lab-demo was the way to go" and for the
first time saw a viable alternative in project-based science. He was so eager to try the kind of new ideas he had
been reading about physics teachers trying in the LabNet book [Ruopp, Gal, Drayton, & Pfister, 1993] that h e
altered his curriculum and instruction i n midyear. The question was, where and how should h e begin?    He was
convinced that "if students are involved with doing things that they pick and design, they're more apt to be ...
more energized by that, and take more interest in and ownership in it" as opposed to cookbook labs and lockstep
textbook and lecture learning. But he wasn't sure how to      "describe [projects] to them  without telling them
exactly what to do."
So in the late fall of the 1992-93 school year, Rory stopped giving lectures, reading assignments, tests and
"cookbook" labs. Instead, he assigned students a quarter-long, open-ended project with no formal requirements
other than originality. He himself had only a vague sense of what he wanted his students to accomplish, but
felt they would enjoy the freedom. As he tells it:

      "I thought that I was setting them on top of Mount Everest and saying 'look, the whole world
      is here for you to look at. Isn't that great?  Look what you can study.' ...    And they felt like
      'Oh my God, I'm gonna fall, I could die up here, this is horrible, I'm gonna freeze to death,
      I'm gonna fall off the mountain.' ... I thought I was setting them free and they felt like they
      were being abandoned"
Rory's initial swing away from teacher-directed pedagogy to a student-directed version is well-described in a study
by [Rogoff, 1994]. As Rogoff describes, lecture-based classrooms depend on transmission of knowledge from
an active teacher to a passive learner. In contrast, unguided discovery depends on acquisition of knowledge by an
active learner with the teacher remaining passive.  However, the model of community of learners "is based on
the premise that learning occurs as people participate in shared endeavors with others, with all playing active but

                                                                                                            475
 asymmetrical roles." (p.   209). Since that first frustrating project in his class, Rory Wagner has been designin g
 and refining his unique role of structuring and guiding student activities in the classroom so that they can learn
 to conduct scientific inquiry.

 Modeling projects
 In the literature on cognitive apprenticeship, modeling is discussed as an important aspect of how experienced
 practitioners can help novices learn new skills and ideas [Brown, Collins, & Duguid, 1989; Collins, Brown, &
 Newman, 1989]. In the 1993-94 and 94-95 school years, Rory implemented a form of modeling projects that he
 eventually decided did not meet the desired results.
 Since students had never conducted projects before, it seemed that leading them through a whole-class project of
 his own design would provide them an opportunity to "observe and build a conceptual model of the processes
 that are required to accomplish the task" [Collins, Brown, & Newman, 1989, p. 481].          These model projects
 were completed before the first student-designed projects were begun. In the first year, he directed the students in
 mapping and measuring the size and extent of a local sand beach, collecting historical maps and data, and
 analyzing how the beach had eroded and changed. In the second year, he directed the students in collecting data
 on the size, texture, and composition of the sand grains from different beach locations and environments.
 Each of these model projects included students working on vital parts of the process, such as systematically
 collecting and organizing data, and creating graphical representations of the data.       In Rory's appraisal, these
 model projects did not motivate the students.. The projects fell into the same kind of trap traditional labs do
 students never took interest or ownership, and were able to go through the motions without thinking.     Students'
 lack of engagement in the model project prevented them from building a "conceptual model" through which they
 could learn and remember the parts of the process in subsequent projects. During the 1995-% school year Rory
 decided to forgo complete model projects andrely instead on modeling subskills and scaffolding support for the
 students in the midst of the projects that they direct themselves.

 Giving the Students Raw Materials and Glimpses of their Crafting
 The 1995-% school year is the fourth in which Rory Wagner has been teaching using projects.          He currently
 employs a constellation of scaffolding strategies to help students learn how to conduct science research projects.
 Not only are most students entering Rory Wagner's earth science class unfamiliar with the project-based method;
 most of them are unfamiliar with the subject matter of earth science.         This relates to the tug-of-war many
 teachers experience between balancing "content" and "process." Rory said, ''There are 2 parts to what scientists
 do: the body of knowledge, and how they go about getting that knowledge. Most classes concentrate on just the
 body of knowledge. In this class, I'm more interested in the process-how you go about getting knowledge."
 Nonetheless, in order for students to get started on building their own research projects, they need some raw
 materials. Specifically, to design and conduct in-depth projects on earth science questions, they must have some
 basic familiarity with the scope and issues addressed by geology, meteorology, oceanography, and astronomy.
 Thus, Rory includes a series of lectures and films primarily concerned with the "body of knowledge"            that
 constitutes earth science.
 However, this preliminary work is also concerned with the crafting of those raw materials in the "process" of
 science research. For example, Rory showed a video which described Halley's comet through the history of how
 the comet was discovered and it's return predicted by increasingly accurate models.    After stopping the video, he
 emphasized the process of work conducted by a scientist in the video:  "Yeoman came up with a model.       That's
 what scientists do ... He used supporting data to prove that his model was correct."
As evidenced through student interviews and classroom observation, lectures and videos have provided Rory's
students (1) an awareness of the topics in earth science so that they are better prepared to choose one for their
 later projects, (2) a familiarity with the basic terminology that is beneficial in students' initial project research
 on their chosen topics, and (3) an inkling of some of the crucial aspects of the process of science. Even though
 this approach is promising, its effectiveness is limited by common problems associated with lectures and
 videos. In interviews, students mentioned their own tendency to disengage from these traditional presentations.
They explained that their interest and engagement increased later when they were doing projects. Lectures and
videos at the beginning of the year also tend to make the class seem like "business as       usual" in school. This
can undermine the points made during lecture leading toward the teacher's ultimate goal of students doing

476
scientific inquiry themselves. Despite these weakness, lectures and videos may be the best choice for teachers
moving toward projects, especially if they include interactive discussions.

Providing      a Structure on      Which    Students       Can  Build
Giving students an overall "conceptual model" of how projects can be conducted       remains a necessity.  Rory
achieves this in part through a written project paper format adapted from two other CoVis teachers at his school.
The process includes the following milestones: (1) choosing a group to work with and a general research topic,
(2) collecting and writing up background information on the area of research,        (3)   submitting a research
proposal which includes a research question and methods for addressing the question,       (4) collecting data to
answer the research question, (5) analyzing the data to answer the question, and (6) submitting the final paper
with the previous sections and a conclusion and abstract
The format of the paper gives students a framework to structure their work, so that they are not cast completely
adrift for ideas on how to proceed. Having the students turn in milestones has the additional benefit of breaking
down a long ten-week project into manageable increments. At the same time, the format challenges the students
to come up with their own questions and ways of addressing them-as Rory told the students when he was
introducing the projects, "I'm trying to get you to solve problems, but you creole  the problem."    It provides a
framework for the students to work and thoughtfully engage in. As one student put it,
       "In [classes with traditional labs], it doesn't really teach you anything about what scientists
       really do.  'Cause scientists don't sit there with, like, an instruction manual. They kind of,
       like, figure stuff out ... So this is more of us ... coming up with our own questions, our own
       theories ... And having to do the research and having to get the statistics to back up the
       research ... And so, I have like a better understanding of what people actually do, instead of
       'nice experiment, kid."'
However, using the project paper format as a framework for conducting projects had not been without problems
and pitfalls. In past years, the most problematic aspect of  projects proved   to be the   selection of a research
question. Rory originally expected students to tum in a research question as the first milestone, lJefore doing
background research on a general topic. But he found that students with little previous background were simply
unable to come up with much beyond what [Scardamalia and Bereiter, 1991] term "basic information questions,"
such as "why does a comet revolve around the sun?"        In order to come  up with more ultimately productive
"wonderment questions" such as "how does a comet's core size affect its tail size?" students needed a little more
background on the topic area than they typically had. Therefore, Rory adjusted the milestones such that Step 1
did not include deciding on a research question, but instead a general topic area which students then collect
background information on in Step 2, and then come up with a focused research question based on their
newfound knowledge. The other problems with the project paper format as a framework are yet to be solved.
One is that the framework can become too much like a template.          Rory concurs with researchers such as
[Feyerabend, 1993] who demonstrate that any one process is not definitive of how all science is or can be done.
But even thoughRory doesn't want the framework to be restrictive of students' creatively approaching problems,
students who want the best possible grade may prefer to take the path of least resistance.

Coaching      Students in  the      Course   of     Inquiry
Rory's work is far from done after providing students with a basic framework.     He supports students in many
ways during their projects, most of which can be considered aspects of coaching.

Appropriation
In Rory Wagner's class, a "project" has a particular meaning, but students usually come in to the class with
other meanings for projects that do not match the goals Rory is striving for.  In Rory's class, he wants students
"to ... observe some scientific phenomena, take measurements or collect information on it, and try to come to
some conclusion about how it worked."     Students confirmed that in other classes, projects simply referred to
extended group work, but the question was often supplied, and students were required to collect information from
library books and summarize it. They were reporting what others had already explained about a phenomenon.
Despite its limitations, Rory recognizes the kind of work students are already familiar with can be a building
block for the research that he intends. He uses a process of appropriation [Newman; Griffin, & Cole, 1984;

                                                                                                            477
 Pea, 1992], which refers in this case to seizing meaning and transforming it through conversation.          For
 example, a group of students chose the plesiosaur, a dinosaur resembling a sea-faring brontosaurus, as their
 topic, because they found it interesting and "cute." In the process of doing their background library research
 about the plesiosaur, one of the group members, Susan, discovered a problem. "Mr. Wagner," she said one day,
 "Do you know whether the plesiosaur moved by rowing its flippers or flapping them like wings? These books
 don't agree." Rory told her he didn't know, and asked to see the books. It turned out that one book claimed the
 plesiosaur swam by a rowing motion, and the other claimed it was essentially "underwater flight." But neither
 mentioned the other possibility. Susan's intention when she went to Rory was to get the answer, assuming it
 was a simple fact. A fact is all she would have wanted for a library research report. But Rory helped her fit the
 issue into a science research process to which she could contribute, when he interpreted her query as a potential
 research question. The question could be "Do plesiosaurs swim by rowing their flippers or underwater flight?"
 Although Susan hadn't yet realized it, they could look for evidence to support a claim about the answer. Rory's
 interpretation did not match Susan's, but it allowed him to scaffold her into the activity she had not yet learned,
 and perhaps extend her own interpretation of what questions arisingfrom literature review imply.

 Providing Feedback        to Students
 Another form of coaching that Rory Wagner performs daily includes evaluating students' actions and products.
 One of the ways Rory provides feedback that scaffolds his students into a better understanding of how to "do
 science" involves negotiating the topics and questions the students work on. Allowing the students to choose
 their own topics and define their own research questions turns out to have significant motivational benefits
 attested to by both the teacher and his students.  But Rory must find ways to help students transform and
 channel their initial interests into productive scientific investigations, without taking away the need for them to
 think, and without taking ownership of the process from them. Because of the need to       balance these goals,
 Rory sometimes makes strong suggestions about paths the students are considering, but leaves the ultimate
 decisions about what they choose to them. Leaving these decisions ultimately to the students does not mean
 that they are completely free, of course, because of the authority the teacher holds and the fact that the teacher
 assigns grades.
 Students are most frequently attracted to topics that are spectacular, threatening or destructive. While some of
 these topics such as earthquakes, volcanoes, hurricanes, and tornadoes often lead to interesting and productive
 projects, others have proven problematic time and again. The most frequently encountered problematic topic is
 worth mentioning:   aliens and UFOs. Rory made the case with several project groups (3 out of 11 groups in
 the class wanted to do something about aliens) in the 1995-% class that such projects tended to degenerate into
 empty rhetoric about the government covering up files, with no data to use for an analysis.           After these
 discussions of the problem with projects on aliens, one of the groups switched to another topic.     Two groups
 decided to try and make something of the topic. One of the two groups encountered the expected problems and
 concluded in their final paper that "there is not enough 'real' information" to prove anything," but the other
 group managed to develop an unexplored angle. The students pointed out that the government had published a
 document in the 1960s explaining away many UFO sightings through understood events such as meteor
 showers, the aurora borealis, and airplanes. In a discussion during class, Rory suggested they take a cue from
 this strategy, and try to prove the government wrong by attempting to replicate their fmdings, or using similar
 methods to explain recent sightings. Such a sequence of events required Rory to entrust his students with more
 control over their own learning than is customary.
 Rory also offers feedback in written form.   When students turn in milestones and drafts of their papers, Rory
 makes detailed comments and suggestions on the text, and also assigns numeric grades to portions of the paper.
 In some cases, perhaps due to students' unfamiliarity with the process of writing and revising drafts, students fail
 to respond to Rory's feedback on their interim papers. In cases where Rory tries to ensure students will act on
 his comments, he has had more success when the students are given notice with the lowest grade possible.   For
 example, in order to make the distinction between simplycollecting the findings of others, and coming to one's
 own new fmdings, Rory has found it useful to focus on whether or not students have data and analysis.    Data in
 earth science is often in the form of numbers or charts of descriptive categories, and analysis in the form of
 graphs or visualizations. He has found that many students think they have data, but have little they can analyze
 to answer their question. For example, the group who researched plesiosaur locomotion initially had little data
 from the fossil record to support their claim that plesiosaurs swam by flapping their wings like birds.   They
 cited modern-day sea turtles in their report as swimming with the same motion, however, and Rory pushed them
 to fmd skeletal records on these turtles to use in a comparison and bolster their case. In other cases, students
 have voluminous data and make graphs of every conceivable variable, but form no coherent argument with the

478
graphs. Rory offers such groups commentary on shortcomings, and suggests ways of focusing and organizing
their analysis.  All the written work and the discussion it spurs provides an opportunity                   for Rory and his
students to come to a mutual understanding about what they have done and where they could go.

Learning       from     the   Archives        of  Student       Work
In addition to the means documented above to scaffold students into a new classroom community of practice,
Rory has attempted to carry what he can of the community from one year to                the   next.  The legacy of previous
years' classes to an incoming class is the archive of student project reports. Rory makes the archive available
for reading and reference.       Students initially used the archive to mine for project ideas and get a sense of how
projects are done. Later, when students were getting ready to turn in their research reports, Rory gave them an
example of a particularly good research reportfrom another student group. The example helped the students to
understand how they should write up their results, in a way that his descriptions of the report could not.              As one
student put it, "I found that it really helped me see what he wanted, 'cause I had all the information ... I just
didn't know how to put it in the right form." Although useful in the current undocumented form, students have
pointed out that commentary and assessment of more past projects from the teacher would be helpful.

Conclusion
Although project-based teaching like Rory Wagner's is not widespread in schooling today, it is a method with a
long history and theoretical appeal from John Dewey [Dewey, 1902] to recent work on apprenticeship learning
[Lave & Wenger, 1989]. Many educators are interested in creating environments where students can learn by
working on projects, but it is a complex task.        Educators unprepared to help students "pull themselves up by
their bootstraps," and extend beyond the students' preconceived notions of schoolwork developed in other classes
may become frustrated and return to more familiar          ways.    Unfortunately, this is far too often the case [Cuban,
1986]. The ideas presented here are intended to serve as frames [Schon, 1983] and sources of inspiration for
other educators to use in their own planning and implementation of reform efforts.

References
[Brown, Collins, & Duguid,    1989].  Brown,   J. S., Collins, A.,  & Duguid,   P. (1989).   Situated cognition and the culture
of learning. Educational Researcher(January-February), 32-42.
[Collins, Brown, & Newman, 1989].         Collins, A., Brown, J. S., & Newman, S. E. (1989). Cognitive apprenticeship:
Teaching the craft of   reading, writing, and mathematics.   In L.  B. Resnick  (Ed.), Knowing,   learning, and  instruction:
Essays in honor of Robert Glaser (pp. 453-494). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
[Cuban, 1986].   Cuban, L. (1986). Teachers and machines: The classroom use of technology since 1920. New York:
Teachers College.
[Feyerabend,  1993].    Feyerabend, P. (1993). Against method (Third ed.). London: Verso.
[Lave & Wenger, 1991].     Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated teaming:         Legitimate peripheral participation.
Cambridge:   Cambridge     University Press.
[Newman, Griffin, & Cole, 1984].      Newman, D., Griffin, P., & Cole, M. (1984). Social constraints in laboratory and
classroom tasks. In B. Rogoff and Lave, J. (Eds.), Everyday cognition:          Its development  in social context Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
[Papert, 1980].  Papert, S. (1980). Mindstorms:     Children, computers, and powerful ideas. New York: Basic Books.
[Pea, 1992].  Pea, R. D. (1992). Augmenting the discourse of learning with computer-based learning environments. In
E. de Corte, Linn, M., M andi, H., & Verschaffel, L. (Eds.), Computer-based teaming environments and problem
solving (pp. 313-344). New York: Springer Verlag.
[Pea, 1993].  Pea,   R. D. (1993). The    collaborative visualization  project. Communications    of  the ACM,  36(5),  60-63.
[Rogoff, 1994].  Rogoff, B. (1994). Developing understanding of the idea of communities of learners. Mind, Culture,
and Activity, 1 (4), 209-229.
[Ruopp, Gal, Drayton, & Pfister, 1993].      Ruopp,   R., Gal, S., Drayton, B.,  &  Pfister, M. (Ed.). (1993).  LahNet:  Toward
a community of practice. Hillsdale, NJ:     Erlbaum.
[Scardamalia & Bereiter, 1991].    Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (1991).      Higher levels of agency for children in
knowledge building: A challenge for the design of new knowledge media Journal of Learning Sciences, 1(1),              37-68.
[Schon, 1982].   Schon, D. (1982). The reflective practitioner:      How professionals think in action. New York: Basic.

Acknowledgments
I am grateful for the insight and courage of Rory Wagner and his students, as well as discussions with Roy Pea, Louis
Gomez, and my research colleagues at Northwestern in the development of these thoughts.           I am also grateful for
research support from NSF grant numbers RED-9454729 and MDR88-55582.

                                                                                                                           479
