Unified vs. Tailored Analogies: Effects on Conceptual Knowledge Acquisition

                                                    Valerie J. Shute
                                               Armstrong Lab/HRTI
                                               1880 Carswell Avenue
                                         Lackland AFB, TX 78236-5507
                                                    (210) 671-2734
                                             vshute@colab.brooks.af.mil

                                                 Richard Catrambone
                                               School ofPsychology
                                         Georgia Institute ofTechnology
                                              Atlanta, GA 30332-0170
                                                    (404) 894-2682
                                               rc7@prism.gatech.edu

Theoretical Motivation

You have to learn to walk before you can run. Or do you? This simple metaphor for acquiring new knowledge and
skills has been implemented in countless pedagogies, but may not be completely true. For instance, in ACT-R
[Anderson, 1993) all knowledge starts in declarative form and productions (for carrying out procedures) are formed
through an analogy   process. Likewise, in   SMART      [Shute, 1995),  the  underlying learning theory  posits              a uni
directional link from symbolic knowledge (SK) acquisition (i.e., knowing basic, abstract curriculum elements\ to
procedural skill (PS) acquisition (i.e., the application ofthat knowledge). Conceptual knowledge (CK) is the deeper
level understanding about relationships among SK items as well as the rationale for choosing among different
procedures (i.e., the "why" ofthe material).

An important learning issue concerns ways to facilitate the acquisition of conceptual knowledge. Concepts serve
many psychological functions and provide the basis for generalization and other forms ofinference. As such, these
complex structures contribute to explanations, enabling inferences and deductions about events and ideas [Shute,
1994; Thagard, 1992).  There   is growing    support in the literature  for  the notion that analogies, if created             and
employed   properly, can be used   to explicitly instruct CK    [e.g., Gentner   & Gentner,  1983;  Glynn, 1991).               For
instance, Glynn [1991) has developed a "teaching with analogies" model that provides guidelines for the effective
employment of analogies to enhance CK. This model consists of specific operations that one should apply when
using analogies as instructional tools (i.e., introduce target concept, cue retrieval ofanalog, identify relevant features
oftarget and analog, map similarities, indicate where analogy breaks down, and draw conclusions). The order ofthe
operations can vary, but conceptualizations are enhanced (and misconceptions, minimized) ifall are ultimately used.
Thus, we wish to examine the degree to which we can generate and effectively utilize analogies within the domain
ofdescriptive statistics to enhance CK acquisition.

A related issue is to examine the efficacy ofa unified analogy used to illustrate multiple concepts versus multiple
analogs, each tailored to a particular concept. Is a concept (e.g., central tendency) learned better when a unified
analogy is used to illustrate its various facets (e.g., Mean, Median, and Mode) or when separate analogies are used
to illustrate those facets? Perhaps fine-tuned analogies for each facet are better than a unified analogy that may do
only an adequate job on each facet. Spiro, Feltovich, Coulson, and Anderson [1989) have pointed out a number of
dangers in using analogies  to help   convey  knowledge   (although    their comments   may   apply more   to               complex
knowledge rather than simpler concepts). One particularly intriguing issue is the suggestion that multiple analogies

[I] A curriculum element, or CE, refers to any unit of instruction. CEs may vary in grain size from low-level bits of knowledge
and skill, to more global units, depending on the needs of the particular learner population and the instructional goal(s).

502
for a single topic have the advantage ofhelping the learner to overcome mis-mappings and misconceptions induced
by the reliance on a single analog. Our project examines a similar notion in that we contrast a single analog versus
multiple analogs, but we carry out this contrast across three concepts, in which each is illustrated by a unique analog
or by the same analog. This contrasts with trying to convey a single concept using either a single analog or multiple
analogs.  The  fmdings   of Spiro et al. [I 989]      have implications for   our work;  nevertheless,   the situation they
examined (learning a single, albeit complex, concept with the aid of a single analog versus multiple analogs) is
different from ours (learning a few related concepts with the aid of a unified analogy or separate analogs for each
concept).

Empirical Motivation

Two controlled evaluation studies have recently been completed that examined Stat Lady learning outcomes as a
Junction ofthe presence or absence ofthe student modeling component (SMART) [Shute, 1995]. The specific set of
fmdings that motivated the current research involved a significant 3-way interaction, obtained in both studies:
learning gain x outcome type x aptitude level. In general, low-ability learners showed dramatic pretest-posttest
improvements for SK and PS, but only moderate gains for CK; high-ability learners improved equally across all
outcome types (note: "outcome type" refers to categories ofknowledge/skill--SK, PS, CK). This finding inspired the
current research to determine some way to similarly boost CK acquisition, especially for low-ability learners. We
are  conducting an experiment     designed       to: (a) examine  the effects of supplementing    conceptual     knowledge
instruction (about measures of central tendency) with analogies, and (b) investigate the effects of employing a
unified analogy versus tailored analogies for that CK instruction. We believe that the introduction of an analogy
may ultimately enhance the acquisition and memorability ofCK elements and also help learners acquire related PS
and SK elements.

Project Description2

The criterion task that we're using to test the current hypotheses about analogy effects on learning is one ofthe Stat
Lady Descriptive Statistics (DS) modules that teaches issues ofcentral tendency [Shute, Gawlick & Lefort, 1996].
The program's curriculum was derived from a cognitive task analysis of the domain. Each of the more than 100
curricular elements are instructed and assessed within Stat Lady, then additionally assessed via pre- and posttests to
examine changes in learning due to the treatment conditions.

Pedagogy

To illustrate, Stat Lady instructs a particular CE (or small group ofrelated CEs), such as the procedural knowledge
associated with determining the Median from a set ofnumbers. Subsequently, learners are presented a problem set
designed to assess their skill and understanding. Learners obtain data from the "Number Factory" and then proceed,
step-by-step, to solve the problem that requires them to figure out the Median from their unique set ofdata. Three
level feedback (i.e., progressively more explicit) is provided by Stat Lady when learners solve the problem or make
an error. The system updates its record(s) about whether learners have learned particular CEs and the degree of
mastery ofthat learning.

CE-Derivation and Analogy Construction

As mentioned, we began this project by systematically decomposing the curriculum into a hierarchically-related set
ofCEs that were subsequently classified into three outcome types. We then created analogies for instructing the
higher-level CK  elements   (in this case,       Mean,   Median,  and Mode).   For example,    with regard   to  Stat  Lady
instruction on the Mean, an on-line seesaw appears with numbers arrayed along the board, similar to the x-axis ofa

[2] This paper describes an experiment-in-progress.    And  while preliminary findings will be presented at  the conference,
unfortunately, no data are currently available.

                                                                                                                       503
graph. Boxes are stacked to different heights above the numbers; the heights representing frequencies. Moreover,
the seesaw consists of a moveable fulcrum so that learners can slide the fulcrum, horizontally under the board, until
the board (tipping appropriately in relation to the fulcrum) becomes balanced [see Fig. I]. While the fulcrum is
moving, numbers dynamically appear within it representing the corresponding point/value along the board (x-axis).
The number that shows up when a balance state is attained reflects the Mean for those particular data.

                                                                   1  2  3    4 5.  6    7   8   9 1O

                                      Figure 1: Seesaw Analogy, Illustrating the Mean

CK Instruction via Unified Analogy

The mapping between the seesaw (base domain) and the Mean (target domain) would be as follows: To "balance" a
seesaw, one    needs  to  distribute  the "weights"   such  that they occur "equally"    on either side of the fulcrum. To
achieve this   state, either the   weights    or  the fulcrum can  be  moved    around.  The   weights   represent  different
magnitudes of numbers, and the Mean maps onto the fulcrum when it has reached the balance point [5.5 in Fig. I].
Learners are given the opportunity to manipulate the seesaw by moving the fulcrum to balance the seesaw for
different weight distributions.

The mapping between the seesaw and the Median is less straightforward. The seesaw would become balanced (i.e.,
horizontal)   when  the  fulcrum   is moved    to the Median  value.  In Figure I   this value would    be 6. The   mapping
between the seesaw and Mode is even less intuitive. In this case the seesaw will balance when the fulcrum is under
the  tallest pile of boxes [8,  in Fig.   I]. This situation could  look very  odd  and  violate   the expectations of most
learners. However, the value of using a unified analogy for instructing the Mean, Median, and Mode may outweigh
this potential    disadvantage.  The   mismatch    between    the physical  reality (balancing     only at Mean)    and the
demonstration (balancing at Median and Mode) is precisely the point. That is, when the learner sees the seesaw
balancing at the Mean but then later not balancing at the Mean, but rather at the Median or Mode, this may make the
distinction   among   the concepts    that  much   clearer,  thus  may   help the  learner  understand   how   the  analogy
differentially applies (or "breaks down" in Glynn's 1991 framework).

CK Instruction via Tailored Analogies

In contrast to the above argument for the value of a unified analogy to teach related concepts, perhaps analogies that
are specially tailored to each facet of a concept would be more useful. Each analog could provide a mapping to the
relevant facet that might be more straightforward than the mapping involved in using a unified analogy, thereby
improving the degree of conceptual knowledge acquisition.

504
For instance, Figure 2a represents a "folding paper strip" analog that provides a clear mapping between position on
the strip of paper (or number line) and the Median. Figure 2b contains "hanging buckets of balls" that shows a
mapping between frequency (number ofballs) and how far a bucket descends.

                                     I. Array nwnbers in order on paper

                                    2. Fold strip of paper exactly in half

                                    3. Find nwnber that falls on the "bend" (or midpoint) ofstrip

                      Figure 2a: Folding Paper Strip, Illustrating the Median

                           Ages:

           Ages:_ _,.6 8..,__,,.6aa___,..,_fje -
                     Figure 2b: Hanging Buckets of Balls, Illustrating the Mode

In summary, we are interested in analogy effects on CK acquisition--Is conceptual knowledge acquisition facilitated
as a function ofusing analogies for instruction/remediation in contrast with a condition involving no analogies, and
does this ultimately enhance SK and PS acquisition as well?

Experiment

To assess learning, we analyze pretest to posttest changes in performance on a set of matched items, administered
on-line (before and after Stat Lady instruction, respectively). Data are analyzed separately per outcome type and by
experimental condition (i.e., no analogy, unified, or tailored).

This particular Stat Lady curriculum consists of 130 CEs covering the main topics of central tendency as well as
lower-level issues (e.g., computing the Mean from data sets having frequencies > 1, being able to find the Mode
from a frequency distribution). Each of the three primary CEs (Mean, Median, Mode) has its own set of "children"
as the entire curriculum was decomposed in a top-down manner, resulting in a hierarchy of CEs.

                                                                                                                              505
 The three   treatment  conditions  for this   study are: (a) No  Analogy     (Instruction Only)--presentation    of the
instructional material without any analogies; (b) Unified Analogy--same instruction as the No Analogy condition,
but using a unified analogy (i.e., a seesaw with manipulable fulcrum) to supplement the standard CK instruction for
the  three main concepts of Mean,    Median,   and   Mode;  and (c)  Tailored  Analogies--same     instruction as the   No
 Analogy condition, but using three different analogies to supplement CK instruction: Mean = Seesaw (like in the
Unified Analogy condition), Median = Folding Paper Strip, and Mode = Hanging Buckets ofBalls.

Hypotheses and Experimental Tests

Analogy    Effect(s) on CK   Acquisition.  Supplementing    conceptual   knowledge   instruction   with analogies    may
enhance the memorability ofCK elements (a retention issue), and also facilitate the acquisition ofCK and related
SK and PS elements (a learning issue). Learning outcome and efficiency measures are hypothesized to be positively
affected by the use ofanalogies. To empirically test these issues, we will examine (across various periods oftime--
. immediately  and following   some lag)   the effects of different  treatment  conditions  on  learning outcome      and
efficiency for each outcome type (SK, PS, CK) and include various aptitude measures in the equation.

Analogies vs. No Analogies. The No Analogy condition will be contrasted with the Unified Analogy and Tailored
Analogy conditions to test any main effect due to analogies. We will also examine learning gains to see ifthe impact
is equal across outcome types. While we hypothesize that PS should see greater gains (particularly for low-ability
learners) due to the presence ofanalogies, there should also be a significant boost for the CK elements themselves.
A related issue is whether analogies aid long term access ofCK (and possibly SK and PS). Long term retention
issues are beyond the scope ofthe current study, however.

Unified  vs.  Tailored  Analogies  Effect. A   straightforward  contrast between   the    unified- and  tailored-analogy
conditions will demonstrate any main effects attributable to using unified versus tailored analogies to supplement
the teaching ofconceptual knowledge. We suspect that the tailored analogies will result in better CK outcomes (and
possibly   PS  outcomes as well)   given they  have    been tailored to  suit each concept.  However,    if the   unified
framework makes the distinction among Mean, Median, and Mode sharper, then learners receiving the unified
analogy    may actually better remember    the  procedural  differences  in   calculating those values  as   well as  the
conditions  under  which each  facet is  most  appropriate.  That is, a  unified analogy   may     encourage   learners to
compare and contrast the three measures ofcentral tendency. This is a twist on the argument by Spiro et al. (1989]
in which they suggest that multiple analogs can help a learner avoid misconceptions about a single concept; in the
present case, the application ofa single analog to multiple concepts may also help the learner avoid misconceptions.

Discussion

Analogies appear to help the acquisition and retention of conceptual knowledge (CK). A salient question then
concerns the components and attributes ofan effective, explanatory analogy. The work ofD. Gentner (e.g., Gentner,
Rattermann, & Forbus, 1993] suggests that overlap in terms of relations among attributes and relations among
relations might provide a useful metric in determining the "soundness" ofan analogy such as the soundness ofthe
analogy between a seesaw and the Mean.

In addition to the components ofeffective analogies, certain processes aid learning and transfer. Efforts to make the
mapping, and the functionality ofthe mapping, between base and target more explicit can help the learner use the
analogy more effectively. For instance, Catrambone and Holyoak (1989] found that instructions that led learners to
focus on relevant mappings between a base and target during instruction also led them to spontaneously apply the
analogy to the target, even after a delay between reading the base and solving the target. Across five experiments
they found that transfer is typically enhanced when: (a) multiple examples are used rather than just a single one, (b)
explicit, directive comparison instructions are given versus implicit (or no) directive instructions, and (c) more
problem-solving experience is provided in contrast to passive observation.

Ifthe base analog is relatively easily understood, then the teacher or tutor must be concerned with making sure the
mapping is straightforward, robust, and reliable. One question in the present study is whether the seesaw analogy is

506
the appropriate "unified" analogy to use. That is, perhaps the folding paper strip analogy would be more effective as
an overall framework and thus, the results will be different if this analogy is used. Future studies can test this notion
by systematically varying which analogy is used as the unified one and which ones are used as the tailored ones for
each facet of a concept.

A related concern is the order in which the three main concepts are instructed. Suppose Median, Mean, and Mode is
the best order if no analogies were presented. When a unified analogy is used, then there might be an interaction
with order and type of analogy such that the concept that is instructed first dictates the unified analogy that is used.
For instance, ifMean must be first, and a unified analogy must be used, then the seesaw analogy might be the one to
use since it applies fairly cleanly to the Mean and can quickly give the learner a reasonable foundation on which to
build the upcoming concepts (Median and Mode). However, if the Median is first instructed, and a unified analogy
must be used, then the folding paper strip analogy might be more effective since it maps so well to the Median and
allows the learner to build a good foundation. This issue will be examined in future studies.

A third issue for future work is whether the analogies used to aid learning can backfire and make it difficult for the
learner to go beyond the analogy and understand the concept successfully [see Spiro et al., 1989]. We can examine
this issue to some degree by examining how well learners can transfer their knowledge about the concepts to novel
situations such as determining the appropriate situations for using particular central tendency measures. We can do a
more intensive investigation of this issue by examining how well learners can acquire knowledge about more
complex concepts that use as building blocks simpler concepts that were instructed with the aid of an analogy or
analogies.

References

[Anderson, 1993]. Anderson, J. R. (1993). Rules ofthe mind. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

[Catrambone and Holyoak, 1989]. Catrambone, R., & Holyoak, K. J. (1989). Overcoming contextual limitations on problem
solving transfer. Journal ofExperimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition, 11, 1147-1156.

[Gentner and Gentner, 1983].   Gentner,  D., & Gentner,   D. (1983). Flowing waters  and teeming     crowds:    Mental models of
electricity. In D. Gentner & A. L. Stevens (Eds.), Mental models (pp. 99-129). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

[Gentner, Rattermann, and Forbus, 1993]. Gentner, D., Rattermann, M. J., & Forbus, K. D. (1993). The roles of similarity in
transfer: Separating retrievability from inferential soundness. Cognitive Psychology, 25, 524-575.

[Glynn, 1991). Glynn, S. M.    (1991). Explaining science concepts:  A teaching-with-analogies     model. In S. M. Glynn, R.  H.
Yeany, & B. K. Britton (Eds.), The psychology of/earning science (pp. 219-240). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

[Shute, 1994). Shute, V. J. (1994). Learning processes and learning outcomes. In T. Husen & T. N. Postlethwaite (Eds.),
International Encyclopedia ofEducation (2nd Edition) (pp. 3315-3325). New York: Pergamon.

[Shute, 1995]. Shute, V. J. (1995). SMART: Student Modeling Approach for Responsive Tutoring. User Modeling and User
Adapted Interaction, 5, 1-44.

[Shute, Gawlick, & Lefort, 1996]. Shute, V. J., Gawlick, L. A., & Lefort, N. K. Stat Lady--Descriptive Statistics Module 2
(Central Tendency). Unpublished computer program. Armstrong Laboratory. Brooks Air Force Base, Texas.

[Spiro, Feltovich, Coulson, and Anderson, 1989). Spiro, R J., Feltovich, P. J., Coulson, R. L., and Anderson, D. K. (1989).
Multiple analogies for complex concepts: Antidotes for analogy-induced misconception in advanced knowledge acquisition. In
S. Vosniadou & A. Ortony (Eds.), Similarity and analogical reasoning. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

[Thagard, 1992]. Thagard, P. (1992). Conceptual revolutions. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

                                                                                                                          507
