                On     the    Usefulness        of   Vector        Representations
                                     in Statistics          Training

                                             Atsushi Terao
                                      Department of Systems Science
                                       Tokyo Institute of Technology
                                   Ohokayama Meguro-ku Tokyo 152 Japan
                                         terao©tp.titech.ac.jp

  The students who are majoring in psychology or other relevant disciplines have to study statistics. It
seems to be a difficult task to understand statistical concepts for these students.       Generally speaking,
they are   not very good at mathematics.    All of the statistical theories, however, are constructed on    the
bases of mathematics.    The teacher often has to try to help them construct or understand statistical
concepts without high level mathematics. Thus, it is quite meaningful to examine how to teach statistical
concepts for these students in statistics training.
  Are there useful materials that help students who are not good at mathematics understand statistical
concepts deeply  ?  It seems to   be useful to use vector   representations in the  training of these students.
The vector representation is a kind of diagram.      Diagrams often   help students memorize, understand,
and  solve problems    [Larkin &  Simon  1987].  For example, suppose that a student has to understand
the proof which indicates that the correlation coefficient ranges from minus 1 to plus          1. If algebraic
method is used in order to prove it, it is probably difficult for him (or her) to understand the proof. If an
appropriate vector representation is used in the proof, the student may be able to understand it, because
the correlation coefficient is consistent with the value of cosine for two vectors which represent variables
and it is clear that the value of cosine ranges from   minus  1 to plus 1.  The only thing the student has to
do is to understand that the variables are represented by vectors. Thus, it may be easy for him or her.
 There are some textbooks which explain statistics by using vector representations [e.g., Takeuchi,Yanai,
& Mukherjee 1982; Eaton 1984]. It is expected that vector representations support or improve students'
understanding of statistical concepts.  However,   no  research has been    done to prove its validity.
 Moreover, vector representations have been only used by teachers in order to explain statistical con
cepts for students. However the representations can be used by students who have to solve some statistical
problems.   If students are taught statistical concepts by    using vector representations, are they able to
solve some statistical problems by using the representations ? I consider the representations as materials
not only for teacher's explanation but also for student's problem solving.
 When a student learns from a textbook, he or she must have some questions about the explanations
in the textbook.   He or she may try to find the statements that mention the questions.          However, the
textbook is often inadequate because it omits statements about the questions. In this case, the student
has to generate  new   pieces  of knowledge  by "self-explanations"  [Chi,Bassok,Lewis,Reimann,      &   Glaser
1989]. Self-explanations are considered to be inferences that went beyond the text [Chi, de Leeuw, Chiu,
& LaVancher 1994]. There are various forms of self-explanations [Ferguson-Hessler & de Jong, 1990]. I
will focus on the forms of problem solving.    For example,  the multiple correlation coefficient is defined as
an index that is used for multiple regression. Suppose that a student has a question of why this index is
not used in the case of simple regression. Although this question seems to be very natural, no textbook
explains it. Thus the student has to solve the question by himself (or herself). In other words, he or she
has to do problem solving because he or she will try to define the multiple correlation coefficient in the
case of multiple regression.   (This task is used in experiment  1 and 2.)
 The purpose of this study is to examine the usefulness of vector representations in statistics training.
I will explore this from the two viewpoints, that is, understanding the textbook and problem solving,
for the reasons mentioned above. Two simple experiments have been carried out.
 To give tasks that can be solved by using vector representations is also the purpose of this study.
Although   this purpose  is  a supplementary    one,  it must  be  useful  for teachers who   intend  to  teach
statistics by using vector  representations    because   no textbook shows     what tasks can   be resolved by
using the representations and how these tasks are resolved.

 520
Experiment 1
   In the experiment 1, the usefulness of vector representations was examined from the viewpoints of
problem solving.    Two    conditions were   compared.                In  experimental      condition,  they  were   required to do
it by using vector representations. In control condition, subjects were required to solve a task by using
numerical formulas.
Method
   Subjects.  Subjects   were  four  graduate  students                who    were   studying    statistics or other   relevant dis
ciplines. This study     originally aimed to examine statistics training for students who are not good at
mathematics. However the students in experiment 1 were considered to be good at mathematics. I have
started this study   for these students because of                   availability. In experiment     2, the   subjects who  are not
good at mathematics will be used.
   Design.  As  mentioned   above,  two  conditions                were   compared.   We    will  call them   vector representation
condition and numerical formula condition respectively. These conditions were within-subject.
   Material. The subjects were required to solve the following problem: Consider the multiple correlation
coefficient  "R" in the case of simple regression.                   Please explain    the relationship between this      "R" and
"r" that is the simple correlation coefficient for two variables.
   As mentioned above,     this question seems to                  be natural.     No textbook,   however,    contains  statements
that answer theboth conditions.question.TheanswerofIn the numerical formulathistaskis"R=lrl".This conclusioncondition,the solution is as follows:thecan"R"be drawn inis defined as
the formula R =     -!; -: 1:¼(1Y:i-(Yiii)-2 ii)(Yi1-:Y(Y) i-Y)2 . The capital letter "Y" represents expected value, and
the small letter  "y" represents actual value or data.                     This formula means that          "R"  is defined as the
correlation  coefficient between    two variables that               are  represented  by   "Y"   and   "y".  In the case of simple
regression, 1'i = a0 + a1 Xi, Y = a0 + a1 x . (a0                represents the intercept, and a1      represents the inclination.)
If these relations are substituted for the R's formula and the formula is put in order, then the conclusion
R = lrl is obtained. In the vector representation condition, the "R" is defined as the value of cosine for
two vectors   "Y"   and  "y".  Therefore the conclusion is obtained from the figures that are presented in
Figure 1.                           _·o=C,-d,···. -;j.)                                     i.

                                                                                                          I 'iioo-0
                                                                                                            e
                                                                                     _____ y I'*--··   _....______-:;_R=-r
                         Figure 1. The vector representations that indicate R = lrl.
   Procedure.   At first, subjects were required to solve the problem in the numerical formula condition.
They  were allowed to refer a textbook.      [Tanaka & Wakimoto                    1983] that explains multivariate statistical
analysis  by  using  numerical  formulas   and    contains                all of the  formulas    that   are  needed   to solve the
problem.    The time for solving the problem was not limited.                         After he or she gave up trying to solve
it or reached   the conclusion, they    were shown                 a vector representation    that     explained the   multiple and
the simple correlation coefficient (see Figure 2), and then were required to solve the task again by using
vector representations. All subjects were given a paper-and-pencil version of this problem.
                                                                              4
                                                                              

                                                                                               
                                                                                             :i 1
                                                                               multiple CQrreW-ion coefficient::: CGA-0
              Figure    2. The  vector  representation                that explains    the  correlation coefficient.

                                                                                                                                     521
Results and Discussion
  Only one subject succeeded in solving the problems in the numerical formula condition. Three of four
subjects failed  to solve  it in this condition.   Note  that  the subjects   are graduate students   majoring   in
statistics or other relevant  disciplinary. The result suggests that it is     difficult for students to solve this
problem by using numerical formulas even if they are good at mathematics.
  In the vector representation condition,      all the subjects succeeded in     solving the problems.   Note that
all of the subjects who gave up solving this task in the numerical formula condition succeeded in solving
it in the vector representation condition.
  The results indicate that vector representations are useful in the context of problem solving. However
this experiment is seriously flawed because all subjects attempted an algebraic solution before trying
the vector representation. I will resolve this problem in the second experiment by using between-subject
design.
Experiment 2
  In this experiment, subjects were changed from graduate students to undergraduate students who
were majoring    in psychology.   They    were considered   to be  not  good  at mathematics.   In   experiment  1,
the results supported the usefulness of vector representations. However, we have to confirm these results
again for these subjects in experiment 2.
  In experiment 1, we have examined the usefulness of vector representations in the context of problem
solving. In addition to this context, we will explore it in the context of understanding textbooks.
  Moreover, we will examine whether vector representations are always useful for students. If these are
not always useful, we can find the principles why and when these representations are useful.
Method
  Subjects. Subjects were eight undergraduate students who were majoring in psychology.
  Design.  Before   this experiment,   subjects received  a simple examination     (pre-test) that measured basic
knowledge of statistics. This examination inquired about the formula of mean, variance, SD, covariance,
and correlation coefficient, and was marked on a maximum scale of five points. Based on the results of
this examination, subjects were assigned to two conditions, that is, vector representation condition (four
subjects) and numerical formula condition (four subjects), so that there would be no difference between
the two conditions with respect to subjects' knowledge about elementary statistics.
  In experiment     1, the design is  within-subject.    Because of  this, it is possible the good   results in the
vector representation condition are caused by the order effect.          In order to resolve this problem, the
design is between-subject in experiment 2.
  Materials. We examined the usefulness of vector representations in the two contexts in experiment 2,
that is, understanding the text material and problem        solving. Therefore, the subjects were given      a text
material and some problems.
  The    text material  was  made by   the author because I    was  not  able  to find an   appropriate one.  Two
types of text materials were used. I will briefly explain the contents of the text materials.
  In the numerical formula condition, the text explained mean,             SD, and variance at first.    Then the
scatter  diagram  was   presented,    and the  correlation  coefficient was   defined  in the forms  of  numerical
formula based on the diagram.         Then the proof which indicates that the correlation coefficient        ranges
from minus 1 to plus 1 was presented by using algebraic method (using numerical formula).                  At last,
simple and multiple regression analysis was explained from the viewpoint of the least squares method
that was based on the scatter diagram.
  In the vector condition, mean, SD, variance were explained as same as numerical formula condition.
Then a vector representation that is constructed with two vectors X = (x1 - x, x2 - x, · · · , Xn - x) and
Y =  (Y1  - y, Y2 - y, · · ·, Yn - y) was presented instead of scatter diagram.        The correlation coefficient
was defined as the value of the cosine for this two vectors.           The  range    of the  correlation coefficient
was  explained as   the range  of the  cosine, that  is, from  minus!   to plus   1. At last  simple and  multiple
regression analysis was explained from the viewpoint of projection on the linear space [Takeuchi, Yanai,
& Mukherjee 1982}.
  In addition to the problem used in experiment 1 (We will call it problem 1.), two problems were used
in this experiment (We will call them problem 2 and problem 3, respectively.).
  Problem   2 is as follows:  In the case of simple  regression, if the number    of paired data (for example     x1
Ganidveya1n) is two, we can describe one variance by using explanation for the reason this can be done. the other variance without any margin of error.

 522
  In the numerical formula condition, the answer is as follows: In this case, two dots are plotted on the
scatter diagram. The regression straight line is uniquely specified because the straight line that connects
the two dots is unique.
  In the vector representation condition, the answer is as follows: See the vector representation presented
in figure 3. The vector X lies at right angles to the vector (x, x), and the vector Y lies at right angles to
the vector (y, y). (This is  found by calculating the inner product.)                                                               Thus,        the vector X is parallel with
vector Y. This means the vector Y is described as "aX".
                                                    (,.'h)

                     Figure 3. The vector representation used to solve problem 2.
  Problem  3 is as  follows: Explain  the  relationship between          regression                                                           coefficient and the correlation
coefficient numerical finortmhuelcaacsoenodfitsiiomnp,lseurbejgercetsssicoannbsyoluvseintgheonplryobBlzezmaansdfSolylyo,w("sS: " represents covariance.) In the
                             a· 1=- SSzzyz-=-.;s-;S;..z...:y,;.f.-t';-; x- ..,;fst- ';;;;-- rzy x- -.;/s8-;;;;
 In the vector representation condition, subjects can solve the problem as follows: If we see the vector
representation presented in figure 4,  we can find r = cos0 = -                                                                  If the relations a= a1 :E(xi -x)2,
b= :E(Yi -y)2 are substituted, we will reach the same conclusion as numerical formula condition.
 All of the elementary statistical concepts that were needed to solve the problems were explained in
the text materials.                                 -y =-(..<,T ,- -l- >                                                   · · ·  , '!1-<>< - -)

                     Figure 4. The vector representation used to solve problem 3.
  Procedure. There   were two  sessions in this experiment, that                                                             is, understanding         the text  material and
problem solving.   In the first session, subjects were required to understand the text material.                                                                     If they
found a description that was difficult to understand, they were also required to underline that point and
to note the reason in the margin    why it is difficult to understand.                                                               The time was not limited in this
section. It took about one hour for all subjects to finish this section.
 After that, each subject had the descriptions that had been difficult for him or her to understand
explained (by the author). Thus, all of the questions were resolved.
 In the second session, subjects were required to solve the three problems mentioned above. Subjects
were given fifteen minutes for each problem. All subjects were given a paper-and-pencil version to solve
these problems. They were allowed to refer to the text material.
 The subjects received the correct solution of each problem after they had finished trying to solve all
the problems. They were required to evaluate to what degree they could understand each solution and to
what degree they could accept each solution on a 5-point scale ranging from "very difficult to understand
(or accept)" to "very easy to understand (or accept)" .
Results and Discussion
Understanding the text material.
 Table 1 shows the results of experiment 2. In the numerical formula condition, three of four subjects
have underlined in the text material.   Two subjects (subject G and H, see Table 1) were not able to
understand the proof about range of the correlation coefficient, and two subjects (subject F and H)

                                                                                                                                                                             523
were not able to understand the formula of the correlation coefficient (Especially, they were not able to
understand why covariance is divided by SDs.). We can find these descriptions in the many textbooks.
However, the results suggest that it is difficult for students to understand the descriptions.
   In contrast to the results in numerical formula condition, only one subject (subject B) had underlined
in the text  material  in  vector representation    condition.   She was   not able to understand the concept of
"projection" because she had not learned this concept.
   Although we must be careful to reach any conclusion because this experiment was done with a small
number of subjects (this work is still in progress), these results support the usefulness of the vector
representations.
   Do the explanations using vector representation always help students understand statistics ?                   The
answer   is "No".   Let us see the scores of evaluating the degree of understanding and accepting the
correct solution   of problem 2   (see Table    1). We   will realize that the overall   scores are  less high in the
vector representation condition than       in the numerical formula condition.      This result indicates that it is
difficult to understand and accept the explanation about correct solution of problem 2.
   Why do vector representations sometimes not help students understand statistics ?                  I believe that
the usefulness of vector representations are caused by easy geometric manipulation (e.g., changing the
angle  between  two   vectors).  In   the case  of understanding   the  proof  about   the range of  the  correlation
coefficient, students found it fairly easy to manipulate the vector representation geometrically. The only
thing they have to do is to understand that the variables are represented by                vectors. In contrast to
this case, the students are required other tasks in addition to the geometric manipulation in order to
understand the correct solution of problem 2.          For example, they have to understand to calculate the
inner product. They also must understand why vector X must be divided into two vectors (x1, x2) and
(x, x). Based on this discussion , I maintain that the usefulness of vector representations are caused by
easy geometric manipulation.      I will  insist on this again in  the next   section.
                                    Table 1. The Results of Experiment 2.
 Conditions    Subjects      Pre-test  Difficulties    s/FProbUlenm 1AcVectorA30F52Problem 2s/FUnAcF21s/FProbUlenm 3AcF44
                   B           1              1         F      1     1         F       4    2         F       4    2
                   C           1              0         s      5     5         F       2     3        F       5    5
                   D           1              0         s      4     4         F       4    4         F       4    4
 Formula           E           3F1G1H0        0112      F      4     3F55F44F42FF      55    34s55s55 Fs      55   45FF4424
 Notes.        Pre-test:  the score of pre-test  (1-5)
               Difficulties: the number   of  descriptions in the text which were difficult to understand
               S/F: whether succeeding in solving or failing to solve each problem
               Un:    the score of evaluating the degree of understanding  the correct solution (1-5)
               Ac:  the score of evaluating   the degree of accepting  the correct solution (1-5)
Problem solving.
   In the   vector representation     codition,   one  subject   (subject  D,  see Table    1) succeeded   in solving
problem!, and another subject (subject C) reached the conclusion R = r in the case of r 2'. 0. It would
be relatively easy    to  draw diagrams    showed    in Figure   1 and  to manipulate     them   geometrically.   No
subject succeeded in     solving the problem     in the numerical  formula    condition.  These   results, which  are
similar to the results in experiment 1, suggest that vector representation is useful for this problem.
   In contrast to the results for problem 1, no subject was unable to solve problem 2 in vector represen
tation condition.   Two of four subjects in numerical formula condition (subject G and H, see Table 1)
succeeded in solving the problem.         It seems to be difficult for students to draw an appropriate vector
representation needed to solve this problem.           In other words, the subjects were required to do other
tasks in addition to geometric manipulation.         A subject in vector representation condition         (subject A,
see Table 1) was interviewed after the experiment. He said that it was difficult to know how to use the
vector (x, x) and (y, y).
   Only one subject (subject F, see table ) was able to solve problem 3. The vector representation needed
to solve the problem is similar to the one used to solve problem 1. Thus, it must not be difficult to draw
an appropriate diagram.       However, no subject in vector representation condition succeeded in solving
this problem regardless of the good results for problem 1. The role of vector representation for problem

 524
3 is to help students calculate. In addition to geometric manipulation, the subjects were required to do
another task, that is, calculation.
  Based on this discussion above, I maintain that the usefulness of vector representations are caused
by easy geometric manipulation.         If students were required to perform other tasks in addition to the
manipulation, the vector representations would not be useful.
General Discussion
. Self-explanations.
  Each problem used in this study represents the questions that students may have when they study
statistics. If the textbook is inadequate by omitting statements about the questions, the students have
to generate answers by self-explanations.        Chi et al.  [1994) emphasized that improvement in learning
was achieved when students were merely prompted to self-explanation.               However, the results in this
experiment    suggest that   the  specific  training (for example,  leaning  vector representations)    is needed
in order to generate good self-explanations.       For example,    if students learned statistics without vector
representations, they could not solve problem 1.
When and why vector representations are useful.
  It should be emphasized that vector representations are often useful for understanding textbooks and
problem   solving.  We can   say that the use   of pictorial representations is as valuable for university-level
mathematics courses as it is for elementary school mathematics. However, it should be also emphasized
that vector representations are not always useful.
  This representation was useful for understanding the proof about the range of the correlation coefficient
and solving   problem  1. It  may   be  easy to draw  appropriate diagrams for these    tasks, and subjects are
not required special abilities except for moving or manipulating diagrams geometrically.              Larkin and
Simon[1987] proposed that diagrammatic reasoning has an advantage because perceptual reasoning is
easy.
  In contrast to this case, subjects were required to have additional abilities for problem 2 and 3, for
example, the abilities to calculate and to draw a difficult diagram.         Therefore, we can conclude that
the  usefulness  of vector   representations  is due  to  easy geometric   manipulation.  It   stands   to   reason
that the  problems become difficult if      additional abilities are needed.  However the important thing is
that this study clarifies where the students' limitation is.       Note that the range of usefulness of vector
representations is not very wide.
  Generally    speaking,  it is difficult for students  to  draw   an appropriate  diagram    [e.g., Anzai   1991].
We can not answer the questions what abilities are needed or what training is useful in order to draw
appropriate diagrams. Further research is needed about the additional abilities.
References
[Anzai 1991] Anzai, Y. (1991). Leaning and use of representations for physics expertise. In K.A. Ericsson
  &   J. Smith(Eds.)  Toward    a   general theory of expertise, Cambridge:  Cambridge   University    P ress.
[Chi  et  al.  1989) Chi,    M.T.H.,   Bassok,   M., Lewis,  M.,   Reimann,  P.,  &   Glaser,  R.    (1989).  Self
  explanations:   How students study and use examples in learning to solve problems.          Cognitive  Science,
  13, 145-182.
[Chi  et  al.  1994) Chi,  M.T.H.,    de   Leeuw,  N., Chiu,   M.,  &  LaVancher,   C.  (1994).      Eliciting self
  explanations improves      understanding.   Cognitive   Science, 18, 439-477.
[Eaton 1983] Eaton, M. L. (1983). Multivariate Analysis: A Vector Space Approach, John Wiley & Sons.
[Ferguson-Hessler &   de Jong 1990)     Ferguson-Hessler, M.G.M.,      & de Jong,  T. (1990).  Studying physics
  texts:  Differences in  study processes between good      and  poor  performers.  Cognition  & Instruction,   7,
  41 -54.
[Larkin &     Simon 1987) Larkin,   J., & Simon, H. A.     (1987).  W hy a diagram    is (sometimes) worth ten
  thousand words.     Cognitive  Science,   11, 65-99.
[Takeuchi et al.   1982] Takeuchi, K., Yanai, H., & Mukherjee, B. N. (1982).          The Foundation of Multi
  variate  Analysis.  New    Delhi: Wiley   Eastern.
[Tanaka   & Wakimoto 1983) Tanaka, Y.,          & Wakimoto,    K.  (1983). Methods    of Multivariate   Statistical
  Analysis. Tokyo: Gendai Sugaku Sya. (in Japanese)

                                                                                                                    525
