 A   Design       Framework           for      Teaching/Learning                Activities          Supporting
Latino    First       Graders'       Ten-Structured               Thinking      in     Urban        Classrooms

                            Karen C. Fuson, Steven T. Smith, Ana Maria Lo Cicero
                                      School of Education and Social Policy
                                          Northwestern University USA
                         fuson@nwu.edu, ssmith@nwu.edu, locicero@merle.acns.nwu.edu

            Abstract:     This paper  presents a  design  framework  for  teaching/learning  activities
            during year-long classroom teaching experiments that sought to support first graders' ten
            structured thinking in two predominantly-Latino low-SES urban classrooms (one English
            speaking and one Spanish-speaking).       The  design framework   outlines  (1) theoretical
            perspectives  on   the teaching/learning  domain   of multidigit  concepts and  multidigit
            addition and subtraction, (2) theoretical perspectives on teaching and learning processes,
            and   (3) the pragmatic  context   of the research.   The particular elements within the
            framework generalize to other design tasks to various extents.      The teaching/learning
            activities were successful in enabling children in these two classes to achieve above grade
            level and to look more like East Asian than U.S. children in their multidigit concepts.

      Children in the United States do considerably worse on many measures of mathematical thinking and
performance than do children in China, Japan, and Korea [Fuson & Kwon 1992a, 1992b; Miller 1990, 1991;
Miller &  Stigler 1987;   Miller   & Zhu 1991;    Song   & Ginsburg   1987;   Stigler, Lee,  &  Stephenson   1990;
Stephenson & Stigler 1992].     Poor urban children, especially those who do not speak English or who have
parents with low levels of education, perform even worse   [Secada 1992].     This paper reports initial results from
a project focused on designing teaching/learning activities for Latino-background urban children that are
culturally appropriate but create learning experiences more like those received by East Asian children.
     The focus is on the design framework for the teaching/learning activities, but summary achievement
results are reported to indicate the effects of the activities. More details about the teaching/learning activities and
the achievement data are in Fuson, Smith, and Lo Cicero [1996]. The mathematical focus was addition and
subtraction of quantities expressible by 2-digit numbers and the conceptual relationships among number words,
2-digit numerals, and quantities (place-value concepts).   Project staff teachers worked in one English-speaking
and one Spanish-speaking first-grade classroom for a whole year.

The Design Framework
     The design framework is given in Table 1. Its three major components are theoretical perspectives on the
teaching/learning content domain, theoretical perspectives on teaching and learning, and attributes of the
pragmatic context of the research.   We view these as the miminum elements of any design framework.             The
particular elements within the framework generalize to other design tasks to various extents.       The perspectives
on the domain of teaching and learning (multidigit numbers) generalize the least, although aspects do generalize
to any mathematical tasks using multidigit numbers and to decimals.        The general frame within Figure I of
triads of number words, written number marks, and quantity referents for these is also a general frame that can be
used for any quantity domain (with appropriate specifics at each comer of the triad).       The general categories
within the theoretical perspectives on learning and teaching apply to any content domain, and many elements
within these categories also generalize. Certain aspects within the pragmatic context also generalize to many
school classrooms. For school-based projects (and probably also for most projects in non-laboratory settings),
important attributes  of  this pragmatic context   are  often  discovered  during the   course of    the design and
implementation process.   The timing of these discoveries is vital, because they can occur after design decisions
have been  made.     For  technology  designs,    where  there  may be   a long lag    between design    and actual
implementation testing, failure to discover limiting aspects of the pragmatic context can be very costly in terms
of a lack of fit of the designed technology and its pragmatic context of use.
     The design process for our project had single or multiple recursive team cycles of design followed by
mental implementation and then redesign. This was followed by implementation in one classroom, reflection
and discussion, and often, redesign for the second classroom.     Some elements of the framework were explicitly
used from the beginning, some were used implicitly, and some emerged and/or were clarified during the year.

                                                                                                                  83
                    Theoretical Perspectives on the Domain of Teaching and Learning

 A. Theory of multiunit conceptual structures: A connected web of unitary, tens-within-decades, and tens/ones
 triads (all paths in Figure 1) -> Need classroom supports for children's construction of all triads and
 connections among them  ->    Project classroom supports:
      a. Paths linking tens/ones quantities, number words, and number marks
          i. Various introductory activities to see grouping in tens and relate groupings to number words and
            number marks (numerals)
          ii. Ten-sticks and dots related to number words and number marks (numerals)
      b. Tens/ones words (53 said as five tens three ones)
      c. Ten-structured prerequisites for finger and mental single-digit methods around ten
      d. Special difficulties with teens words-> begin 2-digit web to 100 before extensive work with teens
 B. Theory ofMultiunit Addition and Subtraction
      a. Add/subtract like multiunits
      b. If necessary, make another ten (adddition)/open a ten to get more ones (subtraction)
      c. Single-digit add/subtract a given kind of multiunit

                         Theoretical Perspectives on Learning and Teaching Processes:
                  A Constructivist View of Learning and a Vygotskiian View of Teaching

 C. Children as meaning makers
      a. Research says children initially need perceptual unit items for quantities
      b. Constructions with quantities take a long time before addition/subtraction methods can be
       abbreviated or internalized to mental or written numeric methods (no instamatic camera
        model of learning)
      c. Children choose their solution methods (they use paths of their choice)
      d. Use quantities so that they support reflection to move on to mental and numeric methods
 D. Teaching as assisting all children to use cultural-historical semiotic domain tools meaningfully
      a. Necessary domain tools:
          i. English/Spanish number words
          ii. Written 2-digit marks (numerals)
      b. Pedagogical tools (potentially mathematical referrers and referents)
          i. Tens/ones words (53 said as five tens three ones)
          ii. Ten-sticks and dots
          iii. Various tens/ones quantity activities (most of which did not meet pragmatic tests)
          iv. Fingers for ten-structured single-digit addition and subtraction methods
 E. Teaching as assisted performance of children with meanings-in-the-making
      a. Classroom learning experiences support children's learning of manageable multidigit addition/subtraction
        quantity methods
      b. Elicit, discuss, and demonstrate a range of solution methods
      c. Emphasize methods using tens and ones (decade count-by-tens, tens/ones count-the-tens)
     d. Assist children needing help with particular steps
           i. Whole-class discussions focus on errors (why wrong? how to correct?)
           ii. Assist individuals in class with missing or erroneous components
           iii. Assist individuals outside of class if substantial chunks of web are missing
     e. Assist reflection so that children can use alternative methods
      f. Assist reflection so that children move on to mental and number methods

                                       Attributes of the Pragmatic Context

 F. Constraints of many urban schools
     a. Limits concerning pedagogical tools
          i. Low cost in money and teacher time
          ii. Not easily lost or taken
          iii. Ease of management:    distributing, keeping sets separate, objects dropping off desks,
            fiddling with rather than solving or listening

84
            iv. Allow teacher to see children's solution methods after class because of large class
               sizes and frequent interruptions during class
    b. Standardized tests affect curriculum topics covered
    c. Individual differences in teacher emphasis and teacher style
G. Need to develop, try, and adapt learning activities and pedagogical tools
    One class tried activities first (the project staff teacher was more experienced in the teaching domain);
    activities were modified as seemed necessary and were then tried in the second class (the Spanish-speaking
    class)
H. The pragmatic sieve:    the learning activity actually works in a whole classroom of children

              Table 1:   Design  Framework     for  Multidigit      Teaching/Learning      Activities

     The project staff doing the design work were (1) a professor who was an experienced math teacher and had
many years of experience doing basic and applied research on children's mathematical learning and on teaching
based on such learning, (2) a post-doctoral fellow with a background in anthropology and considerable experience
in designing and testing math learning activities for young children, and (3) a bilingual bicultural experienced
language teacher.   Input was sought from and given by the classroom teachers in whose classrooms we were
working.  The design framework was actually put into a table only when the results of the year were being
written up.   It now gives clarity to what was often an intuitive process with different perspectives by all
participants. In retrospect, it seems that use of such a design framework would facilitate reflection and speed up
the construction of shared meanings by participants as well as expose differences that would be helpful to
discuss. Beginning any design project with an explicit framework, and revising it frequently throughout the
design process, might stabilize and improve what is necessarily an emergent process.

Theoretical    Perspectives   on  the  Domain  of  Teaching        and  Learning:    Multidigit      Numbers

     The    theoretical  work of  this study was an extension       of earlier theoretical work     [Fuson 1990],
instructional development    work [Burghardt  &  Fuson       1996; Fuson &   Briars 1990,  Fuson,    Fraivillig, &
Burghardt 1992], and analytical and empirical work on linguistic and cultural supports for ten-structured thinking
available for East Asian children [Fuson & Kwon 1991/92, 1992a, 1992b].        The extension and    clarification of
conceptual structures children construct for understanding multidigit numbers is summarized in Figure 1 and
described in more detail in Fuson, Smith, and Lo Cicero [1996].     East Asian children need only construct the
inner tens/ones triad (connected by the heavy lines) and the outer-most unitary triad (connected by the thinnest
lines) because their number words are regular and name the tens for numbers between 10 and 100 (e.g., 53 is
said "five ten three"). Children speaking European languages with a decade structure (e.g., twenty, thirty, forty,
fifty, etc. instead of two tens, three tens, four tens, five tens, etc.) must construct the special middle tens-within
decade paths for the decade words in addition to the unitary and the tens/ones paths (meanings).      Children can
function meaningfully in ten-structured situations with only the decade or the tens/ones (thick line) paths, but a
fully integrated and complete understanding of standard European number words and the number marks requires a
flexible use of all paths in the web.  Figure 1 indicates clearly that the learning and teaching tasks are much
more complex in the U.S. than in East Asian countries, and that discourse within classrooms may get confused
because children may have, or be using at that moment, different conceptions of multidigit contexts.

Theoretical    Perspectives   on  Learning   and  Teaching

      The perspective used by the research team can be summarized as a constructivist view of learning and a
Vygotskiian view of teaching.   Central attributes of our version of these perspectives are listed in the middle
section of Table 1, but there is not space here to discuss them in detail.     A brief discussion of children as
meaning makers appears in Fuson, Fraivillig, and Burghardt [1992], and a paper explicating the perspectives in
D and E is in preparation.  The pragmatic context affected our search for pedagogical tools that would support
meaning making for multidigit numbers.   In earlier studies we had found that teachers can use base-ten blocks to
help whole classrooms of children construct quantitative meanings for standard algorithms [Fuson & Briars
1990] and that small groups of children can use base-ten blocks to construct various meaningful methods of
multidigit addition and subtraction if they link their actions on the blocks to their actions on the written
numerals [Burghardt & Fuson 1996; Fuson, Fraivillig, & Burghardt 1992].        However, base-ten blocks are too
expensive to have enough so that every child in the class can act on them.          Therefore, our instructional

                                                                                                                  85
               1/mcount by ones toninety nine(noventa nueve)mUnitaryQuantity        . ....-.=.и..и Unitary multidigit1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6,..., 53и:и.-:-. ..и:.и-.ииии иии :и
                                                                                  a
                                                                       organize by tens
                                                                       (i) by counting
                                                                       (ii) by pattern

                                                               a
                             h/i(i) count by tens to ninety (noventa)(ii) switch from countingtens toib/cTens/OnesQuantityCTens-within-decades and ones..10.. 2......0 3.....04.....5 0 .......0 5155 2 3 . . .
 Unitary                          (i) count to nine(ii) count tens                      1  2  345 tens                    1  2 on3es
        Tens-within                    then countones                                Collected-tens and ones
         Decade ITens/Ones(i) b (ii) Tens/Ones one-nine 1-9 Tenes/dOnes i: sd                Tens/Ones
         Number Words e ии------ииd                                                    Number Marks
              five tens three ones                                                                                   5 3

                                                                     j/k
                                                 (i)  ten-ninety 1-9 association
                                                      (fifty is 5)
                                                 (ii) 1-9 written in the
                                                      left slot_Д__
                                                 (iii) one-nine 1-9 association
                                                 (iv) 1-9 written in the
                                                       right slot   _    i
     English/Spanish
     Number Words
         fifty three
       cincuenta tres

            Unitary, Tens-within-Decades, and Collected-Tens Triads:
   Quantity, Number-Mark, and Number-Word Relationships for Two-Digit Numbers
                                                   Figure 1

86
development focused heavily on devising pedagogical tools that would meet the pragmatic constraints outlined
in the design framework.
     The most powerful semiotic domain tool developed during the year was a drawn quantity referent we
called "ten-sticks and dots." Ten-sticks  were  vertical sticks, each of which had a quantity of ten,   and dots  (or
circles) had a quantity of one and were drawn in horizontal rows. The ten-sticks and dots met the pragmatic tests
listed in Table 1 under Fa. They also facilitated linking of quantities and number marks because number marks
could be written on or near the ten-sticks or dots, and they supported reflection by the child on their own
constructions because the drawings were permanent. Linking is important in multidigit addition and subtraction
because errors arise much more frequently if quantities and marks are not linked; errors can be eliminated by
linking [Burghardt & Fuson 1996; Fuson 1986).       Written number marks do not take on quantitative meanings if
they are not used to refer to multiunit quantities. With objects, the initial quantity is lost through the addition
or subtraction operation of acting on the quantities. With the ten-sticks and dots, dots were enclosed to make
another ten, or a ten-stick was opened up to make ten dots.   Therefore all quantities were potentially there for
reflection about the problem-solving process.
     Ten-sticks and dots were first developed out of unitary quantities (dots) grouped in tens.             Children
therefore could think of these quantities using any of the conceptual structures in Figure 1 (unitary, decade, or
tens/ones). To make a record of 2-digit quantities the class was accumulating, children counted by ones while
they made columns of ten dots and then a horizontal row of dots for the ones (often with a space between the
first five dots and the last four dots to facilitate "seeing" these larger numbers as patterns of 5 + x).   To check
their quantity, children could count then count the columns of ten dots by ones, by tens (10, 20, 30, 40), or as
tens (1, 2, 3, 4 tens). These different ways to count were all modelled by the teacher and by children.       When
children confidently could make such drawings, the columns of ten dots were connected by a line drawn through
them as the counting by tens or of tens was done; some children had already spontaneously begun to do this.
Eventually only the vertical stick was drawn to show a ten. These activities occupied part of the class period for
about two weeks.
     The ten-sticks and dots facilitated meaningful addition and subtraction of multidigit quantities because
they supported all three aspects of these operations (see B in Table 1, taken from Fuson, 1990).        In classroom
instructional conversations, the children and the project teacher discussed various addition (and, later, subtraction)
methods using the ten-sticks and dots. Dots were combined to make another ten when possible, and a ten-stick
was opened (its ten dots were drawn within an ellipse) when necessary in subtraction [see Figure        2). Addition
and subtraction took place within word problem contexts, for example as buying/selling doughnuts packed in
boxes of ten, so boxes were packed or opened as necessary. Children could use either a decade or a collected ten
conception in adding or subtracting:  They counted the "stick and dot" ("las barras y los puntos") quantities by
tens and ones (10, 20, 30, 40, 41, 42, 43) or as tens and as ones (1, 2, 3, 4   tens and 1, 2, 3 ones).

The Pragmatic      Context

     The major pragmatic constraints      on pedagogical semiotic tools   are given  as Fa in   Table   l;  they were
discussed above with respects to the ten-sticks and dots.     The attributes A through G concern the cycle of
learning/teaching activity development throughout the whole year.   H, the pragmatic    sieve, was an immediate
test of every teaching/learning activity. It was more difficult to anticipate and repair problems in this general
"Does it work?" aspect than in the others. We usually could determine low cost in money and teacher time, and
we then could  reject    invented options  that did  not meet these criteria.    We  frequently   could     anticipate
management problems and modify to reduce or eliminate them.     But the pragmatic seive involved complexities
of making an activity that would be interesting to children, would be at the right level of difficulty for many,
and could fit within a few core classroom activity structures that could be learned and routinized.      We did not
always anticipate all of the necessary aspects, so learning activities frequently needed to be adapted.
     There also was interaction between the pragmatic seive and the different paths within the web. Part of the
adaptation process involved trying to achieve a balance among opportunities for children to work on various
paths and learn necessary knowledge for these.      Another part of the balancing act was maintaining enough
continuity of activity structures and mathematical content so that children could function profitably and could
learn over sessions, but enough variation so that the teacher and children did not become bored.        Furthermore,
there were individual differences in the need for the predictable old and the strange new. We found that our first
graders, and our first-grade teachers, felt comfortable with the many days of sustained experience in each of
several different types of activities it took to build up multiunit concepts.

                                                                                                                   87
         7'3
            47 \ I \I                                                              ci c..
          + 26            )
      73

     73 -25 '1-:2t-/ 11,   и f ,

       1S
            2-Digit Addition and Subtraction Using Ten-Sticks and Dots
                                 Figure 2

88
Results    of   the    Teaching/Learning        Activities
       The ten-sticks and dots allowed children to use different solution methods, some that required decade
conceptions and some that required tens/ones conceptions.    Some children in each class used each of these kinds
of conceptions.  However, most children in the Spanish-speaking class used decade conceptions, and more that
half of the children in the English-speaking class used tens/ones conceptions.         These emphases resulted from
different emphases by the teachers.    By the end of the year, almost all of the first graders could accurately use
ten-stick and dot drawings to add 2-digit numbers that require trading (regrouping), most of the English-speaking
first graders could use such drawings to subtract 2-digit numbers with trading (regrouping), and most of the
Spanish-speaking children could use them to do 3-digit adding without trading (the latter two different foci were
necessitated by differences in the standardized tests used in these classes).
       End-of-the-year interview tasks on Figure 1 knowledge paths indicated that all children in both classes
constructed all of the knowledge paths for the inner tens/ones triad.  All but three children could do the middle
decade triad tasks. Children in the Spanish-speaking class tended to do these directly by using paths h/i and j/k,
and children in the English-speaking class tended to use the tens/ones triad paths b/c and die and the path fig
connecting tens/ones number words to English/Spanish number words.
       On various tasks assessing children's conceptual structures for 2-digit numbers, first graders from both
classes looked more like East Asian children in other studies, who give answers reflecting ten-structured
concepts of numbers, than like first graders in the United States, who predominantly respond unitarily.          On
some tasks, the first graders did better than second and third graders from their school before this intervention and
than suburban U.S. children from higher grades reported in other studies.
       We are not aware of comparable data to assess the relative competence of our children on multidigit
addition tasks. Stigler, Lee, and Stevenson [1990] reported that Japanese, Taiwanese, and U.S. first graders were
29%, 25%, and 13% correct on a Combine word problem adding 26 + 19.             Hiebert and Wearne [1992] reported
that 35% of their conceptually instructed first graders and 25% of the traditionally instructed first graders were
correct on a Change Add To: unknown Result problem with trades.        Our children were given a word problem
with base-ten blocks (89% correct) and a 2-digit addition problem in numerals, for which most children used ten
sticks and dots (90% correct).  Thus, our children's performance on multidigit addition problems with trading
considerably exceeded that of children in other studies.

Conclu s ion
       It did prove to be possible to support most children's construction of most elements of the web of
relations in Figure I.  Most children demonstrated most relations for all three conceptions:      the tens and ones
conception, the sequence-tens decade and ones conception, and the unitary multidigit conception.       Furthermore,
on a range of unfamiliar tasks, many children showed a robust preference for ten-structured conceptions, looking
like children in China, Japan, and Korea rather than like age-mates in the United States, or like children in
higher grades in the United States. Many children also were able to carry out ten-structured solutions to 2-digit
addition problems (also subtraction, for the English-speaking class).         This is considerably above what first
graders in the United States ordinarily have an opportunity to learn, because such problems with trades are
usually not included in first-grade textbooks [Fuson 1992].   Performance was considerably above that reported
for U.S. children receiving traditional and nontraditional instruction and was above that reported for Japanese and
Taiwanese first graders.
       The work   on   2-digit addition  (and 2-digit    subtraction and      3-digit addition with no  trades) was
conceptualized partly as work on that domain but also as an opportunity for children to continue to construct and
to use in more complex activities many relations from the web.       Therefore, the teaching criteria during these
activities were different from those usually used with the simple topics in the first-grade curriculum, where high
levels of success   are  expected   of most children.     The 2-digit  activities     were viewed   as involving an
apprenticeship in complex activities during which children might make many partial errors that gradually would
come to be corrected as they had opportunities to construct more adequate understandings.           In our view, the
whole web of knowledge European children must construct is so complex, and so many different orders of
construction are possible, that its full construction and use is best conceptualized as a 2-year task requiring much
of first and second grade. However, unlike current practice, much more of this web can be constructed in first
grade if teaching/learning activities stemming from the design framework given in Table 1 are used.       The tasks
for second grade should then focus on consolidation and automatization of the web and on moving from using
drawn concrete quantity referents to using written and mental numerical methods that have those quantity
meanings.

                                                                                                                     89
 References

        [Burghardt & Fuson 1996] Burghardt, B. H. & Fuson, K. C. (1996).    Multidigit addition and subtraction methods
 invented in smal) wups and teacher support of problem solving and reflection.     Manuscript under revision for
 publication, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL.
        [Fuson 1986] Fuson, K.C. (1986).    Roles of representation and verbalization in the teaching of multi-digit
 addition and subtraction. European Journal ofPsychology of Education, l, 35-56.
        [Fuson 1990] Fuson, K. C. (1990).   Conceptual structures for multiunit numbers:  Implications for learning and
 teaching multidigit addition, subtraction, and place value. Cognition  and Instruction, 1, 343-403.
        [Fuson 1992] Fuson, K. C. (1992).   Research on learning and teaching addition and subtraction of whole
 numbers. In G. Leinhardt, R. T.Putnam, & R. A. Hattrup (Eds.), The analysis of arithmetic for mathematics teaching
 (pp. 53-187).  Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
        [Fuson & Briars 1990] Fuson, K. C.  & Briars, D. J. (1990).   Base-ten blocks as a first- and second-grade
 learning/teaching approach for multidigit addition and subtraction   and place-value concepts. Journal for Research in
 Mathematics   Education,  21. 180-206.
        [Fuson, Fraivillig, & Burghardt 1992] Fuson, K. C., Fraivillig, J. L., & Burghardt, B. H. (1992). Relationships
 children construct among English number words, multiunit base-ten blocks, and written multidigit addition. In J.
 Campbell (Ed.), The nature and origins of mathematical skills (pp. 39-112). North Holland: Elsevier Science.
        [Fuson & Kwon 1991/1992] Fuson, K. C., & Kwon Y. (1991/1992).        Learning addition and subtraction: Effects
 of number words and other cultural tools/Systemes de mots-nombres et autres outils culturels: Effets sur les premiers
 calculs de l'efant. In J. Bideaud, C. Meljac, & J.P. Fischer (Eds.),Pathways to number/Les chemins du nombre (pp.
 283-302/pp. 351-374).    Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc/ Villeneuve d'Ascq, France: Presses
 Universitaires de Lille.
        [Fuson & Kwon 1992a] Fuson, K. C. & Kwon, Y. (1992a).         Korean children's single-digit addition and
 subtraction:  Numbers structured by ten. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education. 23. 148-165.
        [Fuson & Kwon 1992b] Fuson, K. C. & Kwon, Y. (1992b).         Korean children's understanding of multidigit
 addition and subtraction. Child Development, fil, 491-506.
        [Fuson, Smith, & Lo Cicero 1996] Fuson, K. C., Smith, S., & Lo Cicero, A. (1996).       Su1;rnorting Latino First
 Graders' Ten-Structured Thinking in Urban Classrooms.     Manuscript under revision for publication, Northwestern
 University, Evanston, IL.
        [Hiebert & Wearne 1992] Hiebert, J., & Wearne, D. (1992).     Links between teaching and learning place value
 with understanding in  first grade. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 23, 98-122.
        [Miller 1990] Miller, K. F. (1990, November).   Language, orthography, and number:      When surface structure
 matters. Paper presented at the annual meeting of thePsychonomics Society, New Orleans, LA.
        [Miller 1991] Miller, K. F. (1991, November).   Languages of number: Language, orthography.    and
 developmental changes in number similarity judgments. Paper presented at the annual meeting of thePsychonomics
 Society, San Francisco, CA.
        [Miller & Stigler 1987] Miller, K. F., & Stigler, J. W. (1987). Counting in Chinese:    Cultural variation in a
 basic cognitive skill. Cognitive    Development, 2., 279-305.
        [Miller & Zhu 1991] Miller, K. F., & Zhu, J. (1991).  The trouble with teens: Accessing the structure of number
 names. Journal of Memory and Language. 30, 48-68.
        [Secada 1992] Secada, W. G. (1992).   Race, ethnicity, social class, language, and achievement in mathematics.
 In D. Grouws (Ed.), Handbook of reearch on teaching and learning mathematics (pp. 623-660).      New York: Macmillan.
        [Song & Ginsburg 1987] Song, M. J., & Ginsburg, H.P. (1987).      The development of informal and formal
 mathematical thinking in Korean and U.S. children.    Child  Development, 58, 1286-1296.
        [Stevenson & Stigler 1992]    Stevenson, H. W., & Stigler, J. M. (1992). The learning gap: Why our schools are
 failing and what we can learn from Japanese and Chinese education.    New York: Summit Books.
        [Stigler, Lee, & Stevenson 1990] Stigler, J. M., Lee, S.-Y., & Stevenson. H. W. (1990).    Mathematical
 knowledge of Japanese, Chinese, and American elementary school children.    Reston, VA: National Council of Teachers
 of Mathematics.

 Acknowledgements
 The research reported in this chapter was supported in part by the National Science Foundation under Grant No. RED
 935373 and in part by the Spencer Foundation.  The opinions expressed in this chapter are those of the authors and do
 not necessarily reflect the views of NSF or of the Spencer Foundation.

90
