                          New Initiatives in Youth Development:
                                  Technology Works Enterprises

                                                   David Cavallo
                                      Epistemology and Learning Group
                                               MIT Media Laboratory
                                       Room E15-320A, 20 Ames Street
                                          Cambridge, Ma. 02139-4307
                                               cavallo@media.mit.edu

                                                    Abstract:

           This paper describes a new initiative, Technology Works Enterprises (TWE), a radically
           different learning environment for low-income, at-risk adolescents. This article probes which
           aspects of the technological and educational infrastructure of Technology Works helped to
            make the project successful. It uses a case study of an individual and the developing learning
           culture to highlight these aspects. Finally, the paper discusses the implications of this project
            on approaches to vocational education.

Keywords: Vocational Education, Learning Environments, Technology and Education, Youth training.

1. Motivation
Many societies are facing a crisis with their youth brought about by the confluence of various major structural
and attitudinal changes. These include the changing nature of work, the dysfunction and subsequent distrust of
large, bureaucratic institutions, and the alienation felt by many young people.        The symptoms of this crisis
include large-scale, structural unemployment and underemployment, high drop out rates, substance abuse, and
increasingly brutal and pervasive violence.    A large segment of a whole generation risks being permanently
disenfranchised and marginalized due to being unskilled and unprepared for active and productive participation
in modern society.
Businesses complain that many youth are unprepared for the increasingly technical and complex nature of work.
Given the rapidity of change, continuous learning and re-training are essential.      Yet, most traditional methods
for training and vocational education have limited effect at best.
This paper describes a new initiative, Technology Works Enterprises (TWE), designed as one approach to help
address this crisis. The paper describes the goals and design principles of TWE, a sample of activities, and
closes with a discussion of the successes and limitations of the initial project.

2. Technology Works Enterprises
Technology Works Enterprises is a radically different learning environment for low-income, at-risk adolescents.
The youth involved had never achieved academic success or demonstrated the inclination or capability to
perform intellectually   rigorous work   requiring  sophisticated   reasoning     and mathematical, scientific     and
engineering knowledge.    TWE was an experimental project to determine if we could design and operate a
technologically rich environment   where these adolescents could build and demonstrate this capability.           The
teenagers who participated experienced their first real successes in an organized learning environment through
their involvement in TWE.

                                                                                                                        9
There are two primary goals to this work:
1) To document that it is possible for at-risk adolescents without prior school success to demonstrate significant
achievement on difficult projects.
2) To probe and clarify which aspects of the technological and educational infrastructure of Technology Works
helped to make the project successful.

2.1 Technology Works Enterprises: School that's not School

Conventional wisdom and practice is that a loosely structured, fast-paced, individual-centered, learner-driven,
project-based, intellectually   challenging, peer    collaborative learning environment     is appropriate only for
children deemed the best and the brightest, those who are selected for advanced work classes.      This same point
of view relegates those who have not done well to an almost opposite environment; highly structured, slow
paced, standardized, directed, task-oriented, intellectually-stultifying, and non-collaborative.

This work takes the  exact opposite direction for at-risk youth.   Rather than pulling content, rigor, and autonomy
out of their environment, we provide them with the same challenges and freedom normally only afforded to the
elite.  Technology Works Enterprises (TWE) is an existence proof of the validity of this approach for that
population.

2.2 A Rolling Sample of Life at TWE

Day 1:
It is clear our twelve new participants think they are in school.  And they are not happy about it. We decide to
use LEGO/Logo for a Soap Box Derby project.       Their task is to build cars that will go down a ramp the fastest.
They have to theorize about what will make their vehicles go fast, and then build and test them.             Bill is
explicitly not participating, except to occasionally mock others who are.     Worse, it appears, though it is not
certain, that he is willfully trying to destroy others' vehicles as they exit the ramp.
Day 7:
Bill is working with the programmable brick, touch sensors and light sensors to develop an accurate timer for
the races. There is a great controversy about how to tell who wins a race; how to ensure that all cars start at the
same time; and how to get a time for each of the cars racing in a heat.      There is animated discussion about
various proposals.  As a group they can find holes in each. The discussion is the first time they are cohering and
cooperating as a group. Bill tries to write the program to control the sensors, coordinate them with the timer and
display the values. He is having difficulty and quits.    I offer to help but he is highly resistant. I believe he is
afraid of not being smart enough to do what he wants and thus quits to avoid the embarrassment.          I decide to
wait for a while and approach him when fewer people are paying attention.

Day 8:
Bill and I find a time when the others are away on break to work through the difficulties.      The program works
and he joyfully demonstrates it to the others.

Day 28:
Bill is still struggling to get his LEGO/Logo vehicle to turn. Because the vehicle carries a programmable brick,
its weight is relatively heavy. His car moves forward and back well enough, but it stalls when tying to turn.   He
realizes he needs to trade speed for power in his design. He is experimenting with gear reduction to increase the
power.   While playing, he places a small LEGO brick in font of the wheels.        To his surprise and joy, his car
climbs over the brick!  He creates a taller barrier. His car is powerful enough to climb this one as well.  He had
never realized or even considered that there might be a connection between the power needed to turn and the
ability to climb barriers. He shows this effect to his friends.    Suddenly, a whole new activity grows at TWE:
creating climbing vehicles.  To these boys, this resonates as a Monster Truck and Tractor PuU:        They add it as a
new event for our Programmable Brick Olympics.        He also bets me that he can design and build     a car that will
climb the steep hill from the river to TWE.  Before the day is over, he demonstrates it.    They now have a cluster
of activities (climbing, turning, slow-racing, pulling) that utilize gearing down.

10
Day 34:
Bill is now calling himself "Mr. Brick."   He refuses, even in the pressure of having a finished demo for the
imminent Open House,   to customize his program to adapt to the specific layout of a maze.     He insists that the
program must be general enough to navigate any maze.       He goes through a repeated cycle of modification,
testing and debugging. He succeeds and a great cheer is let out.

2.3 TWE Design Principles

The concept of TWE was formulated around several broad beliefs, growing out of the educational philosophy of
Constructionism, about what types of environments facilitate powerful learning experiences.     The following are
some of our design principles.   Some are social; some relate to the physical environment; and some relate to the
learning environment. All are intertwined.
 Expectations that everyone in the group was capable of significant achievement
 Validation of their lives as important, their experiences as relevant, and their language, thoughts, activities and
   social interaction as critical components to learning
 Deeply, immersive environment where there was a computer for every child
 Extended amount of time
 Work with materials that are open-ended and malleable
 No pre-set curriculum, where the presentation of ideas are pre-determined
 Authentic activity as the most effective method of engagement and retention
 Understanding systems and powerful ideas within systems
 Technological fluency as opposed to specific skill training as a critical element for developing a continuing
   and renewable expertise [Papert, 1994).

3. Discussion
The children involved in this project had not resonated with the approaches used in traditional school settings.
As often is the case with children from poor or non-mainstream backgrounds, the language, culture, activities
and issues within traditional learning environment were not those of the children.

By not having a pre-set curriculum or a pre-defined set of problems, the projects could emerge from the ideas
and interests of the children themselves. Often they set much deeper and ambitious projects goals than anyone
might have chosen for them.      But because they were their own, they had an investment in bringing them to
fruition. In order to do this, they had to utilize sophisticated reasoning. These ideas were rooted in authentic
activity, in their own language and images (Lave, 1991), [Collins, 1991).

We utilized a multiplicity of materials.  Combined with free choice on projects, this provided multiple ports of
entry because they were free to choose what to work on and what to work with.    This also helped resolve gender
issues that often arise as the four girls in our project all performed extremely well.

The materials we initially used all were programming environments (Microworlds Logo, LEGO/Logo, and
StarLogo) [Resnick, 1994). As the project continued, new tools were introduced as children built databases,
spreadsheets, and web pages.      Because we wanted the children to work on projects of interest to them, and
thereby learn concepts that they could apply to subsequent projects, it was crucial that utilize open-ended,
malleable environments that the children could adapt for their own purposes.    We believed that by developing
fluency first, they would be better suited to expressing and completing projects in the future, particularly as new
tools and domains were addressed. Our experience demonstrated that this view was justified.

We received  two criticisms for this approach. One was that programming was too difficult and that these kids
could not do it. The children themselves thought that it was hard, but this turned out to be beneficial. Because
they attempted something they believed to be difficult, using technology that they endowed with the quality that
it takes smart people to use it, they gained an incredible amount of cultural capital.  They altered their views of
themselves from a bunch of dummies to sharp technologists.       They reasoned that if they could perform this
work, then they too must be smart. If their work had been pared down this benefit would not have accrued.

                                                                                                                      11
The other criticism was that they would not be employable by learning the Logo suite of tools; that we should
teach keyboarding or spreadsheets or something where they might get a job.         Typical vocational education is
task-oriented and slow-paced, because children receive vocational education since they are too slow for regular
education. They are only trained on specific tools.

This too we rejected, not merely because even if such jobs do exist now, they soon will be obsolete, but also
because by developing a technological fluency they would be better suited to perform meaningful work in the
near and long terms. This view also was justified as by the end of the summer project, they had secured projects
building web pages for community activities, providing network, hardware and software support, and as
teacher's aides.

By providing a deeply immersive environment, we were not constrained by lack of access to machines or
materials. This allowed everyone to gain the benefits from working with the technology.       We did not have to
take Legos apart to allow another group to work with them.        The children had ample time and access to
computers.  They could have multiple projects in development simultaneously.        Many expressed gratitude that
they could work on several things at once, for if they were stuck in one project, as often happened, they could
take a break and work on something else returning to the original project with a fresh approach. This resembles
a typical work environment more than a typical school environment and that is precisely the point.      Often the
constraints imposed by schools in the name of providing bite-sized morsels of knowledge.

The TWE participants enjoyed the luxury of time.       Projects could evolve over a long periods. Thus, they could
delve deeply into areas of interest, rather than broadly but shallowly as so often happens.

Perhaps the most critical thread running through the entire program was the issue of control.       Students from
disadvantaged backgrounds typically have little control over their learning, and hardly none over the institutions
they attend [Giroux, 1981].     We wanted them to have both, while not abdicating our responsibility as caring
adults involved in their lives.

We not only opened up the activities to their freedom of choice, but we also opened the operation of TWE itself.
In the beginning of the project, the staff would run a morning meeting to map out the day's activities, plan for
the future, address problems, etc. At first, the children treated this as school. That is, they ignored most things,
did not pay attention, just wanted to get out. Gradually, they came to see the program as their own and by the
end of the project were running the meetings, setting the budget, and making decisions democratically.

A turning point was when we first had a meeting to "debug TWE."      We opened the discussion to them to say
what was going well, what was going badly, and what they wanted to do differently.      It was clear that they had
never been engaged with an institution in this way previously.    They were reluctant to offer any criticisms.
Perhaps this was not only a matter of being unaccustomed to such a role, but also because they did not trust or
believe that we would act upon their voices.   When we did, and truly demonstrated that this was their project as
well as ours, their participation changed on numerous levels.

Our goal was to use critical questioning, not only in debugging programs and mechanical artifacts, but also in
addressing institutions and activities in their lives. Their learning in institutions had never been their own, in
their control.   Thus we could see a discrepancy between the institutional description of these children as
incapable of learning and their lives where they demonstrated intelligence in their own activities.  Our aim was
to bridge from their inner strengths to other domains.     To do so required a valuing of their experiences and
language and not an imposition of a different set.

Once this was achieved, and an initial fluency developed, we toured their city to study how technology was
used, and how they might improve their environment.        This was a radically different relationship for these
children to their community.    These are adolescents who,  when they go into the stores of their neighborhood,
the proprietors become nervous and watchful.       These are children normally alienated from the established
norms. Now they were called upon to improve the community.

After their investigation, they returned to TWE to analyze what they found, to brainstorm about improvements,
and then to build models of what they would change. This was then demonstrated back to the community at the
project-ending Open House.

12
3.1 Limitations

Naturally, not everything attempted at TWE worked or resonated with the teenagers.             Many suggestions were
made that were not accepted.  Many developments occurred that were unexpected or unwelcome.               There were
many aggravations and frustrations. Not everyone made all the progress we desired.

The structure of TWE itself had advantages and drawbacks that require elucidation.          While we had the luxury of
only working with    12 children, even this  12: I ratio was too large in the beginning of the project.  Much of the
early work was spent searching for activities that could engage the participants.          Early on every obstacle was
met by a tendency to quit, and naturally, while working with technology there were constant, and often obscure,
obstacles. The children were not resilient learners.

Finally, the seven week period that the program ran, while sufficient to demonstrate that the approach is feasible
and, most importantly, sufficient to provide an extremely positive experience in the lives of the participants, was
not sufficient to turn anything totally around in the community nor to necessarily provide a lasting effect in the
lives of the children.

4. Future Plans

Currently, a new Computer Clubhouse has evolved from TWE.        We hope to begin a new TWE and run it over
an extended period of time.  This should help address some of the deficiencies mentioned above, as well as
provide a better basis for evaluation of the concept.

We will begin with a smaller number of children, and gradually increase the number of participants.        We hope
to have that children will flow into and out of the program seamlessly; that is, participating at TWE part-time,
going to work, going to school, returning, and so on.    Early participants will serve as mentors for later ones.
The roles of coaching, teaching and guidance will be taken on more by the children themselves.          This, coupled
with the revenue earned through performing work for the community, will help reduce the costs of the project.

We believe that TWE demonstrated that it is a viable option for preparing disadvantaged youth for meaningful
work in the modern, technological economy. We adapted our approach based upon our interests, the lives of the
children involved and their interests.     Business is evolving from large hierarchical organizations to smaller,
more varied, nimbler ones.  We-believe that by providing a multiplicity of learning environments, the needs of
more children can be addressed better than trying to accomplish everything within one type of institution.

5. References

[Collins, 1991) Collins, Allan, Hawkins, J. & Carver, S.M., (1991), A Cognitive Apprenticeship for Disadvantaged
Students, in B. Means, C. Chelemer, & M.S. Knapp (eds.) Teaching Advanced Skills to At-Risk Students.  San Francisco:
Jossey Blass, 1991.

[Giroux, 1981) Giroux, Henry A., (1981).  Ideology, Culture, and the Process of Schooling. Philadelphia, Pa: Temple
University Press,

[Lave, 1991) Lave, Jean and Etienne Wenger, (1991). Situated Leaming: Legitimate Peripheral Participation, Cambridge,
England: Cambridge University Press.

[Papert, 1994) Papert, Seymour & M. Resnick, (1994). Technological Fluency and the Representation of Knowledge,
Proposal to the NSF.

[Resnick, 1994) Resnick, Mitchel, (1994). Turtles, Termites & Traffic Jams, Cambridge, Ma: MIT Press.

Acknowledgments

The author would like to thank the National Science Foundation and the LEGO Group for their support of this
research.

                                                                                                                        13
