A  Case     Study        of Problem-Based        Learning in a Middle                          School Science
Classroom:         Lessons Learned

      Alice D. Gertzman, EduTech Institute, Georgia Institute ofTechnology, USA (aliceg@cc.gatech.edu)

          Janet L. Kolodner, EduTech Institute, Georgia Institute ofTechnology, USA (jlk@cc.gatech.edu)

         Abstract:   Research on teacher thinking within a constructivist framework emphasizes the relationship
          betweenteacherbeliefs about teaching and learning and effective classroom practices. A project sponsored by
         theEduTechinstitut at Georgia Tech provides training and support to middle-school teachers using problem
          based learning (PBL) in their science and math classes, seeking also to enhance the role of technology in
         learning.  This report of an ethnographic case study in one 8th-grade science class discusses the specific
         difficulties encountered in implementing PBL and identifies coping strategies improvised by teacher and
         students in adapting to the unfamiliar roles and expectations ofthe PBL approach. Classroom observation and
          interviews with the teacher reveal the importance not only of training teachers in the appropriate classroom
         techniques but also ofproviding ongoing support as they develop context-sensitive PBL modules and acquire
         deeper understanding and acceptance ofthe philosophy underlying the new approach. Reflection infuses the
         teaching and learning processes, encouraging all participants to re-view both content knowledge and knowledge
         about learning.

         In winter 1995, in response to the wishes of our primary funders and to numerous reports ofdisappointing
student performance on assessments ofscience and math learning in this country, the EduTech Institute embarked on
a project to enhance middle school science, math, and technology education. We formed a partnership with science,
math and technology teachers from three local middle schools as well as with faculty members in science and
engineering at Georgia Tech. The Tech professors bring up-to-date expertise in design, engineering and research;
middle-school teachers provide content knowledge as well as their experience with students, the curriculum, teaching,
and the classroom; and EduTech contributes expertise in the cognition oflearning and problem solving, models of
educational practice, assessment, and software design and development. Our goals are to help students understand the
roles science and math play in the world, to offer classroom methods and technological assistance that will help them
learn science and math more deeply and effectively, and to encourage more students to go into science and engineering
careers.
         Based on Georgia Tech's strengths and on what we know about learning, we decided to combine our goals
by developing design problems for the curriculum that introduce students to technology and engineering while
incorporating the math and science concepts that were already a part ofthe curriculum. These concepts would be
situated in real-world problems whose relevance to students' own communities and lives would serve to motivate and
contextualize learning.  To support the endeavor, EduTech agreed to develop appropriate software as well.                 One
research question we hope to address, as our studyprogresses, is whether such situated learning actually improves long
term retention ofkey concepts and problem-solving strategies, and whether those learned concepts and strategies are
transferred to other problem situations.

RATIONALE FOR PROBLEM-BASED LEARNING
         Recent curriculum development and teaching innovation in the math and science areas have taken a
constructivist approach to education, one in which knowledge is seen to be the product ofsocial interaction and situated
within particular cultural and linguistic practices which influence the participants and the processes through which they
construct knowledge (Cobb & Bauersfeld, 1995; Cobb, 1994; Driver et. al., 1994; Lemke, 1990).          Teachers are
increasingly encouraged to take the role offacilitator or coach rather than storekeeper ofknowledge, and students are
put into small collaborative groups where they are encouraged to share information, to relate new ideas to the world they
inhabit, to ask questions, conduct investigations, and think critically about what they find. Journals ofeducation are
filled with articles about the theory and practice ofinquiry, and many research studies have focused on aspects of
problem-posing and problem-solving as a way to motivate and teach students about science and math (Helgeson, 1994).

                                                                                                                           91
  Research also demonstrates the value ofcomputer applications in enhancing the learning environment and improving
  student competence (Berger et al., 1994). Our own approach to learning, drawn from case-based reasoning (Kolodner,
  1993), supports the premise that effective learning is situated in complex problem-solving activity that reflects real
  world needs and that draws on previously-acquired knowledge and experience to inform new understandings.
        From this research on science and math education and teacher development, and from the extensive classroom
  experience ofour teachers, we were able to formulate a set ofcentral tenets which guide our work. These tenets include:
  (1) learning by solving complex realistic design problems; (2) integrating instruction in sciences, math, and technology;
  (3) integrating learning ofconcepts, skills, and critical thinking; (4) focusing on collaborative learning and doing; (5)
 fostering reflection and articulation to enhance learning; (6) software-realized scaffolding ofcollaboration, complex
  problem solving, and learning; and (7) providing on-line information resources and tools in an integrated software
  environment.
        We found that the model ofproblem-based learning (PBL), developed by Howard Barrows (1985) for use in
 medical school classrooms, offered a methodology that was consonant with our principles ofteaching and learning. In
 the PEL-based curriculum now used at numerous medical schools, students learn science by diagnosing patient case
 histories. Faced with ill-structured clinical problems, medical students work in small groups to summarize what they
 know, develop hypotheses, determine what they      still need to find out, and plan their next steps.  They next do
 independent research and then return to their groups to share information and continue with their analysis ofthe
 problem. Students are thus taught a methodology that scaffolds the solving of hard problems and promotes the
 acquisition ofself-directed learning skills. The collaborative group format allows students to build on each others'
 strengths and knowledge and to gain needed experience in the skills ofarticulating and justifying their reasoning.
 Facilitators assigned to each work group help students to manage their collaborations, to stay on track in solving
 problems, and to reflect on their experiences in such a way that they appreciate the broad range ofknowledge and skills
 they are acquiring and their applicability to other problems.

 INITIAL PBL WORKSHOP FOR TEACHER AND CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT
        The goals ofPBL correspond with the goals ofour project and those ofthe teachers we are working with.
 During the summer of1995 our partnership ofteachers, professors and EduTech researchers met in a month-long
 workshop to explore the potential applications ofPBL in middle-school classrooms and to design a number oftrial
 curriculum modules to be implemented during the ensuing school year. Assisted by Paul and Joan Feltovich, experts
 from the Problem-Based Learning Institute in Springfield, Illinois, we organized training sessions for our teachers to
 help them learn how to carry out PBL methodology and to adapt it to the constraints ofthe middle-school classroom.
 Some ofthese constraints included the higher student-teacher ratio (often more than 30:1) in middle schools, issues of
 classroom discipline and control, use ofcollaborative learning and small-group techniques, support ofparents and
 school boards, limited resources, and the social and cognitive development ofyoung adolescents.       Teachers were
 enthusiastic about the approach and worked hard to develop problems and compile suitable materials. They also had
 the opportunity to try out software tools being developed at EduTech to assist students in the scaffolding ofproblern
 solving skills and to offer suggestions for the improvement ofthose tools.
        However, after teachers returned to their classrooms in August, it became clear that they were not completely
 comfortable with carrying out PBL methodology.    Most waited for several months or even longer before attempting
 to use the approach for even a short unit, and expressed uncertainty during the implementations about whether they
 were "doing it right" or whether students were responding satisfactorily.  Teachers talked oftheir own uncertainty in
 the unfamiliar role offacilitator or coach, and struggledto balance the constructivist call for more student autonomy (and
 a concurrent decrease ofteacher-centered direction and control) with the more familiar patterns oftraditional didactic
 teaching. We also noticed that teachers were caught between their own familiar practices and beliefs on the one hand
 and their desire to cooperate with EduTech researchers in implementing new approaches and using new technologies
 on the other. We realized we would have to learn more about what it takes for teachers to institute change in their
 classroom practices to provide the support these teachers needed. To understand teachers' experiences, we decided
 to add a qualitative research component to the research effort originally aimed at measuring student success.

92
THE RESEARCH PLAN
        A crucial aspect of the shift to PBL is to have teachers reflect on their own beliefs about classrooms and
learning and to understand the philosophy of teaching that underlies thePBL approach. Recent research has explored
the links  between teachers' beliefs      and attitudes and their adaptability to changing  classroom    conditions and
methodologies (Calderhead, 1987; Clark, 1988; Floden & Klinzing, 1990; Schon, 1983; Shavelson & Stem, 1981,
Sirotnik, 1983). Studies of teacher knowledge have identified two categories, pedagogical knowledge and content
knowledge (Barnes, 1989; Shulman, 1987),      showing that both kinds are essential to good teaching.  Researchers have
looked into the process of teacher change and the influence of teachers' backgrounds on the change process, finding that
teachers are most likely to institute changes that are reasonably congruent with their preexisting beliefs and practices
(Louden, 1991). Others haveproducednarrative studies of teachers' lives and their stories about teaching and learning
(Elbaz, 1991; Goodson, 1992) to understand the effects of context on classroom practices. This constructivist approach
views the teacher as an active agent for change and sees teaching as a creative, humanistic endeavor in which methods
are adapted to suit particular settings, students and goals.    Research within this paradigm has tended to be more
qualitative and interdisciplinary, often involving observation in naturalistic settings and other ethnographic and
ethnomethodological techniques (Louden, 1991; Rist, I970; Spindler, 1982).
        To  better understand these processes of change,       EduTech is conducting a series of qualitative studies of
middle-school classrooms as teachers implementPBL modules. This paper reports on the first ethnographic case study
involving one teacher, Ms. J, and her 8th-grade science classroom, as she uses "The Gold Problem."     The problem was
developed during the summer I995 PBL workshop and modified by this teacher to augment an earlier unit on rocks and
minerals that included a field trip to Dahlonega, the site of Georgia's own I 9th-century gold rush. The report is based
on field notes of daily participant observation in two classes throughout the 7-day unit, informal interviews with the
teacher, and classroom artifacts.      These data were coded following Glaser and Strauss' (1967) constant comparative
method, and emerging categories revealed key focal areas of teacher and student concern.     In this report we identify
some of the issues teachers face as they implement this new classroom methodology. We discuss strategies improvised
by both teacher and students to meet the unfamiliar demands of the PBL classroom, and from these we make a number
of recommendations about how to facilitate teacher learning and development.

THE CLASSROOM SEITING

       Ms. J is a veteran classroom practitioner, a conscientious and thoughtfully reflective educator who establishes
her goals in advance, plans each class carefully, and keeps a journal to record notes about students, curriculwn,
activities, and teaching effects. She is not afraid of innovation and believes the best way to find out what is still needed
in this PBL approach is to simply try it and see what happens. She is intrigued by the challenge of PBL and enthusiastic
about the potential benefits of her partnership with the EduTech team, particularly the increased availability of
technological support. Many of the features of PBL are already a part of this teacher's repertoire: she uses cooperative
groups, encourages student independence and self-direction, is accomplished at guiding students through questions and
suggestions rather than merely giving them information, has experience with alternative assessment measures, and is
a skilled classroom manager. Her own interest in the subject matter is manifested in her enthusiasm for the topics at
hand, and she conveys the clear impression that in this class serious work is both possible and expected. Ms. J treats
students as respected co-investigators of indisputably fascinating fields of knowledge. There is no time to waste in her
classroom: every minute is valuable, and students come to class expecting to work continuously.
       The students in this suburban middle school are overwhelmingly white, middle-class teenagers, well-dressed,
with no major learning disorders or social problems.    Some are assigned to a special education pullout class, but their
problemstend to be moderate, such as ADD and below-average reading or math ability.       Ifthey become inattentive or
disruptive, they are responsive to the teacher's mild corrections, and all seem able to work independently.
       Unfortunately the computer resources at this school are currently severely restricted due to temporary
overcrowding, and consequently Ms. J is unable to gain access to the computer lab for the duration of the PBL unit.
Internet access is also restricted as county administrators try to formulate a policy for use of the Internet by minors. It
is thus not possible for this class to use the software being developed at EduTech, nor do they have in-school access
to the vast resources of the Internet. However, many of the students have computers at home and use both the Internet
and CD-rom encyclopedias to supplement the information available to them in class.

                                                                                                                     93
   IMPLEMENTATION OF THE PBL MODULE

            On the first day ofthe unit the students are presented with the problem statement:

                    A thirteen-year-old boy in North Carolina recently found a sapphire worth $33,000.
            Georgia has riches too. "There's gold in them thar hills." And much ofthis gold is in the Atlanta
            area. Maybe we can get lucky too. Where might we find gold and what areas would be worth
            mining? You will make a presentation to potential investors.

   Using thePBL "white board" format to brainstorm, the students make lists offACTS (what we know), IDEAS (related
   thoughts and hypotheses), LEARNING ISSUES (what we need to know more about), and ACTIONS (what we need
   to do), recording the information on large sheets of poster paper tacked to the classroom wall.    Once they have
  identified a number ofitems in each category, they begin independent research using materials the teacher has placed
   on a table at the front ofthe room. The teacher facilitates the brainstorming sessions to keep students focused and to
  guide them to resources that will answer their questions. She does not give prepared lectures about the content, nor does
  she attempt to provide structure to the unfolding information. Students discover and record pertinent facts as a result
   oftheir own exploration ofthe resources, and they discuss findings with group members to compile the evidence that
   will support their argument in the final group presentation.  On the fourth day of the unit, Ms. J tries to stimulate
   students' thinking about the environmental impact of mining by introducing a lab experiment demonstrating the
  chemical process ofreclaiming copperfrom a solution
           However, as students work through the gold problem, a number of unanticipated difficulties in this initial
  application of the PBL approach become evident.        In daily interviews, Ms. J talks of her frustrations. First, she is
  perplexed to find that several ofher curricular objectives are not actually being addressed by the students' work. For
  example, she tells me that the "wording" ofthe problem statement leads students to focus on economic rather than
  environmental questions, and that the availability ofmineral resource maps enables them to "find" the gold without
  having to learn about the geological processes that determine the types and locations of mineral  deposits.    Another
  problem is that the research materials she and the EduTech staffhave gathered for students to use do not provide details
  about the geological processes, but instead steer students to consider mining techniques and legal issues. She feels that
  the content goals she identified in planning this unit have been replaced by tangential issues, and that the customary
  authority she has as teacher to redirect students' attention is not available in her role as PBL facilitator.    She is
  uncomfortable with this loss ofcontrol, explaining that she is accustomed to "chunking oft" bits ofeach topic so that
  students are introducedto concepts gradually and can build new knowledge on the old. "I need some more help or input
  withhow to tier the problem, to find a way to make those two or three major facets ofthe problem more obvious," she
  says.
           Her discomfort with the unintended direction ofstudents' research leads her to abandon the PBL white boards,
  intended ideally as an ongoing record ofstudent learning and reflection. She feels that the entries students made during
  the first brainstorming session were too far afield ofher original goals for the gold problem, and so opts not to continue
  using the white boards because she "doesn't feel confident" in her facilitation ofthe problem and worries that students
  might get even:finiher off-track Her ambivalence about what she perceives as a surrender ofcontrol in the facilitator's
  role and her lack ofconfidence in students' ability to identify key issues create ambivalence in her commitment to what
  she calls "pure PBL." Iftime were not an issue, she says, the students might eventually arrive at the curricular goals
  on their own, but the current grading period is ending and a long list ofcounty-defined topics remains to be covered
  during the school year. She chooses practicality over idealism when she asserts, "I may have to feed them more
  [information] than I should, but I will if! have to."
           The students also encounter difficulties in coping with the PBL approach. The most noticeable issue is their
  initial level ofuncertainty about the problem statement and what they are really expected to do. Though the teacher
  carefully explains the steps they will undertake, the scope ofthe problem and its open-endedness are daunting to these
  students who are accustomed to being given more explicit direction and less complex tasks. As a result, many students
  are either passive or openly resistant at various points through the unit. A second issue is that students do not see the
  problem as an authentic one, in part because they believe no adults would really consult them for advice about
  investments and in part because they have direct knowledge ofthe depletion ofgold deposits in the geographic area.
  These eighth-graders have visited the abandoned gold mines in north Georgia and have heard their tour guide tell them
  there is not enough gold to warrant further efforts at extraction. Thus the gold problem is an exercise in fantasy, not a
  potential real-world puzzle, and their primary goal becomes to satisfy the teacher with the minimal effort required.
          In addition, the small-group collaborations cause problems for many students.   Though Ms. J felt that the

94
collaborative process worked well overall and that students seemed able to adjust to their group situations, there were
numerous conflicts with the gathering, sharing, analysis and presentation ofinformation, and also with interpersonal
dynamics within groups. The students' general lack ofresearch skills meant that they spent their time aimlessly flipping
through pages oftexts and journal reprints without knowing what infomiation they were looking for, taking notes on
easily recognizable data but failing to ask questions that would lead them to a deeper understanding ofthe issues.  In
addition, rather than dividing upresearch issues among group members, students tended to duplicate each other's work.
Issues of gender and leadership also arose, with boys tending to push for decisions early in the process (often before
doing much research) and girls asswning the passive role of group recorder. Finally, a number of groups had difficulty
completing their assignment because ofthe uncooperative or inattentive behavior ofone or two members who sabotaged
the group's efforts. This is a problem Ms. J readily acknowledges and which she works hard to combat in the classroom
by moving from group to group to encourage students throughout each class period and by frequently changing the
composition ofgroups. Still, with thirty or more students packed into her small classroom, the task ofmaintaining order
and concentration among these teenagers is intimidating. "It's really an art," she tells me, referring to the challenge of
arranging groups to maximize cooperation and learning amongst the members.

TEACHER COPING STRATEGIES

Both teacher and students make adjustments in their expectations about the classroom and learning to cope with the
demands ofthe PBL approach. Ms. J is a skilled teacher whouses many practices such as defining, clarifying, restating,
reinforcing, summarizing and recapitulating information to guide students' learning. Yet she understands PBL to mean
she should assume the less familiar role offacilitator, not provider ofinfomiation, and encourage students to construct
knowledgefromtheir own investigations rather than from her condensation oftext-based facts. As she attempts to take
on this role, she improvises several techniques that might be helpful to other teachers as they try to direct student
investigations and keep them moving forward in their research and analysis. These include:
         Jump-starting: When students seem unable to move forward in their work, Ms. J offers a barrage of questions
to stimulate their thinking. When she :finds one group sitting passively rather than engaging with the resources, she sits
down with them:     "OK, How are you going to start?" she asks. They shrug listlessly.  "What is the problem?" More
shrugs.  "Where might you :find it?" One lifts the brainstorming handout tentatively. "What does it say? Read it," she
encourages. She keeps up this rapid-fire questioning until the students in the group seem to discover a way to proceed,
then leaves them to continue working on their own.
         Check-ups:    To keep students focused on the stages oftheir work, Ms. J checks to see if they're on-target for
the schedule of activities. For example, when she finds several members ofone group working on pictures for the
presentation, she prompts them to remember the main goal oftheir collaboration: "Are you also thinking about making
an argument?" she asks them. Seeing that one girl is making lists offacts, she continues, "Is that what B is doing? You
need to put together the evidence to make a good argument, that's the meat ofyour presentation."
         Dropping hints:    The teacher mentions infomiation and implies that it might be helpful to students.  For
example, when she wants students to notice some coincidences between geological regions and gold deposits, Ms. J
introduces some maps included in the resource materials. "Here's one about geology occurrences in the West Central
Piedmont," she tells them. "Where do we live?" (answer: the Piedmont.) "Yes," she confirms.  "These might be useful
to you."
         Spotlighting: The teacher focuses on a previously unremarked aspect of some new information, or points out
inherent conflicts in thefacts students are developing. When a student finds an article staunchly opposed to mining, Ms.
J asks who authored the article: it turns out to be a publication of the Sierra Club. "What is the Sierra Club?" she asks,
and someone tells her it's an environmental group. "So you would expect them to oppose mining, wouldn't you, because
ofthe harmful effects on the environment," she says. She suggests that they look for other articles by potentially pro
mining authors such as business leaders or politicians, and reminds them they must make up their own minds in
weighing the evidence about what they believe.
         Ratcheting up: Each day Ms. J recaps what they've done on the preceding day and sets a new challenge for
them. For example, when the groups discover the mineral resource maps that show them exactly where gold is located
in Georgia and where the mines are, several seem to feel that they've solved the problem: here's the gold, all we have
to do is go get it. "Well, you have some good ideas about the first part of the problem, but so far you don't have any
information about how to respond to the second part," she reminds them. She picks up some articles from the resource
table and reads off the title and short summary of each one, suggesting ways to think about how the geographic
information they've found might be connected to the issues raised in the articles.    Then she leaves the students to

                                                                                                                    95
 continue on their own.
        Stepping back:     This is a way of providing meta-structure for solving the problem, of reminding students of
 the "big picture" they're trying to address. As they begin work on the problem, she gets their attention for a moment to
 help them break the problem statement down into its parts: first, they have to find the gold; second, they have to decide
 whether it will be worth the effort to mine it; and third, they have to plan a presentation to a group of potential investors.
 She repeats this outline regularly each day to ensure that each group is addressing all three parts of the problem.

 STUDENT COPING STRATEGIES

 For their part, the students also encounter difficulties in adjusting to the PBL approach. Probably the most noticeable
 is their initial level of uncertainty about the problem statement and what they are really expected to do; another problem
 for students is to find ways to work with--or around--members of their collaborative groups.  The following list
 describes some of their coping strategies:
        Going through the motions: Experienced at following instructions and doing what they're told to do, a number
 of students doggedly work at taking notes.   Some fill out the questions on the first-day task-sheet, and others make neat
 lists of facts without attempting to categorize or interpret them.
        Doing what I'm good at: As the week goes on and the presentations become the focus of classroom activity,
 quite a number of students relax into the preparation of visuals for the group presentation, drawing pictures and making
 posters and signs. Though the teacher emphasizes that she will not count artwork in determining the quality of the
 group's argument, students obviously prefer this more familiar activity.
        Passive non-participation: A few students simply do not take part in the work, disguising the fact by keeping
 papers in front of them. One girl makes multiple trips to the materials table to glance through articles, then returns to
 her seat empty-handed and chats until she notices that she's being observed, then returns to the materials table and
 repeats the process. A boy reads from a paperback copy of To Kill a Mockingbird that he keeps in his lap.
        Giving up:   Some students need a disproportionate amount of reassurance and "hand-holding," frequently
 raising their hands to askfor help. Becausethe teacher is usually busy with other students, they may sit for long minutes
 waiting for her to come over. If she doesn't come within 3-4 minutes, some of these students simply put their hands
 down and stare at the desktop, stymied.
        Seizing control:     In at least three groups, one student refuses to work cooperatively and seizes control by
 dominating the decision-making process. In each case the controller had done little or no research and analysis; each
 had insteadjumpedto a decision and then coerced his teammates into agreeing with him by bullying and ridiculing the
 opposition.
        Bluffing and posturing:    One student was particularly resistant to the work requirements of the problem.
 Though I never saw him actually read any of the articles, he always kept some resource material in :front of him and, if
 an adult directed a question at him, he would invent a plausible response by glancing at the paper in :front of him o r
 drawing on his own background knowledge. His behavior serves as a reminder that students are experts in the types
 of behavior and discourse expected in the classroom, and many, like this boy, are able to bluff answers and pose as
 learners when in fact they have done no work.
        Distracting others, off-task behavior:     This final category of behavior was the most egregious, because not
 only would the offending student be off-task, but he or she would also prevent students in the vicinity from working.
 In effect, one student sabotages the efforts of the whole group, and sometimes of adjacent groups as well.

 DISCUSSION
        Teachers must make adjustments and find ways to integratetheirown personal philosophy of teaching and style
 with any new teaching approach.    In adopting the PBL approach, Ms. J has found this adjustment to be fairly
 unproblematic, in large part because the characteristics of PBL are consonant with her own practices as a teacher.
 Probably the two biggest changes for her under the PBL approach are, first, that she has to give up some of her
 customary control over which content to teach and when to teach it, and secondly, that she has to adjust to the PBL view
 of the teacher as facilitator and coach. Her conflicting beliefs about what's best and most efficient in the classroom are
 evident in some of her practices during this unit, including her decision to abandon the PBL white board format and her
 ambivalence about how much background information to give students when she introduces the PBL problems.            She

96
also feels l.lllcomfortable about the lack of structure available in the PBL format and feels constrained from refocusing
students when they drift into curricular tangents. Yet she is intrigued by the interdisciplinary promise of the approach
and eager to add the technological component as computers become more available to her students. She is anxious to
give the white boards another chance and to incorporate more ongoing reflection into the PBL process during her next
attempt; she now sees the white boards as a way to encourage in-progress adjustments in students' thinking, a potential
solution to the structuring problem that concerns her rather than a fixed plan that misdirects student focus.
         Ms. J's :first experience with PBL has been one of growth and discovery for her pedagogically, expanding her
own knowledge of teaching as her students explored content issues. Her example serves as a reminder to us at EduTech
that teachers must be allowed time to grow into new teaching approaches, to try them on and make alterations so that
the approach becomes a good fit with the teacher's own beliefs and practices.     Teachers need support during this
process: they need like-minded mentors and colleagues to talk with, for clarification and reassurance and renewed
commitment; they need assistance with the details of planning and carrying out PBL units, such as designing curriculum
sensitive real-world problems and gathering materials appropriate to the abilities and interests of their students; and they
need training in the skills of facilitation, collaboration and authentic assessment to help them move away from th e
tempting familiarity of traditional teacher-centered instruction.
         Students also need time and support to adjust to the new ways of learning introduced by the PBL approach.
Having been convinced through prior schooling practices that knowledge resides in texts and is :filtered through
teachers, they must now be persuaded that they possess both the ability and the authority to construct knowledge on their
own using a full range of resources.  They need research skills to know where and how to look for information.   They
need practice in skimming, looking for keywords, and cross-referencing.    They must think critically--questioning and
analyzing information and looking for potential bias in their sources. They need the skills and specialized language of
collaboration, and to acknowledge the unique benefits of group diversity. As they gain confidence in solving complex
problems, they learn to value the process of discovery. Finally, they learn to be responsible for their own education as
they acquire the skills--and, we hope, the motivation--for lifelong learning.
         As more of our teachers make use of PBL in their classrooms, we are collecting :further data and broadening
the scope of our research efforts. Using what we are learning in the classrooms to inform the design and functionality
of our software, we are developing powerful computer programs that offer not only record-keeping capabilities but also
provide for scaffolding of resource acquisition and use as well as the skills students need to explain and justify their
arguments. We continue to explore ways to make technology more accessible to these classrooms so that teachers and
students cantakefull advantage of, and provide feedback on, the software EduTech develops. We will add :further case
studies of classrooms and will augment the observation data with other measures of students' changing attitudes and
learning about science and math.     Our preliminary results have been encouraging, and we are eager to continue
developing PBL curricula with our teachers. We believe that PBL is a promising methodology for the middle school
classroom.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was supported in part by the EduTech Institute through a grant from the WoodruffFoundation. We also want
to thank Ms. Joanne Collins and her students at Five Forks Middle School for all their cooperation and assistance.

REFERENCES
Barnes, H (1989). Structuring knowledge for beginning teaching. In M. C. Reynolds (Ed.),   Knowledge base for the
         beginning teacher (pp. 13-22). New York: Pergamon Press.
Berger, C. F., Lu, C. R, Belzer, S. J., & Voss, B. E. (1994). Research on the uses of technology in science education.
         InD. L. Gabell (Ed), Handbook of research on science teaching and learning. New York: MacMillan, 466-
         490.
Calderhead, J. (1987). Exploring teachers' thinking. London: Cassell Educational Limited.
Clark, C. M. (1988). Asking the right questions about teacher preparation: Contributions of research on teacher
         thinking. Educational Researcher, 17(2), 5-12.
Cobb, P. (1994).  Where is the mind?    Constructivist and sociocultural perspectives on mathematical development.
         Educational Researcher, 23(7), 13-20.

                                                                                                                    97
  Cobb, P. & Bauersfeld, H (Eds.). (1995). The emergence ofmathematical meaning: Interaction in classroom cultures.
         Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Earlbaum Associates.
 Driver, R, Asoko, H, Leach, J., Mortimer, E., & Scott, P. (1994).  Constructing scientific knowledge in the classroom.
         Educational Researcher, 23(7), 13-20.
  Elbaz, F. (1991). Research on teacher's knowledge: The evolution ofa discourse. Journal ofCurriculum Studies, 23(1),
         1-19.
 Floden, R E., & Klinzing, H. G. (1990). What can research on teacher thinking contribute to teacher preparation? A
         second opinion.     Educational Researcher, I 9(5), 15-20.
  Gabell,D. L. (Ed.). (1994). Handbook ofresearch on science teaching and learning. New York: MacMillan.
  Glaser, B. G., & Strauss, A. L. (1967). The discovezy ofgrounded theory: Strategies for qualitative research. New
         York: Aldine.
  Goodson, I. F. (Ed.). (1992). Studying teachers' lives. New York:   Teachers College Press.
 Helgeson, S. L. (1994). Research on problem solving: Middle school.    InD. L.    Gabell (Ed.), Handbook ofresearch
         on science teaching and learning. New York: MacMillan, 248-268.
  Lemke, J. (1990). Talking science. Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
 Louden, W. (1991). Understanding teaching: Continuity and change in teachers' knowledge.      New York:   Teachers
         College Press.
 Rist, R. C. (1970). Student social class and teacher expectations: The self-fulfillig prophecy in ghetto education.
         Harvard Educational Review, 40, 411-451.
  Schon,D. (1983). The reflective practitioner: How professionals think in action. New York: Basic Books.
  Shavelson, R J., & Stern, P. (I 981). Research on teachers' pedagogical thoughts, judgments, decisions, and behavior.
        Review ofEducational Research, 51, 455-498.
 Shulman, L. S. (1987). Knowledge and teaching: Foundations ofthe new reform. Harvard Educational Review, 57(1),
         1-22.
 Sirotnik, K (1983). What you see is what you get: Consistency, persistency, and mediocrity in classrooms. Harvard
         Educational Review, 55(1), 16-30.
  Spindler, G.D. (Ed.) (1982). Doing the ethnography ofschooling: Educational anthropology in action. New York:
        Holt, Rinehart and Winston.

98
