CSCL 2013 Proceedings                Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

            Reflectively Prototyping a Tool for Exchanging Ideas
    Camillia Matuk, Kevin McElhaney, David Miller, Jennifer King Chen, Jonathan Lim-Breitbart, Hiroki
                                   Terashima, Geoffrey Kwan, Marcia Linn
                                      University of California, Berkeley

       Abstract: We describe our approach to prototyping an iteration of the Idea Manager, a tool
       integrated into an online science inquiry environment. Students use the Idea Manager to track
       ideas as they encounter new information, and reflect upon, sort, and distinguish ideas toward
       integrating their understanding. To explore the value of collaborative features, we designed a
       hybrid online/offline activity to facilitate students exchanging ideas with the Idea Manager.
       Based on student interviews and case studies, we identify aspects of collaboration to inform
       design features for enabling the meaningful exchange of ideas. Whereas most design accounts
       focus on the evaluative role of prototyping, this study highlights its reflective use, and its role
       in   involving multiple stakeholders in rapid iterative cycles of   establishing     requirements,
       building alternatives, and testing. By documenting these iterative design activities, this study
       informs both the theory and practice of designing collaborative educational technologies.

Reflective Prototyping and the Knowledge Integration Framework
Prototyping can inform  both   the theory and  practice of designing  collaborative      learning technologies: It
encourages reflection and enables early feedback from users (Saffer, 2010; Schon, 1990), serves to externalize
and support the development of ideas, and helps filter aspects of interest for investigation (Lim, et al., 2008).
But educational technology design tends to be practically rather than theoretically driven (Bennett & Oliver,
2011), and researchers rarely document these mid-stages of their design processes, or else they focus on the
evaluative rather than on the reflective functions of prototypes (Lim, et al., 2008).
       We describe how prototyping allowed us to filter and study aspects of students' collaborative learning
to inform design iterations of a theoretically-driven technology: the Idea Manager. The Idea Manager is a tool
integrated into the Web-based Inquiry Science Environment (WISE, wise.berkeley.edu) and designed to support
students building evidence-based explanations during online science inquiry units (see Figure 1).

 Figure 1. The Idea Manager's two components: (1) A persistently accessible repository for ideas, into which
students type and revise entries (<150 characters) and apply author-supplied tags and labels (top left and right);

© ISLS                                                                                                        101
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                  Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

 and (2) A dynamically linked Explanation Builder space, into which students drag and sort ideas into author-
                           specified categories before writing an explanation (bottom).

Building on previous educational technologies (e.g., Bell, 1997, Zhang & Quintana, 2012), the Idea Manager
helps students manage complexity and support production (Blumenthal, 1991). It breaks down the process of
explanation into the discrete steps of gathering, sorting, and distinguishing information encountered; and guides
understanding by making the process of reflection explicit, deliberative, and continual (Beeth, 1998). The Idea
Manager's design is guided by Knowledge Integration (KI, Linn & Eylon, 2011), a constructivist pedagogy that
takes a knowledge-as-elements perspective on learning to incite conceptual change (Özdemir & Clark, 2007).
Recognizing   that  their existing understanding   may  be  fragmentary  and    idiosyncratic (diSessa, 1993),  KI
instruction elicits students' prior knowledge and encourages them to confront and distinguish among their often
conflicting ideas. Classroom implementations demonstrate the usefulness of the Idea Manager for eliciting and
making   visible students'  ideas  (Matuk &    King Chen,   2011). Logs  of students' interactions  with   the Idea
Manager moreover lend insights into how students integrate ideas over the course of a unit, and inform targeted
curriculum revisions (McElhaney, et al., 2012).

Methodological Approaches to Exploring Requirements for a Collaborative Tool
         Our design process integrates user-centered design and Agile Methods of software development (da
Silva, et al., 2011), and emphasizes rapid iteration between establishing requirements, designing alternatives,
and building and evaluating prototypes. Through the early and regular involvement of users, this approach
permits simultaneous exploration of how users and the establishment of technical and pedagogical requirements.
Thus, we first elicited ideas from WISE users worldwide, including 20+ middle and high school teachers, and
30+ WISE researchers and WISE developers. Interviews, discussions, workshops, and a survey revealed interest
in extending  the   Idea  Manager  to support  student collaboration. Respondents   saw  potential  in the tool for
students to  practice communication;    for studying   the impacts of  peer exchange  on   perceptions  of science
inquiry; and for operationalizing and researching knowledge exchange. This investigation also revealed open
questions over how to orchestrate the sharing of ideas. Should students see the ideas of all their peers, or of
selected peers? Should contributing and/or citing others' ideas be anonymous or rewarded? Should teachers
facilitate the exchange of ideas, and if so, how? One way to investigate these questions is to implement and
observe students' use of collaborative features. But this technology-first approach risks masking the incidental
face-to-face collaborative  interactions  that can  be valuable for   learning. Instead, we   chose a  learner-first
approach, and designed an offline activity in order to identify incidental aspects of face-to-face collaboration,
which would then inform specific design features in a collaborative learning tool.

Methods: The Detergents Unit and Collaborative Idea Manager Prototype
We integrated the Idea Manager into Designing a detergent to clean marine pollution, a freely available unit
authored         in        the        Web-based         Inquiry        Science        Environment          (WISE,
(http://wise.berkeley.edu/webapp/vle/preview.html?projectId=4369). In the unit, students explore the chemistry
of detergents and use the Idea Manager to gather and distinguish ideas on electron sharing, electronegativity,
and polarity, before writing explanations for how detergents cleans birds endangered by marine oil spills. To
explore the potential for a collaborative Idea Manager, we designed an Idea Exchange activity, which prompted
students to share the contents of their Idea Baskets with another student team; identify ideas that were the same
and different between their Baskets; suggest ideas to the other team; and label newly added ideas as Important
or Not Important.
         Participants were 170 students of five teachers at a high school in the United States. Student pairs
worked on the Detergents unit for 5-6 consecutive school days while their teacher and a researcher circulated to
offer assistance as needed. Data include classroom field notes, videotapes of nine pairs of student dyads during
the Idea Exchange activity, and end-of-unit interviews with 15 students (2-3 students per 15-20-minute session),
in which we asked for students' impressions of the unit, of the utility of the Idea Manager, and their experiences
during the Idea Exchange activity. Our video analyses identified incidents during the Idea Exchange, in which
collaboration appeared to promote KI (e.g., when students contributed new ideas and engaged in distinguishing
among them). Our interview analysis characterized students' perceptions of the value of the Idea Exchange
activity, and of a mediating technology. Below, we illustrate three aspects of collaboration that emerged from
our prototyping, and how these informed iterations of the Idea Manager.

Major Findings

Exposure to diverse ideas through increased peer interaction
         Students interviewed expressed interest in seeing their peers' ideas. As one student described, the Idea
Exchange activity showed how the other students "saw it different than us. They would tell us `Oh, but this...

© ISLS                                                                                                         102
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

and then we would tell them." Another student noted that "it was useful to see like how other people, like what
their views of the project were, and how, what kind of notes they were taking." The Idea Exchange not only
exposed students to different ideas, but also broadened their social encounters. One student noted "I don't talk a
lot in this class," but in the Idea Exchange, she and her partner collaborated with peers outside their social
circles. Thus, students appeared to value the opportunity to discuss divergent perspectives with their peers.
Indeed, research on brainstorming and group creativity suggests that early exposure to others' ideas has positive
impacts on the speed with which individuals generate new ideas, as well as on the quantity, diversity, and
semantic organization of ideas generated (Nijstad, Stroebe, & Lodewijkx, 2002).
         At the same time, our data revealed a number of logistic issues with coordinating the sharing of ideas.
Because their work was self-paced, it was rare for a sufficient number of teams to have simultaneously arrived
at the Idea Exchange activity, which resulted in students waiting idly for others to catch up, or else moving
ahead and forgetting to later return to the activity. Some students indicated in their responses to the embedded
prompts  that their partner teams' ideas were  too few or   too similar  to spur discussion.     In one   student's
description of this "awkward" situation, a partner might ask, "`What was your ideas?' And a lot of the ideas
people would write... it would be something that I probably already knew or thought of." This challenge limits
the diversity of ideas students encounter, and forfeits chances to learn from one another (cf. Hsi & Hoadley,
1997). To increase students encountering diverse ideas, a text-analysis function might help automatically partner
teams based on similarities or differences of their ideas. This same feature might help coordinate asynchronous
participation, and eliminate the time students spent idly waiting for others to catch up.

Orchestrating Meaningful Sharing of Ideas
Face-to-face, students not only present their ideas, but benefit by questioning, explaining, and elaborating upon
them  (Howe   & Mercer,  2012). For  example, when   one student  pair   questioned another's      use of the term
electron sharing, the teams  proceeded to negotiate a shared   conceptual   understanding     (see Figure  4, left).
Students are themselves conscious of the value of face-to-face sharing. On being asked whether she would
prefer to exchange ideas face-to-face or online, one student replied "it's always better like, face-to-face, because
that's when you actually discuss the main topic, and it's just not reading it, and (...) just putting it in your Basket
to get more ideas." Yet, we observed face-to-face interactions in which discussions failed to develop beyond
dictating entries for others to transcribe (see Figure 4, right). A digital platform would easily avoid the need for
dictating entries, but it must also encourage careful consideration of one another's ideas. Threaded, scaffolded
discussion around individual entries, for example, might encourage and capture more elaborated discussion (cf.
Hoadley & Linn, 2000; O'Neill & Gomez, 1994).

    Figure 4. The Idea Exchange activity engaging students in distinguishing ideas (left), and devolving into a
                                          dictation exercise (right).

Vulnerability, Validation, and Social Exclusion
Sharing unrefined ideas puts one in a state of vulnerability, and how the recipient responds can have either
alleviating or worsening effects. In one case, Vitaly apologizes to Harshan because he and his partner have
collected only one idea, and, he adds, "I don't know if it's right." Harshan replies, "That's a good idea," and
reminds Vitaly "It's an idea. It's not right or wrong, it's just an idea." Pointing out "We both agree that the
atoms don't have a strong attraction so they won't bond together," Harshan then leads a conversation to further
elicit and distinguish each of their ideas. In a contrasting case, Elliott shows visible dislike for Armando, and
tells his partner Derek, "I'm not talking to him." Instead of engaging Armando, Elliott and Derek work alone to
answer the unit prompts as Armando silently faces away from them. Once finished, Armando abruptly picks up
his laptop and returns to his desk. These episodes demonstrate a range of social dynamics and their implications
for learning. Whereas   Harshan's  validation of   Vitaly's ideas shows     how  collaboration     can  encourage
meaningful sharing of ideas, Elliot, Derek, and Armando's failure to achieve intersubjectivity results in a missed

© ISLS                                                                                                        103
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

learning opportunity (cf. Barron, 2003). Technology might anticipate these outcomes by allowing anonymous
participation, thereby foregrounding ideas and promoting contributions (cf. Hsi & Hoadley, 1997).

Conclusions and Implications
Our prototype highlights the value of peer interaction for exposure to diverse ideas; the impacts of favorable and
adverse social dynamics; and logistical considerations for orchestrating the meaningful exchange of information.
Without attempting to identify broad generalizable patterns, these cases illustrate the spectrum of collaborative
interactions afforded by face-to-face and technology mediated collaboration, and define a baseline for further
study. By documenting the co-evolving design and development of a theory-driven tool, this paper informs both
the theory and practice of designing collaborative learning technologies.

References
Bennett, S., & Oliver, M. (2011). Talking back to theory: The missed opportunities in learning technology
        research. Research in Learning Technology, 19(3), 179-189. Routledge.
Blumenfeld, P. C., Soloway, E., Marx, R. W., Krajcik, J. S., Guzdial, M., & Palincsar, A. (1991). Motivating
        project-based learning: Sustaining the doing, supporting the learning. Educational psychologist, 26(3-
        4), 369-398.
da Silva, T. S., Martin, A., Maurer, F., & Silveira, M. (2011). User-Centered Design and Agile Methods: A
        systematic review. 2011 AGILE Conference. IEEE.
diSessa, A. A. (1993). Toward an Epistemology of Physics. Cognition and Instruction, 10(2), 105-225. JSTOR.
Hoadley, C. M., & Linn, M. C. (2000). Teaching science through online, peer discussions: SpeakEasy in the
        Knowledge Integration Environment. International Journal of Science Education, 22(8), 839-857.
Howe, C., & Mercer, N. (2012). 7 Children's social development, peer interaction and classroom learning. The
        Cambridge Primary Review Research Surveys, 170.
Hsi, S., & Hoadley, C. M. (1997). Productive discussion in science: Gender equity through electronic discourse.
        Journal of Science Education and technology, 6(1), 23-36.
Matuk,  C.  F., &   King Chen,  J. (2011). The WISE    Idea Manager:      A  tool to scaffold  the collaborative
        construction of evidence-based explanations from dynamic scientific visualizations. In Proceedings of
        the  9th  International  Conference on  Computer    Supported     Collaborative Learning:   Connecting
        Computer Supported Collaborative Learning to Policy and Practice. Hong Kong: The University of
        Hong Kong.
McElhaney, K., Miller, D., Matuk, C., & Linn, M. C. (2012). Using the Idea Manager to promote coherent
        understanding of inquiry investigations. In Proceedings of the 10th International Conference for the
        Learning Sciences, Sydney, Australia, 2012. International Society of the Learning Sciences.
Lim, Y.-K., Stolterman, E., & Tenenberg, J. (2008). The anatomy of prototypes: Prototypes as filters, prototypes
        as manifestations of design ideas. ACM Transactions on Computer Human Interaction TOCHI, 15(2),
        7. ACM.
Linn, M. C., & Eylon, B. S. (2011). Science Learning and Instruction: Taking Advantage of Technology to
        Promote Knowledge Integration. Routledge, Taylor & Francis Group. 7625 Empire Drive, Florence,
        KY 41042.
Nijstad, B. A., Stroebe, W., & Lodewijkx, H. F. M. (2002). Cognitive stimulation and interference in groups:
        Exposure effects in an idea generation task. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 38(6), 535-
        544. Elsevier Science.
ONeill,  D. K.,  &  Gomez,   L. M. (1994). The Collaboratory Notebook:      A  Networked    Knowledge-Building
        Environment for Project-Enhanced Learning. Proceedings of EDMEDIA 94.
Özdemir,   G.,  & Clark,  D. B.  (2007). An  overview  of  conceptual     change  theories. Eurasia  Journal of
        Mathematics, Science & Technology Education, 3(4), 351-361.
Quintana, C., Carra, A., Krajcik, J., & Soloway, E. (2001). Learner-Centered Design: Reflections and new
        directions. Human-Computer    Interaction in the New  Millennium      (J. Carroll, Ed.). Harlow, Essex:
        Addison-Wesley, p. 605-626.
Saffer, D. (2010). Designing for interaction: Creating innovative applications and devices (2nd Edition). New
        Riders Publishing Thousand Oaks CA USA: New Riders Press.
Schon, D. A. (1990). The design process. Varieties of thinking: Essays from Harvard's philosophy of education
        research center, 111-141.
Zhang, M., & Quintana, C. (2012). Scaffolding strategies for supporting middle school students' online inquiry
        processes. Computers & Education, 58(1), 181-196.

© ISLS                                                                                                     104
