CSCL 2013 Proceedings                    Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

  Multimodal Interactions with Virtual Manipulatives: Supporting
                               Young Children's Math Learning
Seungoh Paek, University of Hawai`i at Mnoa, 1776 University Ave, Honolulu, HI, 96822, spaek@hawaii.edu
       Dan Hoffman, University of Illinois, 1310 S. 6th St., Champaign, IL, 61820, dlh2109@columbia.edu
John B. Black, Teachers College, Columbia University, 525 W 120th St. New York, NY, 10027, black@tc.edu

          Abstract:   This study  investigates  how   multimodal   interactions    impact learning  in digital
          learning environments. More specifically, the study argues that modern virtual manipulatives
          should offer   a rich  sensory  experience   by  presenting   information    visually, aurally, and
          kinesthetically and that carefully designed perceptual experiences will facilitate learning in
          young children. To test this hypothesis, sixty (N = 60) second grade students were randomly
          assigned   to learn multiplication using    software designed   to  vary the aural  and  kinesthetic
          experience while holding the visual presentation constant. The results reveal that both aural
          and kinesthetic interactions increased learning outcomes but in different ways and at different
          points. The paper concludes with a full discussion of the results as well as their theoretical and
          practical implications.

Introduction
In mathematics, manipulatives are objects used to introduce children to concepts that are difficult to "see" due to
their abstract nature and young learners' developmental capacity. Both physical manipulatives, such as beans
and blocks, and virtual manipulatives, digital instantiations of such objects, have been shown to help children
learn abstract concepts. However, weaknesses in both types of manipulatives have been identified. For example,
children  often struggle   to connect their  physical  actions with manipulatives    to the  underlying   mathematical
concepts. On the other hand, virtual manipulatives designed to help children make such connections, strip-away
the benefits of interacting physically with real-world objects. Given this scenario, the following study attempts
to improve manipulative learning experiences by combining recent advances in input technologies with well-
established multimedia learning principles.

Theoretical Framework
Manipulatives are defined as physical objects specifically designed to foster learning (Zuckerman, Arida, &
Resnick, 2005) and studies have shown they can help young children learn abstract math concepts (Sowell,
1989;  Suydam    &   Higgins,  1977;  Tooke,  Hyatt,   Leigh,  Snyder,  &    Borda, 1992).   Other  studies argue that
manipulatives   fail to improve   student understanding    (Rust, 1999;   Suydam    &  Higgins,  1977).   For example,
Hiebert   and Wearne     (1992)   observed   that students  performed     all  the physical   steps correctly   without
understanding the target concept of place value. In another study, Thompson and Thompson (1990) described a
similar situation where students failed to link their actions with manipulatives to the underlying mathematical
content.
          With the advent of technology, physical manipulatives have transformed into virtual manipulatives--
interactive visual representations of dynamic objects that present opportunities for constructing mathematical
knowledge    (Moyer,    Bolyard,  & Spikell, 2002).   Research   with  virtual manipulatives  has   found   them to be
promising educational tools with many advantageous properties (Suh, Moyer, & Heo, 2005). One advantageous
property  is their ability to  help make    explicit, through  careful design,  the  connection   between   the  virtual
manipulables themselves and the abstract symbols they represent. Yet despite this benefit, virtual manipulatives
suffer from a major drawback compared to physical manipulatives: the lack of developmentally appropriate
physicality.
          Theoretically, virtual manipulatives that takeaway the physicality of real-world manipulatives should
result in a  more  limited  sensory  experience,  which   may,  in  turn, reduce   learning potential. However,   with
today's technological advancements, it may be possible to design a virtual manipulative that offers a sensory
experience similar to traditional physical manipulatives while preserving the pedagogical advantages of digital
learning  environments.    The   current  study   explores this   idea by    examining    how a   multi-modal    virtual
manipulative    that  can  be  experienced   visually,  aurally,   and  kinesthetically,  impacts   young     children's
understanding of multiplication.

Method
Research Design and Participants
To investigate the impact of a multimodal virtual manipulative on student learning, the researchers developed a
computer-based virtual manipulative designed to introduce the concept of multiplication to children through

© ISLS                                                                                                            117
 Audi o
        Narr.
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                       Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

repetitive      addition (details below).  Using  this research  software, a  2 x  2 factorial  experiment   with  two
independent variables was designed, resulting in four experimental groups. The two independent variables were
audio narration (present vs. not present) and input device (touchscreen vs. computer mouse). Students in all four
experimental        groups received  visual  information   that contained  mathematical   notation  relevant to   their
interactions with the on-screen graphical manipulatives. In addition to the visual math notation, some students
received audio narration (A) corresponding to the visual math notation, and others received no audio narration
(NA). Moreover, some students controlled the virtual manipulatives using their finger on a touchscreen device
(T), while other students used a computer mouse (M). Table 1 shows the four experimental groups. Sixty (N =
60, Female = 22, Male = 38) second grade students from New York City public schools were randomly assigned
to four groups.

Table 1: 2 x 2 Factorial Experimental Groups and 2 x 1 Control Groups

              Experimental Groups                                          Input DeviceFingers on Touchscreen (T)Computer Mouse (M)
                    Presence (Auditory)                 A-T (N = 15)                         A-M (N = 14)
                 Absence (No Auditory)                 NA-T (N = 15)                       NA-M (N = 16)

              Prior to  using the software  for the first time, all students took a  pre-test  to measure   their prior
knowledge and understanding of multiplication. Students with a score of more than fifty-percent were deemed
too     proficient   in  multiplication and were  subsequently    dropped  from   study.  There   were no   significant
differences between groups as measured by mean pre-test score.
              After the pre-test, students used the virtual manipulative software for five sessions and took a paper-
based mid-test. Students then used the virtual manipulative for five more sessions and took a paper-based post-
test. The tests consisted of 33 fill-in-the-blank and matching questions, with a maximum score of 34. The format
of the pre-, mid-, and post-tests was identical, however, the 33 items, and the order in which they were presented
varied slightly from version to version. In total, the virtual manipulative software was used for ten sessions over
six weeks. Each session lasted an average of twenty minutes and each participant completed a pre-test, mid-test,
and post-test.

Research Instrument
The virtual manipulative software built for this study is called Puzzle Blocks. The goal of Puzzle Blocks is to
build common shapes such as a house or a car by moving small groups of blocks repeatedly to form bigger
groups of blocks. For example, if students need a group of six blocks, they build it by adding a group of two
blocks three times (2+2+2=6). While moving the on-screen blocks, students receive visual feedback that is both
graphical (the blocks) and textual (mathematical notation). In addition to visual feedback, the software provides
auditory narration temporally aligned with the visual mathematical notation. For example, when students grab a
group of two, they see the visual notation of "2" and hear an audio voiceover say, "two." Similarly, when
students move the group of two blocks, visual notation of "x1," "x2," and "x3" appears, and the corresponding
audio narration reads aloud, "times one," "times two", and "times three", as the blocks are dropped into place.
When a larger group of blocks is complete, the full mathematical equation (i.e., "2 x 3 = 6") appears and the
audio    voiceover     reads, "two times  three equals six." The  goal of  this design is to  help students make   the
connection between the graphical blocks, their actions with them, and the underlying mathematical concepts of
grouping, repetitive addition, and multiplication. Importantly, the presence of the audio narration can be turned
on or off by the researchers in order to form the audio narration group (A) and the non-audio narration group
(NA).

    Figure 1. Moving a group of two blocks three times, completes the group and the full equation is diplayed

              Puzzle Blocks is also designed to vary the kinesthetic interaction experienced while manipulating the
on-screen blocks.        This was accomplished by deploying the software on laptops and tablets. On the laptop
platform, students used a traditional computer mouse (M) to manipulate the on-screen blocks. On the tablet
platform, students used their finger on a touchscreen (T), to manipulate the virtual objects. The authors argue
that the two input methods result in different kinesthetic experiences that might impact student learning.

© ISLS                                                                                                             118
CSCL 2013 Proceedings               Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

           Figure 2. Using Puzzle Blocks with either a finger on a screen or a computer mouse

Data Analysis
To measure   students' learning outcomes,  pre-, mid-      and post-tests scores   were  analyzed using    a Profile
Analysis. Learning outcomes between the pre-test and mid-test, the pre-test and post-test, and the mid-test and
post-test were compared between all four experimental groups. The impact of the two factors, the absence or
presence of audio narration (A vs. NA), and the two input devices (M vs. T), were also examined.

Results
Learning Outcomes
The mean scores of participants' learning outcomes from pre-test to mid-test, and pre-test to post-test, and mid-
test to post-test for each group are presented in Table 2.

Table 2: Learning Outcomes by Group

    Group              Pre- to Mid-TestsMSD         Pre- to Post-TestM SD                Pre- to Post-TestMSD
 A-T (N = 15)      20.700 (61%)     8.261     28.067 (83%)          6.543          7.367 (22%)        7.965
 A-M (N = 14)      19.893 (59%)     6.625     23.464 (69%)          6.843          3.571 (11%)        4.437
 NA-T (N = 15)     15.567 (46%)     7.766     21.767 (64%)          7.805          6.200 (18%)        6.716
 NA-M (N =16)      14.563 (43%)     8.828     18.125 (53%)          9.141          3.563 (10%)        5.961

       On the mid-test, there was a marginally significant difference among the groups' scores, F (3, 56) =
2.474, p = .071. The A-T group had the highest mean score increase from pre-test to mid-test (M = 20.700, SD =
8.261) and the NA-M group had the lowest mean increase (M = 14.563, SD = 8.828). From the pre-test to the
post-test, the A-T group had the highest mean score increase (M = 28.067, SD = 6.543) and the NA-M group
showed the  lowest  mean score  increase (M = 18.125,       SD = 9.141).  Differences   between  the groups'  score
increases from pre- test to post-test were significant, F (3, 56) = 5.025, p = .004. Lastly, the groups' score
increases from mid-test to post-test were examined. The results show the differences from mid-test to post-test
for each group were not statistically significant, F (3, 56) = 1.338, p = .271.

Main Impact of the Auditory and Kinesthetic Modalities
When the main impact of the two factors on students' learning outcomes was examined, the results reveal that
the presence of audio narration led to significantly higher learning outcomes on the mid-test, F (1, 56) = 6.941, p
= .011, and significantly higher learning outcomes on the post-test, F (1, 56) = 9.272, p = .004, compared to no
audio narration. However, the presence of audio narration was not a significant factor between the mid-test and
post-test, F (1, 56) = .125, p = .725. On the other hand, the kinesthetic modality was not a significant factor on
students' learning outcomes between  pre-test and  mid-tests,    F (1, 56)  =    .363, p = .549.  However,   it was
significant factor between pre-test to post-test, F (1, 56) = 5.284, p = .025. Finally, it was marginally significant
on students' learning outcomes between mid- to post-tests, F (1, 56) = 3.756, p = .058.

Conclusion
The purpose of this study was to systematically test the design of a modern virtual manipulative environment
that provides young learners with visual, aural, and kinesthetic interactions related to a math concept and how
such multimodal interactions might impact learning. The results show that the type of multimodal interaction
afforded by the virtual manipulative environment impacted learning outcomes as measured by paper-based tests.
Participants' aural and kinesthetic experience seemed to influence what was learned. However, the impact of the
aural and kinesthetic experience seemed to influence learning in different ways and at different points in the ten-
session experiment.

© ISLS                                                                                                          119
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                      Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

         After   five sessions    (mid-test) with   the   virtual manipulative   environment,      the  presence of audio
narration was a significant factor that helped students learn the concept of multiplication. Furthermore, after ten
sessions (post-test), the presence of audio narration remained a significant predictor of learning. The kinesthetic
experience also impacted student learning, but in different ways. After ten sessions (post-test) controlling the
virtual manipulatives    with   a touchscreen    resulted  in  significantly  higher   learning    outcomes  compared    to
controlling  the manipulatives    with   a computer    mouse.     This was   not the   case  after five sessions with    the
software.

Discussion and Scholarly Significance
From a theoretical perspective, the findings support the notion that rich perceptual experiences may promote
perceptually-rich   mental simulations,    which   in  turn, may    lead to  better  student learning   and understanding
(Black, Segal, Vitale, & Fadjo, 2011). However, more research is needed to understand what constitutes a rich
perceptual experience in a digital environment. There is much to learn in terms of how such experiences should
be implemented in order to optimize learning without overwhelming human cognitive resources. In terms of this
study, finding that varied kinesthetic experience seems to influence student learning is especially intriguing
given the traction of embodied cognition theories and the emergence of innovative perceptual and tangible user
interfaces.
         In  conclusion,   this study  illustrates the  potential   of technology   to augment,    enhance  or build-upon
traditional instructional interventions in the domain of math. Although further research is needed to confirm the
study's findings,   and  the  limited  sample    size limits  their generalizability,  the   work  presented  here  should
encourage educators, game designers, and researchers to extend their understanding of the role multimodal
interaction in learning.

References
Black, J. B., Segal, A., Vitale, J., & Fadjo, C. (2011). Embodied Cognition and Learning Environment Design.
         In D. Jonassen & S. Land (Eds.), Theoretical Foundations of Learning Environments (2nd ed., pp. 198-
         223). New York: Routledge.
Hiebert, J., & Wearne, D. (1992). Links between teaching and learning place vlaue with understanding in first
         grade. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 23, 98-122.
Moyer,  P.  S.,  Bolyard,  J. J., &    Spikell, M.  A. (2002).    What   are virtual  manipulatives?    Teaching Children
         Mathematics, 8(6), 372-377.
Rust,   A.  L. (1999).  A  Study    of the Benefits    of Math    Manipulatives     versus  Standard    Curriculum  in   the
         Comprehension of Mathematical Concepts. (Master), Johnson Bible College, Knoxville, TN.
Sowell, E. J. (1989). Effects of manipulative materials in mathematics instruction. Journal for Research in
         Mathematics Education, 498-505.
Suh, J., Moyer, P. S., & Heo, H.-J. (2005). Examining technology uses in the classroom: Developing fraction
         sense using virtual manipulative concept tutorials. Journal of Interactive Online Learning, 3(4), 1-21.
Suydam,     M.  N., &   Higgins,    J. L.  (1977).  Activity-based     learning  in  elelementary   school  mathematics:
         Recommendations        from   research.   Columbus,   OH:     ERIC   Center   for   Science,   Mathematics,   and
         Environmental Education.
Thompson, P. W., & Thompson, A. G. (1990). Salient aspects of experience with concrete manipulatives. In F.
         Hitt (Ed.), Proceedings of the 14th annual meeting of the International Group for the Psychology of
         Mathematics (Vol. 3, pp. 337-343). Mexico City, Mexico: International Group for the Psychology of
         Mathematics Education.
Tooke, D. J., Hyatt, B., Leigh, M., Snyder, B., & Borda, T. (1992). Why aren't manipulatives used in every
         middle school mathematics classroom? Middle School Journal, 24, 61-62.
Zuckerman,     O.,  Arida, S.,    &  Resnick,    M.   (2005). Extending      tangible  interfaces  for  education:  digital
         montessori-inspired      manipulatives.   Proceedings    of   the SIGCHI     conference   on   Human    factors in
         computing systems, 859 - 868. doi: 10.1145/1054972.1055093

© ISLS                                                                                                                 120
