 CSCL 2013 Proceedings                  Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

 Individual and Collaborative Reflection at Work: Support for Work-
                                   place Learning in Healthcare

Michael Prilla, Thomas Herrmann, Ruhr University of Bochum, Information and Technology Management, Univer-
                                       sitätsstr. 150, 44780 Bochum, Germany
                             Email: michael.prilla@rub.de, thomas.herrmann@rub.de
  Krista DeLeeuw, Ulrike Cress, Knowledge Media Research Center, Schleichstr. 6, 72076 Tübingen, Germany
                             Email: k.deleeuw@iwm-kmrc.de, u.cress@iwm-kmrc.de

        Abstract: One approach to integrate CSCL in the workplace is the support of collaboratively re-
        flecting on work, aiming at developing and evaluating tools that support reflection at the work-
        place. As an example, we describe the "Talk Reflection App" and its evaluation. On a conceptual
        level we show the relevance of articulation, shared artifacts, and the strong interrelation between
        individual and collaborative activities. On the empirical level we give examples of learning out-
        comes.

Introduction: Learning at the Workplace by Collaborative Reflection
A large part of (life long) learning happens informally at the workplace. Reflecting on one's own or on others' be-
havior is a typical mechanism of learning at the workplace (e.g., Boud, Keogh, & Walker, 1985). In this paper, using
the case of reflection in a hospital ward, we present an analysis of and socio-technical solution for (collaborative)
reflection and learning.
The example of the "Talk Reflection App" for collaborative reflection in hospitals demonstrates how methods and
concepts of CSCL can be successfully transferred to workplaces.
        In its essence,   reflection helps to transform daily work experience  into learning (Boud et al.,    1985;
Daudelin, 1996; Knipfer, Wessel, & Cress, 2013). Through reflection, people step back from an experience and
explore it in order to come to new insights. Reflection can be initiated when some change or problem requires work
practices to be adjusted. It involves a re-evaluation of the situation with a focus on the situation and affective reac-
tions to it. Reflection is not just individual but has multiple levels: Actors of reflection can be individuals, teams or
organizations. Individuals can reflect about own experiences and about experiences made in a team or an organiza-
tion. Likewise, groups can reflect on individual or group behavior. The processes of collaborative reflection can be
well described with models about collaborative learning (Cress & Kimmerle, 2008; Herrmann, 2003; Stahl, 2006),
which intertwine individual information processing and re-evaluation of understanding with shared understanding
and negotiation of meaning in groups. By a process of inference and abstraction, new insights, learning outcomes
and changes in behavior can emerge on individual and group levels (Kimmerle, Cress, & Held, 2010; Knipfer et al.,
2013).
        Technical support for reflective learning has only been explored intensively in the context of education. A
major aspect of this work is support for the externalization of experiences by structured communication (Baker &
Lund, 1997), note-taking (Kim & Lee, 2002), drawing visualizations (Lin, Hmelo, Kinzer, & Secules, 1999) or
tracking one's own learning history (Scott, 2010). This shows that for collaborative reflection experiences need to be
articulated (Bannon & Schmidt, 1992), shared with others, and that other people need to refer to them. However, in
the context of learning at work, which happens mainly informally (Eraut, 2004) and cannot rely on upfront prepara-
tion (Prilla, Herrmann, & Degeling, 2013), such support has not been widely researched. Besides support for specif-
ic situations like project debriefings (e.g., Boud et al., 1985), research mainly proposes tools such as learning jour-
nals and portfolios to externalize experiences (e.g., Scott, 2010). In a current project (http://www.mirror-project.eu/)
tools are developed to collect and reflect on information about work experiences in several formats, including input
on specific experiences in a diary format and ratings on mood during an experience. This information can then be
shared and used by its authors and other as a "mirror" to reflect upon own or others' work experiences. Prior studies
show that supporting tools should address four different kinds of articulation, forming a reflection cycle (Prilla,
Degeling, & Herrmann, 2012): the externalization of experiences, of individual and collaborative reflection, and of
outcomes of reflection (Figure 1).

 © ISLS                                                                                                      121
 CSCL 2013 Proceedings            Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

Case Study: Support for Reflection in a Hospital with the "Talk Reflection App"
To explore reflection in in the field, we conducted a series of studies in different workplaces (Prilla et al., 2013).
One was a hospital, where we worked with the staff of a ward caring for patients suffering from acute strokes and
other neurological emergencies. Our work included interviews and observations on reflection and its role in daily
work. It revealed that although there is a strong need for reflection, there is only little support for capturing experi-
ences (e.g. quick notes), systematically revisiting them and following up on them afterwards (Prilla et al., 2012). In
many situations, ideas for solutions were lost after reflection and it was difficult and time-consuming to remember
experiences. In these cases, learning opportunities were lost. Based on these observations we developed a technical
pilot, the "Talk Reflection App", to support medical staff in reflecting their conversations with relatives (Prilla et al.,
2012). This topic was chosen because physicians stated repeatedly that although they felt a need to more systemati-
cally about think them (as they often had to convey bad news to relatives while keeping calm and acting profession-
ally) their education did not prepare them for such situations and they therefore often sought help from other col-
leagues.

               Figure 1: Tool support for articulation: Screen shots of the Talk Reflection App

         The Talk Reflection App supports all forms of articulation mentioned above. First of all, medical staff can
document problematic experiences ("public documentation", Figure 1, upper right corner). As this generates further
effort for staff, this documentation was also used to replace the (mandatory) documentation of conversations with
relatives in the hospital information system. To stimulate individual reflection, the tool asks the user to add own
thoughts about the situation by answering questions such as how they felt during it and how worried they are about
the situation ("private documentation", lower right). This externalization leads to thinking about the situation and
considering why the experience was negative. A user can share this documentation (Figure 1, no.1) with others, who
may document their own interpretations or experiences with similar issues (Figure 2, no. 2). This triggers individual

 © ISLS                                                                                                    122
 CSCL 2013 Proceedings                 Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

and collaborative reflection among colleagues with similar experiences. Through the combination of own attribu-
tions to the situation and others' experiences, ideas or comments, the group can come to a new understanding of a
situation and how to deal with it in future work. To preserve these outcomes, the app contains a section to document
outcomes of reflection (Figure 1, upper left).

Reflection Support Applied: Observations of Talk Reflection App Use
The Talk Reflection App was used by five physicians in a four-week trial at the hospital. During this time, we con-
ducted two reflection meetings to observe how the content in the app was used to reflect. Before the first meeting,
adoption was low, but after this meeting, in which the notes of one physician were successfully used for reflection,
the physicians started to use the app more intensively. In the 12 days between this meeting and the meeting closing
the trial period, they documented seven conversations, made seven comments (some documentations had no com-
ments) and wrote down four outcomes of reflection ­ all outcomes were documented during the final reflection
meeting. Given that problematic conversations do not occur every day and that using the tool was new to the physi-
cians, we consider the amount of documented conversations and outcomes as sufficient for the short period, alt-
hough we had expected more comments annotating one's own and others' content.

Table 1: Example for reflection among physicians (translated from German by the authors)

 Phase                         Contents
 Externalization of            "Patient's therapy finished, [getting worse]. Wife was prepared for care at home:
 experiences                   She needs to see whether she can cope with it and take its effort. (...) Very diffi-
                               cult conversation, [she] did not notice what I said or blocked it out."
 Own comment (individual       "Wife gives me the feeling that we are the reason for the diagnosis, hears for the
 reflection)                   first time that husband is [getting worse]"
 Comment of colleague          "Especially in the initial conversation with relatives, it is important to take your
 (collaborative reflection)    time. Maybe these talks should also be done in a separate room?"
 Discussion in group           Physicians remembered similar situations and stated that they are often also af-
 reflection meeting            fected when they have to convey bad news. The reporting physician was also
                               asked whether she had thought of asking a senior physician to help her.
 Joint outcome                 "The challenge is that the conversation was held alone. It should always be clear
                               that a senior physician can support talks!"

       Table 1 shows an example of how the app was used to reflect. A physician documented an emotionally
challenging situation of a communication with a patient's wife. Her own comments show that she was emotionally
affected, including a first idea for a reason (the wife had not been told about the state of her husband before). A
comment of a colleague proposed to use a more appropriate room as a solution based on his experiences from own
conversation. This indicates that the problem was not only be caused by the severity of the diagnosis, but also by the
way the conversation was carried out. In the group reflection during a meeting, other physicians reported similar
experiences and proposed that a senior could have been asked to join the critical conversation. They agreed on this
proposal and documented it as a joint outcome. This shows how documentation of an individual experience turned
into a change of team routines and how it affected individual practice as well as the whole team.
       In this and other examples, the physicians were able to reconstruct their experiences in later situations, us-
ing the documentation as a memory aid. In meetings, verbal reports and additions to the content in the app triggered
collaborative reflection, although the physicians had been reluctant to use the commenting feature in the app before
the meeting. Afterwards, they stated that they found it valuable if others commented on their documentation, but that
they had not known what to comment on others' documentation. Furthermore they liked the opportunity to write
down reflection outcomes, but had to be reminded to do so during meetings ­ outside meetings, they did not docu-
ment any outcome. This shows a gap between the value the physicians generally attributed to the features of articu-
lation support and their usage. Obviously, guidance is needed within the app to use these features. Further work will
address this need, the enhanced integration of the app into work practice, and user activation.

References
Baker, M. & Lund, K. (1997). Promoting reflective interactions in a computer-supported collaborative learning
       environment. Journal of computer assisted learning, 13, 175­193.

 © ISLS                                                                                                         123
 CSCL 2013 Proceedings                 Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

Bannon, L. & Schmidt, K. (1992). Taking CSCW Seriously: Supporting articulation work. Computer Supported
       Cooperative Work, 1(1), 7­40.
Boud, D., Keogh, R., & Walker, D. (1985). Promoting reflection in learning: A model. Reflection: Turning experi-
       ence into learning (pp. 18­40).
Cress, U. & Kimmerle, J. (2008). A systemic and cognitive view on collaborative knowledge building with wikis.
       IJCSCL, 3(2), 105­122.
Daudelin, M. W. (1996). Learning from experience through reflection. Organizational Dynamics, 24(3), 36­48.
Eraut, M. (2004). Informal learning in the workplace. Studies in continuing education, 26(2), 247­273.
Herrmann, T. (2003). Learning and Teaching in Socio-Technical Environments. In T. J. van Weert & R. K. Munro
       (Eds.), Informatics and the Digital Society. Boston: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Kim, D. & Lee, S. (2002). Designing Collaborative Reflection Supporting Tools in e-Project-Based Learning Envi-
       ronments. JILR, 13(4), 375­392.
Kimmerle, J., Cress, U., & Held, C. (2010). The interplay between individual and collective knowledge: technolo-
       gies for organisational learning and knowledge building. Knowledge Management Research & Practice,
       8(1), 33­44.
Knipfer, K., Wessel, D. & Cress, U. (2013). Reflection as a catalyst for organizational learning. Studies in continu-
       ing education, 35(1), 30­48.
Lin, X., Hmelo, C., Kinzer, C. K., & Secules, T. J. (1999). Designing technology to support reflection. Educational
       Technology Research and Development, 47(3), 43­62.
Prilla, M., Degeling, M. & Herrmann, T. (2012). Collaborative Reflection at Work: Supporting Informal Learning at
       a Healthcare Workplace. Proc. of Group 2012, (55­64). ACM.
Prilla, M., Herrmann, T. & Degeling, M. (2013). Collaborative Reflection for Learning at the Healthcare Workplace.
       In S. Goggins, I. Jahnke, & V. Wulf (Eds.), CSCL@Work: Case Studies of Collaborative Learning at
       Work. Springer.
Scott, S. G. (2010). Enhancing Reflection Skills Through Learning Portfolios: An Empirical Test. Journal of Man-
       agement Education, 34(3), 430­457.
Stahl, G. (2006). Group cognition: Computer support for building collaborative knowledge. MIT Press.

 © ISLS                                                                                                     124
