CSCL 2013 Proceedings                     Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

 A Multi-Level Analysis of Engagement and Achievement: Badges
                             and Wikifolios in an Online Course

      Andrea M. Rehak, Daniel T. Hickey, Indiana University, 1900 E. Tenth St., Bloomington, IN 47404
                               Email: amstrack@indiana.edu, dthickey@indiana.edu

        Abstract:    Multiple   levels of   data from   an  asynchronous    online course    were analyzed   to
        explore student engagement and achievement around a particular course concept. This study
        examined     how    productive    disciplinary   engagement     around   "wikifolios"    via  threaded
        commenting on those wikifolios fostered learning that transferred to performance on external
        achievement measures not directly targeted in the course. The findings show that a new course
        feature, peer awarded badges, were effective markers of productive disciplinary engagement,
        and impressive achievement gains were accomplished without resorting to dreary expository
        instruction    that typifies  the majority  of   online  learning.  Implications   for the   design  of
        productive online learning and further areas for research are discussed.

This paper describes a multi-level analysis of learning outcomes using data from one cycle of ongoing design
based research    of a fully   online  graduate-level   education   course. This   course  and  the  underlying  design
principles foster diverse   learning  outcomes   by aligning   activity across three increasingly    formal  levels: (1)
productive disciplinary engagement (PDE; Engle & Conant, 2002) in drafting and discussing weekly wikifolios,
(2) enduring  individual    understanding   of  targeted course  concepts   in those wikifolios,   and  (3)  aggregated
achievement on multiple-choice items drawn from the publisher's item pool for the textbook.
         Asynchronous       online learning  is  unique  in that it allows  instructors and  students   time to process
exchanges and formulate meaningful posts, allowing for thoughtful responses and deep processing of concepts
(Swan, 2002). The existence of online artifacts and persistent threads of discourse around those artifacts creates
an opportunity for rich analysis of the trends in computer mediated discourse (Rovai, 2002). A previous analysis
of a prior iteration of the course examined individual understanding and aggregated achievement (Hickey &
Rehak, 2013). This present analysis traces the learning of a particular course concept, teaching & learning
mathematics, across all three levels (PDE, enduring understanding, and aggregated achievement). The following
questions were addressed: (1) to what extent did students engage with this concept? (2) Did a new course feature
(peer awarded  badges)    accurately   flag PDE?   (3)  Did  student  engagement    foster  enduring  understanding   of
teaching & learning mathematics? (4) Did this course design positively impact aggregated achievement on
measures that were independent of the way the content was taught?

Research Context
Since wikis were invented in 1995, they have transformed the way we catalog, construct, share, and refine
information. However, the potential uses of wikis in education have been somewhat overshadowed by debates
surrounding the accuracy of information found on collaborative encyclopedias (e.g. Crovitz & Smoot, 2009).
This course uses wikis as a type of alternative to e-portfolios; thus, they are called "wikifolios" (Hickey &
Soylu, 2012).  However, both the wikis and the threaded comments in which students discussed the course
concepts are remarkably simple. This made the wikifolios ideal for everyday class use and allowed the students
and course refinements to focus deeply and directly on engagement and learning.
        Much    research    in Computer     Supported    Collaborative   Learning   (CSCL)     focuses  on  analysis  of
individual and shared knowledge building using some type of collaborative communication technology (e.g.
Cress &  Kimmerle,     2008;   Greenhow   &  Belbas,   2007;  Moss   &   Beatty, 2006).   It has  been  argued  that the
differences in theoretical and methodological perspectives in this body of research can be reconciled by careful
positioning of results (Clara & Mauri, 2010). In an effort to explicate the positioning of this particular study, it is
necessary to delve into the constituent context of the environment, regarding context not as a variable external to
the course but, as Cole (1996) discusses, context as that which intertwines.
        Instead of going beyond the individual actions and mind (as suggested by Arnsenth & Ludvigsen,
2006), this analytical approach employs a situative theory of learning (Greeno et al., 1998) that examines the
aggregated engagement of the class and how the affordances of the context are taken up by the students. Overall
performance  on   distal achievement   items    (assessment  items  that are not   directly  aligned to the  curriculum
activities) is used to make arguments regarding validity of the course design in the seemingly inevitable broader
context of increased accountability.
        In light of the surging expectations for educational accountability, assessment and evaluation of e-
learning has taken on new significance (Harmon & Lambrinos, 2008). In response, instructors, schools, and
researchers are exploring various strategies to ensure security of online tests and document the validity of scores
(Jung & Yeom, 2009; Rowe, 2004). A melding of these concerns with situative approaches to assessment and

© ISLS                                                                                                             125
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                    Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

learning, along with design based research methodology, has resulted in a set of core design principles that are
currently called Participatory Assessment (Hickey & Rehak, 2013).
         The data for this study comes from the online archive of an asynchronous graduate course, Learning &
Cognition in Education. In this particular semester fourteen School of Education students were enrolled. The
instructor had been teaching the course in its current format since the fall of 2008, making use of a Sakai course
management platform, OnCourse. OnCourse has a wiki feature that allowed the students to post their weekly
wikifolios locally. Each student had her own wikifolio where all of her artifacts were displayed and discussed.
Reflecting  one of   the core  design principles and   Engle  &   Conant's  (2001) suggestions    for problematizing
disciplinary  content,  every  wikifolio had  students articulate the  three most  relevant and   one  least relevant
implications for education found at the end of each chapter of a disciplinary text,         as they related to each
student's self-defined instructional goal and setting. In the last five weeks of the course, subgroups of students
created collaborative group wikifolios around the chapters on literacy, comprehension, writing, mathematics,
and science. Reflecting another core design principle, the wikifolios and student comments were never directly
graded. Instead, students only needed to post three coherent reflections on their engagement and collaboration to
receive  full points for  the  wiki  posting, which   made  up  the majority   of their course  grade.  The   grading
mechanisms for the course have been explored in a prior paper (Hickey & Rehak, 2013) and are beyond the
scope of the current analysis.
         Design-based    refinements  had   been made   across four   prior  semesters. Many   of these  refinements
focused on increasing the amount and meaningfulness of interactive engagement via threaded comments posted
directly on   individual wikifolios.  One   new  feature, peer awarded   "badges,"  were  integrated   into  students'
weekly assignments. Quite simply, badges were comments that included the distinctive string "$$$" to highlight
a classmate's particularly productive contribution. Figure 1 shows a typical badge in context.

                                            Figure 1. Typical Peer Awarded Badge

Synergy between the design of this feature and the design of the research were obtained by framing both using
Engle and Conant's (2002) notion of PDE. More specifically, the assignment prompt included an explanation of
the types of engagement that were productive and disciplinary, and students were asked to award badges to
contributions that exemplified PDE. It was articulated that a valid badge needed to explain why the engagement
was productive and disciplinary. As described below, the content of the badges and interactive context was then
analyzed to determine the extent to which the feature actually represented PDE.

Resulting Engagement
Overall student engagement in the course was high. The ten individual weekly wikifolio posts averaged 1,569
words with an average of 120 comments per week, or 9 comments per individual wikifolio. The comments were
an average length of 95 words per comments. Of these comments, just 16% were standalone comments that
were not part of a threaded discussion. The five collaborative group wikifolios averaged 3,473 words, with an
average of 40 comments that were a length of 92 words, and just 8% of comments were non-threaded. The
mathematics group wikifolio was collaboratively composed by three students; it was the longest group wikifolio
at 4,630 words and had 50 comments.
         Out of the 50 comments on the mathematics group wikifolio, 8 of the comments were peer-awarded
badges. Both the badge awarder's rationale for awarding and the context that resulted in a badge were a priori
coded using the construct of PDE. Rationale and context were considered to represent PDE if they were both
disciplinary (concerning the field of teaching and learning) and productive (intelligently moved the conversation
forward). Two coders had 100 percent agreement that 2 of the 8 badges did not sufficiently warrant how the
engagement, to which they were awarding a badge, was productive or disciplinary. Figure 1 (above) shows one
of the two badges that lacked PDE in the awarding rationale. Encouragingly, all 8 of the badged interactions
were determined (with 100 percent agreement) to be both productive and disciplinary. While the awarder of the
badge may have failed to continue the disciplinary conversation, all badges did recognize engagement that was
both disciplinary and productive.

Content Analysis
Ongoing qualitative content analysis based on the concept of community "uptake acts" (Suthers, 2006) of course
ideas (referred to   as  text) is revealing how  this  online  context fosters discourse  that should   leave behind

© ISLS                                                                                                          126
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                  Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

enduring individual understanding of course concepts and aggregated achievement that should convince skeptics
of the value of this approach. Examining uptake reveals how the learners take up the abstract course concepts
within the context of teaching & learning mathematics and other related domains. Table 1 displays the analysis
of an illustrative thread that was typical of the exchanges in the mathematics group wikifolio.

Table 1. Content analysis of a thread. (emphasis added)
 Student         Content of post                                                                    Analysis
 (timestamp)
 Mariah          I really appreciated your relevant debate. In reading this chapter, I kept         Uptake of text
 (2011-12-       thinking, "I wish I had been taught like this!" I enjoyed solving                  by comparison
 02              equations because they're so black-and-white - and I excelled at them - but        to personal
 17:09:42.0)     I've never learned how to use them beyond the classroom, even in my                experience
                 college level honors calculus course. While practicing skills gives
                 students a solid foundation, without some connection to real life, the             Uptake of text
                 skills are meaningless. I really wish I had been taught why these skills           by comparison
                 were important. I feel like I'd be a lot smarter if that had been the case. I      to personal
                 think your tenth and fifteenth relevant specifics tie into this debate for me.     experience
 Eric            I think that the "why" component of teaching is the most power, one for the
 (2011-12-       reason you mention about connections to real life. Two, because we can't           Uptake of text
 02              always remember the exact formulas for everything we've ever                       by connecting
 18:32:10.0)     learned, but if we understand why things are the way they are, then we             current context
                 can reconstruct those "formulas" or "algorithms" for ourselves in the              to a previous
 -in             real world to a close enough approximation to get by with whatever task we         chapter of the
 response to     are trying to accomplish. To relate this to the learning goal: we might not        text
 Mariah          remember every single rule that governs a median average, but if we
                 understand the basic idea and the "why" of a median average, we are going
                 to figure out a number that is close enough to the median average to satisfy
                 the need we have in the real world.
 Courtney        I think it also has a lot to do with students just really being curious as to
 (2011-12-       how to store the information. When we are teaching them about money,
 03              they know they are going to how to use it in every day situations even to
 21:51:13.0)     buy a pop. But when we are teaching them about these central measures of           Uptake of text
                 tendency they are most likely giving you that deer in the headlights look          by connecting
 -in             and trying not to fall asleep. If you find something for them to tie it to         peers' comments
 response to     they are not only going to grasp on more but already remember it                   on the concept
 Eric            better.

This analysis suggests that all three of these students made meaning of the abstract concepts from the text by
discussing them in a knowledgeable manner and built on the ideas their peers were expressing.
         Another advantage of this new feature that was not explored concerned the badges' value for helping
the  instructor prioritize which  of the numerous    comments  and  exchanges to focus         on.  Specifically, once
wikifolio drafts and comments were posted, the instructor would search for the distinctive string and begin
contributing comments around the badged interactions.

Resulting Understanding and Achievement
Impact on individual understanding was assessed with timed (5 minutes/item) open-ended items that asked
students to consider the relevance of the various chapter implications as they related to the design of the actual
course. The majority of the students received full points on the majority of the items.         Impact on aggregated
achievement was measured using time limited tests (60 seconds/item) consisting of selected-response items
randomly chosen from the subset of items in the textbook item bank whose answers could not be readily located
in the textbook. The pretest was required but ungraded, and consisted of 25 items. The midterm and final
consisted of 20 and 30 items that combined covered the same concepts as the pretest; these exams were graded
but  comprised   only a  small percentage  of the overall  course grade.  A one-way ANOVA showed student
engagement led to significant gains in the posttest analysis. The increase in average percentage correct on the
midterm (83.82%, SD = .1189) and final (80.24%, SD = .1073) compared to the pre-test (66.23%, SD = .1189)
were both statistically significant [F (1, 26) = 10.03, p = .004, and F (1, 26) = 10.70, p = .003] with respective
effect sizes of d = 1.036 and d = 1.060.
         Of  specific interest is the gain on  the   item concerning a very specific  mathematics        concept.  The
question was, "CHANGE-ADD-TO and EQUALIZE are examples of?" On the pretest, only 14% of students
correctly answered the question, while on the final 100% of students correctly answered the question. This

© ISLS                                                                                                            127
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                   Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

change is striking in that the students were never informed of their score or the correct answers to the pretest
questions. Also this concept was never directly discussed in the group wikifolio or any of the comments on the
wikifolio. Rather, it suggests that the students' personally relevant contexts did indeed provide students a means
to engage   with the text   in meaningful   ways.  Additional  analyses currently underway  are    examining other
examples of this link between PDE and aggregated achievement.

Conclusions
Overall student engagement in the course and in the mathematics group wikifolio was high, and most comments
were substantive in that the content of the comments built on the concepts of the text and ideas of peers. The
new course feature, peer-awarded badges, appeared to recognize PDE. Because recognizing desired forms of
engagement is usually necessary for promoting it, this seems like a useful direction for this research. This study
compelled the addition of a new design principle to the set of core design principles employed. This new design
principle necessitates exploration in future iterations of the course. A comparative study using content analysis
to explore the differences in commenting with and without badges could help determine whether the badges
encourage PDE or if they are simply good markers of PDE. Aggregated student achievement was satisfactory,
suggesting that this course design fosters more than student engagement, but also a useful learning experience.
         As online learning continues to grow more innovation and research is needed to ensure students are
indeed learning in these courses. These results suggest that avoiding the discussion of concepts in the abstract
and allowing students to choose their own personally meaningful context for engaging with the text can lead to
efficient online interactions, despite the many barriers of online learning. Peer-awarded badges in this course
were much more than "gold stars" and may offer a means of fostering meaningful engagement with typically
abstract course concepts.

References
Arnseth, H. C., & Ludvigsen, S. (2006). Approaching institutional contexts: Systemic versus dialogic research
         in CSCL. Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 1, 167­185.
Auerbach, C. F. & Silverstein, L. B. (2003). Qualitative data: An introduction to coding and analysis. New
         York: New York University Press.
Cole, M. (1996). Cultural psychology. A once and future discipline. Cambridge: Belknap Press of Harvard
         University Press.
Cress, U., & Kimmerle, J. (2008). A systemic and cognitive view on collaborative knowledge building with
         wikis.  International   Journal    of  Computer-Supported      Collaborative  Learning,   3(2),  105­122.
         doi:10.1007/s11412-007-9035-z
Crovitz, D., & Smoot, W. S. (2009). Wikipedia: Friend, not foe. English Journal, 98(3), 91­97.
Engle,  A., &   Conant,   R.   (2002). Guiding    Principles for Fostering Productive  Disciplinary   Engagement:
         Explaining an Emergent Argument in a Community of Learners Classroom. Cognition and Instruction,
         20(4), 399-483.
Greenhow, C., & Belbas, B. (2007). Using activity-oriented design methods to study collaborative knowledge-
         building in e-learning courses within higher education. International Journal of Computer-Supported
         Collaborative Learning, 2(4), 363­391. doi:10.1007/s11412-007-9023-3
Greeno,  J. G.  and  the  Middle-School     Mathematics   though  Applications Project (1998). The    situativity of
         knowing, learning, and research. American Psychologist, 53(1), 5-26.
Harmon, O. R., & Lambrinos, J. (2008). Are online exams an invitation to cheat? The Journal of Economics
         Education, 39(2), 116-125.
Hickey,  D.  T.,  &  Rehak,     A. M.    (2013).    Wikifolios   and participatory  assessment    for  engagement,
         understanding,   and   achievement    in  online courses.    Accepted  for   publication  the Journal    of
         Educational Media and Hypermedia, January 2013.
Hickey D. T., & Soylu,   F.  Wikifolios, reflections, and exams for online engagement, understanding,  and
         achievement.  Journal of Teaching and Learning with Technology, 1(1), 64-71
Jung, I. Y., & Yeom, H. Y. (2009). Enhanced security for online exams using group cryptography. Education,
         IEEE Transactions on, 52(3), 340­349.
Moss, J., & Beatty, R. (2006). Knowledge building in mathematics: Supporting collaborative learning in pattern
         problems.   International  Journal    of Computer-Supported    Collaborative  Learning,   1(4),  441­465.
         doi:10.1007/s11412-006-9003-z
Rovai, A. P. (2002). Development of an instrument to measure classroom community. The Internet and Higher
         Education, 5(3), 197­211.
Suthers, D.  D.   (2006).   A   qualitative analysis  of  collaborative knowledge     construction through  shared
         representations. Research and Practice in Technology Enhanced Learning, 1(2), 115-142.
Swan, K. (2002). Building learning communities in online courses: The importance of interaction. Education,
         Communication and Information, 2(1), 23­49.

© ISLS                                                                                                        128
