CSCL 2013 Proceedings                    Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

                         Learning to Facilitate (Online) Meetings
                         Peter Reimann, MTO, Tuebingen (Germany), p.reimann@mto.de
                 Susan Bull, University of Birmingham, Birmingham (UK), s.bull@bham.ac.uk
                 Ravi Vatrapu, Copenhagen Business School, Copenhagen (DK), rv.itm@cbs.dk

          Abstract: We describe an approach to teaching collaboration skills directly by building on
          competences    for meeting    facilitation. (Online) meetings    provide   a  rich  arena   to practice
          collaboration  since  they  can  serve  multiple  purposes:  learning,    problem   solving,   decision
          making,   idea generation   and    advancement,   etc.. We   argue that    facilitating meetings  is  a
          competence    worth   developing    in students   and   describe  the    main  knowledge     and  skill
          components that pertain to this competence. We then describe some implemented software
          tools that can be used in schools and colleges to provide opportunities for practicing and
          developing group facilitation skills.

The Challenge of Teaching Collaboration
The focus in CSCL is naturally on group learning: the group comes together with the main purpose to learn
about something. This is different from collaboration outside of educational settings, where the main purpose of
collaboration and cooperation is not only learning (building capacity), but also (and more frequently)            problem
solving, decision making, deliberating issues of shared concern, engaging in a change process, etc (Romano &
Nunamaker, 2001). The purpose of real world collaboration is as often to organize for action and to create
commitment    to a  course   of action  than  it is   to distribute information    and  get  agreement   on terms    (share
information, build community). Another purpose is to advance the thinking, which can be seen as similar to the
goals  of  knowledge  building    (Hakkarainen,   2009).    However,   even  then    in real  world   settings other  than
academic ones, the advancement of thinking is often embedded in a more action-oriented endeavor, such as
creating new products, services, or processes.
          While there are many good reasons for separating collaboration for learning from other purposes, this
can lead to a restriction of opportunities to practice these other forms of collaboration, which are not only
important for business purposes, but also for civic action. The situation is not quite as bleak since educational
collaboration will often include problem solving and decision making etc., but it is worth keeping in mind that
collaboration for the (sole) purpose of learning is comparatively rare in non-educational settings; there, people
meet and collaborate to get things done.
          Our general   suggestion   is to extend   the  forms of   collaboration   considered    in CSCL   beyond   those
focusing primarily on learning, so as to develop in students in secondary and tertiary education a broader set of
collaboration competences. This extends the argument made by Hakkarainen and others with respect to idea
advancement. Our specific proposal is to exploit the richness that meetings, both face-to-face and on-line, offer
for learning. We follow Romano and Nunamaker's definition of a meeting: "a focused interaction of cognitive
attention, planned or chance, where people agree to come together for a common purpose, whether at the same
time and the same place, or at different times in different places" (2001, p. 1) But just participating in meetings
will not be sufficient for learning about group and communication processes, develop skills for productive
collaboration, and develop attitudes and values that are conducive for productive team work. Therefore, our
approach includes teaching students how to facilitate meetings, how to help a group to do its best thinking. The
meeting format we focus on is that of synchronous meetings, both with co-location of participants ("face to
face") and without (e.g., chat based, and/or some form of audio/video conferencing).
          Space is too short to provide a comprehensive research overview. Suffice to say here that the work
from CSCL closest to ours is the one on knowledge building already mentioned, and on supporting synchronous
argumentation (Asterhan & Schwarz, 2010; B. B. Schwarz & Asterhan, 2011). We will present more of the
literature in the Discussion section, after having introduced our own approach.

Learning to Facilitate Group Meetings
In order to identify the competences that are required to facilitate meetings, we are guided by the literature on
professional meeting facilitation. A facilitator is one "...who contributes structure and process to interactions so
groups are able to function effectively and make high-quality decisions. A helper and enabler whose goal is to
support others as they pursue their objectives" (Bens, 2012, p. viii). While a meeting facilitator (also called
meeting moderator) refers usually to somebody professionally trained (Schuman, 2005; R. Schwarz, 2002), we
use the term here as a role a group member takes on for a limited time (one or more group meetings) to help the
group  in  specific ways   to  do its   best thinking.   While a    facilitator's activities are  to some  extent  always
contingent on how a meeting develops, there are numerous ways in which the facilitator can prepare meetings,
anticipate meeting   process    and  outcomes,   and     document   process and    outcomes.   It  is in  particular these

© ISLS                                                                                                                129
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                    Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

preparatory steps that make facilitation a teachable skill set in the context of schools and colleges, whereas the
larger skill set required for proficient facilitation--including strategies to cope with difficult group dynamics--
need to be developed through systematic professional education and ample practice. The activities that a student
in the facilitating role can prepare and help to enact comprise agenda planning, meeting activities planning,
keeping group memory, facilitating decision making, and documenting meeting outcomes. The literature on how
to realize these types of activities and what artifacts are involved is extensive (e.g., Justice & Jamieson, 2006;
Kaner, 2007). The skills that we think can realistically be developed on the middle school level, for instance, are
depicted in Table 1.

Table 1: Meeting facilitation skills.

 1. Preparing a meeting:                                  3. Documenting meeting outcomes:
  1.1 The group's agenda                                   3.1 Preparing meeting minutes for group use
  1.2 The facilitators meeting process plan                3.2 Communicating the meeting outcomes beyond
                                                               the group
 2. Conducting a meeting:
  2.1 Guiding the group through the process               4. Reflecting and learning:
  2.2 Keeping group memory (note taking,                   4.1 Soliciting feedback on one's facilitation work
      visualizing)                                         4.2 Formulating insights and future learning goals
                                                               regarding group facilitation

Towards Computational Support for Practicing (and Assessing) e-Facilitation Skills
We have   in the  Next-Tell project   (www.next-tell.eu)  developed  computational    support that can be used        in
classrooms to provide opportunities to practice meeting facilitation, and to help the teacher provide guidance
and feedback. The guiding scenario is one where the class is engaged in some kind of group-based project work
that extends over a couple of weeks; for instance, a longer lasting inquiry process in science that culminates in a
presentation of findings. We assume that students have (e.g., weekly) face-to-face meetings (with at least one
laptop per group), and/or online meetings, using Skype or some such as the web-conferencing tool. A group is
formed of 5-7 students, by the teacher. The teacher also has created a schedule that specifies who will be in the
facilitator role for each meeting. Our technical solution supports in particular the student in the facilitator role.

Planning a meeting
A week or so before student F has to facilitate a meeting, she is required to engage in the meeting planning, and
discuss her plan with the teacher. F uses a meeting planning tool that allows her to select from a pool of meeting
activities (called meetlets, Fig. 1A) and arrange these in a sequence (Fig. 1B). The planner allows also to express
parallel activities, for breaking the group into subgroups, e.g., pairs. Any meeting plan can be stored at any time,
and accessed from a library of plans (Fig. 1C), thus also allowing re-use of plans and plan components. Both
student and teacher can access the tool and the library via a web browser.
         Each node in the meeting plan (Fig. 1B) can be expanded, offering the user then a set of attributes that
can be further set or changed from their default values. Since each node, i.e., meetlet, represents an activity, the
attributes refer to parameters of the activity. For instance, for a meetlet describing a brainstorming activity the
student could further specify details of this activity. An important set of parameters describes which artifacts the
activity overall (or each sub-step    in the activity) needs and/or generates. For instance,  for  a brainstorming
exercise the student may set up a Google document for each group member plus one to bring the ideas together,
and specify the links to these documents in the plan. Both the student and the teacher can step through the
(partial) plan at any time to see how the activity (sequence) will look like to the group ("activity stepper"). The
meeting agenda that the participants get is a substantially reduced subset of the information in the facilitation
plan.

Running and documenting a meeting
Depending on the circumstances when the meeting is conducted, F can decide to print out all documents needed
for the meeting in advance, or in case all team members have access to a computer or tablet device, can present
the documents needed for the activities online. In the case where the technology is available, F can use the
Activity Stepper, a piece of software that interprets the plan and presents the activities step by step, under the
control of F. This makes it easier to conduct and document the meeting (no paper handling), but requires that
each group member has access. The online meeting resources are essentially made up of Google Apps, with a
particular use of Google Spreadsheets, but also Docs, Presentations, and Drawings. In addition to gathering
these artifacts, which reflect the meeting activities, F is requested to solicit towards the end of the meeting

© ISLS                                                                                                        130
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                  Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

feedback from the group members, and to write a reflective piece, all of which is then shared with the teacher
(either through Google Folders, and/or through an e-portfolio that we provide in addition, but that is not further
described here.)

                        C                                                      B

                             A

                       Figure 1. The graphical meeting planner. See text for explanations.

Rubrics and other forms of assessments
A number of rubrics and checklists help the teacher, and/or the students themselves, to appraise the quality of
the facilitation. This is mainly done based on the artifacts that get created during the meeting planning and while
running the meeting. Depending on technology and time available, as well as on the aspirations of the teacher,
students can   also be  required to audio-record  the   meeting, and   to analyze   these recordings for   learning
opportunities regarding the development of facilitation competences. In any case, the appraisal is currently done
manually, i.e., by teacher and/or student and/or peers, but we are also working on methods for automatic scoring
of meeting activity related artifacts and process records.
         Since the knowledge and skills that goes into meeting facilitation competences need to be developed
across classrooms   and across   time, it is important  for both teachers  and students   that they  can track  the
development. In addition to an e-portfolio, we provide an Open Learner Model (Bull & Kay, 2010) that can be
updated manually as well as automatically, provided scoring algorithms are in place, and displays competence
development in a variety of formats (Figure 2). For teachers, the OLM provides access to individual as well as
aggregated (e.g., on class level) competence reports. The OLM supports multiple visualization formats, and can
hence also be used for discussion with individual students or the class. It further supports drilling down into the
evidence layer (specific Google docs, specific e-portfolio entries).

Discussion
The user interface and the meeting activity templates are currently being refined and extended in cooperation
with teaches and students, and empirical studies are being conducted in schools, in particular in second language
education. These will be reported on in a later stage. There are a number of differences to other approaches to
supporting online synchronous collaborative learning. We are identifying five points here. (1) The learning
focus is on the student in the role of the facilitator: What she learns about group facilitation; if and what the
others learn from the meeting is dependent on the purpose of the meeting and of course on the participants. We
do not support assessing the content learning aspects further, but the teacher may very well.     This is different
from most of the work in CSCL, where the collaboration is for content learning. Our focus is on learning for
collaboration, one  of those "21st  Century  skills".  (2) While the  facilitation plan can be  seen as  a kind of
collaboration script (Kollar, Fischer, & Hesse, 2006), it is different from the typical use of scripting in as much
as the script is created by the students themselves (namely the one in the facilitator role) and script `enactment'
is controlled by the student in the facilitator role. We provide technology to scaffold the `script', but under the
control of the facilitating student. (3) We intentionally use a broad concept meeting activity; "argumentation"
or "discussion" of "decision making" would each only be one of a number them. This because in real world
meetings, multiple activities occur and gatherings are rarely structured according to a single discourse genre

© ISLS                                                                                                         131
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                     Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

(e.g., formal debate). This explains why we cannot design the technical support around to a strong ontology,
such as "argumentation moves" (Hoppe, De Groot, & Hever, 2009; B. B. Schwarz & Asterhan, 2011), but base
monitoring and assessment on the artifacts created as a side-effect of engaging in specific activities, such as
"making   a  decision".  (4) Even  so  we   are building  on a  scenario where    multiple groups   work in  parallel
synchronously (say 5 groups of 5 students in a class of 25), our support focus is not primarily on the teacher (as
in Asterhan   &  Schwarz,    2010, for    example), but  on the facilitating  students. We  argue  that this way  of
"classroom orchestration" makes the job of the teacher achievable because the teacher does not have to micro-
manage   each   group;  the  facilitators do that.  All the teacher needs    is some high-level  information  if the
facilitation "works", perhaps as simple as a communication channel to the facilitators so that they can call on the
teacher's support if needed. (5) We are not imposing a specific communication technology onto the teacher or
school; schools are now widely equipped with propriety web conferencing tools, and/or use freely available
tools such as Skype, perhaps in combination with an online tool for sharing files and documents. It is difficult to
see them switching to a research tool, however powerful, or starting from a niche tool. That means, there will
always be strong limits to process tracing; at least for the time being, it will be easier to capture artefacts at the
file or document level, which are easily shared (e.g, Dropbox, Google Drive), uploaded (e.g., to an e-portfolio),
or mailed.

                       Figure 2. Partial teacher view of the Next-Tell Open Learner Model.

References
Asterhan,   C., &  Schwarz,   B.B.  (2010).  Online   moderation   of synchronous    e-argumentation.   International
         Journal of Computer-supported Collaborative Learning, 5, 259-282.
Bens, I. (2012). Facilitation. Your pocket guide to facilitation (3rd ed.). Salem, NH: GOAL/QPC.
Bull, S., & Kay, J. (2010). Open learner models. In R. Nkambou, J. Bordeau & R. Miziguchi (Eds.), Advances
         in intelligent tutoring systems (pp. 318-338). Berlin: Springer.
Hakkarainen, Kai. (2009). A knowledge-practice perspective on technology-mediated learning. International
         Journal of Computer-supported Collaborative Learning, 4, 213-231.
Hoppe, U., De Groot, R., & Hever, R. (2009). Implementing technology-facilitated collaboration and awareness
         in the  classroom:  Roles  for   teachers, ecuational and  technology   researchers. In B. B.  Schwarz,  T.
         Dreyfus & R. Hershkowitz (Eds.), Transforming of knowledge through classroom intearciton: New
         perspectives in learning and instruction (pp. 130-142). New York, NY: Routledge.
Justice, T., & Jamieson, D.W. (2006). The facilitator's fieldbook (2nd ed.). New York, NY: HRD Press.
Kaner, S. . (2007). Facilitator's guide to participatory decision-making (2nd ed.). San Franisco: Wiley.
Kollar, I., Fischer, F., &   Hesse, F.    W. (2006).  Collaboration   scripts - a conceptual  analysis. Educational
         Psychological Review, 18, 159-185.
Romano, N.C., Jr., & Nunamaker, J. F., Jr. (2001). Meeting analysis: Findings from Research and Practice
         Proceedigns of the 34th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (pp. 1-13): IEEE.
Schuman, S. (Ed.). (2005). The IAF handbook or group facilitation. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Schwarz, B.B., & Asterhan, C. (2011). E-moderation of synchronous discussions in educational settings: A
         nascent practice. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 20, 395-442.
Schwarz, R. (2002). The skilled facilitator. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.

Acknowledgments
The European Commission, Framework 7 Program, has in parts funded this research.

© ISLS                                                                                                           132
