CSCL 2013 Proceedings                Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

    Complementary Social Network and Dialogic Space Analyses:
                                An E-discussion Case Study
     Myriam Sofía Rodriguez Garzon, & Luis Facundo Maldonado University Central, Bogota, Colombia,
                            mrodriguezg5@ucentral.edu.co, lufamagr@gmail.com
      Reuma De-Groot, & Raul Drachman The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, 91905 Jerusalem, Israel,
                        reuma.de-groot@mail.huji.ac.il, raul.drachman@mail.huji.ac.il

         Abstract: The role of e-discussion and e-collaboration with peers in the context of problem
         solving has been widely discussed. Two strands of analysis, one focused on dialogic space of
         and key discussion events of widening and deepening, and one focused on social networking,
         were undertaken in a case study of a graphic, synchronous e-discussion. These approaches are
         shown   to  be complementary,  as  cross-analysis    makes it possible     to  reveal interesting
         phenomena in the discussion and suggest directions for intervention.

Analysis of Dialogic Collaboration in Networked Environments
Socio-cultural theories of learning emphasize the construction of knowledge through social interaction. Such
construction of knowledge takes place in learning situations in which students collaboratively solve a problem,
combining and integrating their own perspectives, thinking and combining everyday experience with scientific
thinking (Collins, Brown, & Newman, 1989). More than merely the construction of knowledge in the mind of
the individual, it is a joint enculturation and meaning-making process embedded in the social context of activity
(Cobb  &  Bowers,   1999). Adding  another contextual   dimension  has to     do with  the use of information   and
communication technologies to support collaborative and co-operative connections between one learner and
other learners, learners and tutors, and learners and resources (e.g., Dillenbourg, Schneider, Synteta, 2002).
         Wegerif et al. (2008) focused on the thinking that occurs in the context of dialogues in networked
environments of online collaborative learning, attempting to track the development of higher order thinking and
learning skills within the `dialogic space', the metaphorical arena within which dialogic discussions occur. The
space of debate or dialogue (and by extension the group's thinking) can develop via deepening, i.e. delving into
an issue and increasing the degree and depth of reflection focused on it, or broadening, i.e. widening the range
of relevant perspectives and relevant knowledge brought into the dialogue.
         Dialogues occur within networks and use the tools, resources and affordances of these environments.
Wegerif et al. (2010) illustrated how specialized ICT tools using also an AI component can help to both deepen
and broaden the dialogic spaces, for example via constructing and modifying a shared external representation of
a dialogue using the Digalo tool also used in this study (see further below).
         Determining points or events of deepening or broadening within an e-discussion involves an in-depth
analysis of the discussion's flow and structure as well as the content of individual utterances. Other means of
analyzing aspects of such discussions are available, stressing measures of participation and social interaction,
making it easier to understand the contribution of each participant to the process. Theoretically, the optimal
situation is that in which each of the discussants is an active participant in the discussion, whether his or her
utterances lead to the development of a certain idea raised in the discussion (deepening) or is in conflict with
another  idea in the discussion (widening, in a  sense)  (McLoughlin   &      Luca, 2000).  Researchers focus,  for
example, on measures of participation and interactivity such as the number of responses for each utterance, or
the number of implicit or explicit links between utterances.
         The leading approach to analyzing the social dimension of asynchronous e-discussions (e.g., those that
take place in online forums) is that of Social Network Analysis (SNA), a key technique in modern sociology and
anthropology.  Using  special algorithms,  SNA   produces    schematic diagrams      of the  connections   between
individuals in a community, in which points or nodes may represent participants in an activity or discussion and
the ties between  them  are represented by lines connecting    the nodes.     Measures  of connectivity and    other
relational concepts are calculated based on data such as the distances between points in the diagram (the larger
the distance, the weaker the connection). Two interesting measures in this context are closeness, i.e., the degree
to which a participant is connected to other participants, and betweenness, the degree to which a participant
connects between other people (e.g., Cho et al., 2007).

Context and Methods
The current study attempts to combine two strands of analysis, one focused on the dialogic space of group e-
discussions and key events of widening and deepening, and one focused on the social network created between
the participants within the activity. The presentation of the SN is based on the connectors which the participants
made between each others' contribution. In our case we didn't differentiate between the green (supporting)
connectors and the black (neutral) connectors. The two approaches we took are shown to be complementary, as

© ISLS                                                                                                         133
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

cross-analysis makes it possible to reveal interesting phenomena on the relations between dialogic engagement
and the way that the participants "behave" as a group in a problem solving context. This is demonstrated via a
case study of a graphic, synchronous e-discussion using the Digalo/Argunaut tool (http://www.argunaut.org/).

The E-Discussion Environment
Digalo is a tool that graphically supports e-discussion and e-argumentation, which are held within an object
space called a "map", where users contribute to the discussion by adding shapes representing an argumentative
ontology (e.g., a rectangle for claims) and typing their utterances onto them. Users may also link shapes to other
shapes, using arrows of different types (support, opposition, reference), which may be modified or deleted. This
tool has been widely used in various pedagogical R&D projects in Israel, Europe and South America.

The Participants and the Activity
As  part of an R&D  project entitled "Network   of Modeling and  Formal    Representation in Mathematics",      18
Colombian engineering students (ages 18-20) took part in an hour-long Digalo-based mathematical problem-
solving activity, in small groups of 5-6 students each (3 groups in total). The e-discussion of one of these groups
(6 students with a teacher-moderator) was chosen for analysis as case studies, due to its richness.
         The problem presented to the students was as follows: A car is traveling in the maximum permitted
speed of 82.8 Km/h. When the car is 65m away from the junction, the driver sees the traffic light turn from
green to yellow. The driver needs to take a decision whether to continue or to stop the car. If he decides to
continue he should make sure that he crosses the junction before the traffic light turns red; if he decides to stop,
he should make sure that the car stops before the junction. Consider also that that the traffic light stays yellow
for 3 seconds before it turns red. If the width of the junction is 15m, the average reaction time of a human being
is 1 second. Assume that braking decelerates the car at 5m/s2. What should the driver decide, and why?

Analysis of the Discussion Map
The discussion map was analyzed in depth using a coding schema suggested by Wegerif et al. (2008) as well as
through SNA measures based on previous work done by Cho et al. (2007) and de Laat et al. (2007). The coding
schema of the dialogic space enables us to identify critical moments of the discussion whereas a critical moment
is identified as a point where the discussion is either widening with open questions and disagreements, or
deepening with cumulative perspectives on the same problem. Beyond the analysis of critical thinking focusing
on claims, counterclaims and reasons, it labels each new perspective or point of view on a problem and focuses
on the dimension of dialogic engagement, which includes not only addressivity and expressions of empathy but
also expressions of doubt, changes of mind, ventriloquation (the presence of another voice within an utterance)
and elicitation of the views of others. Students' style of participation was also followed by tracing individual
dialogic utterances, its cumulative contributions to other utterances and its relevance to the learning outcomes of
the group. The SNA measures used (e.g., betweenness and closeness that entail the geodesic distance of each
actor in the net to all the others actors) give us an idea of the nature of interaction and relations within the group.

Findings
The e-discussion took about 50 minutes and included a total of 46 contributions. In the first 10 minutes, each of
the  six students participating in   the discussion made   discussion   contributions that   they    classified as
"suggestions" (e.g., "the car should stop: if we use the equation of t=d*v it gives us more than the 3 seconds
that we have for the traffic light to change from yellow to red"), and later proceeded to connect their shapes to
each other  using only supporting  (green)  and neutral (black) connectors   (connectors  were      also added  by
Mquinteroc, their teacher moderator, who did not otherwise participate in the discussion). As the discussion
continued, three different threads of meaningful dialogic engagement developed (Fig. 1 below).

                                           1
                                                        2

                                                                        3

      Figure 1: Discussion threads in the e-discussion map: the blue connected shapes pertain to a thread
The first thread (involving students Fmora, UCHernandez and Agalvan) discussed the calculation of speed and

© ISLS                                                                                                       134
CSCL 2013 Proceedings               Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

distance, with a widening aspect from UChernandez in contribution #14 adding the aspect of acceleration and
deceleration to the mix. This is a point of widening, yet it receives no further elaboration. The second thread
(UCgrozog, Jbuitragoc2  and  Fmora)  is a      deepening thread discussing   speed, distance and issues related     to
mathematical representation of the problem. In the third thread (Fortizb, Agalvan, UChernandez, Fmora and
Agalvan), also a widening thread, the participants discuss how to represent the problem and additional elements
are added and discussed (e.g., the width of the junction). Table 1 below presents the two widening threads.
Table 1: Discussion threads #1 and #3 ­ the widening threads
   Participant     Contrib.#  Contr. type                                     Content
   Discussion thread #1                        t=d/v =80m/23m/s=3.47 s. if we had 3 seconds it is breaking the
                             Suggestion        rules [i.e., we would have to travel faster than permitted] but if we
 Fmora                6                        had 4 seconds the car could pass without any problem
 UChernandez         14      Suggestion        it is possible but we also have to evaluate the acceleration and thedeceleration of the car
 Agalvan             18      Suggestion        We can start from here but we have to evaluate the other variables
 Fmora               23      Formula           82.8 km/h*1000m*(1h/3600 s) =23 m/s
 UChernanadez        33      Suggestion        the time=distance / velocity
 Fmora               38      Formula           he has to stop, if we look at the equation t=v*d this will allow us 3seconds for the yellow light to turn so he will not be able to cross
 Discussion thread #3                          Vo=83 km/h and Vf=83 km/h (the speed) is constant: 83 km/h all
                             Suggestion        the time. The distance is x=65 m (if he decides to brake) and x=80
 Fortizb             12                        m if he decides to go on.
 Agalvan             19      Explanation       My   friend, I think that  we cannot  add up  the distance until thejunction (65 m) with its width (15 m), because they are two lengths.
                                               But the sum of the two lengths is the total distance that the car has
 Uclhernandez        13      Suggestion        to go before the lights change. We have to take into account the
                                               units' conversion, so that we can speak the same language.
 Fmora               22      Explanation       We have to take into account the conversion of km/h to m/s
                                               This sum   would   not  be the total distance because the  width     is
 Agalvan             24      Suggestion        immaterial for the vehicle. What is important for us is the distance
                                               that the vehicle must go.

The SN analysis of the group discussions is represented in Fig. 2 and Table 2 below. Figure 2 demostrates the
interrelations between  the  group members        based  on   the connections   made   between   the participants'
contributions in the Digalo map. The bold lines represent strong connections between the participants. Here we
can see the centrality of Fmora, UCgrozo and UChernandez. In Table 2 we present numerical data related to the
participants' rates of participation in the network with respect to the number of contributions that each of them
made, and the rate of "farness" and "closeness" of each actor to the central actor in the network. These measures
also quantify the importance of an actor within a network, referring to the frequency with which a node appears
on the geodesic (shortest path) that connects a pair of nodes. An actor who is in the geodesic path connecting
two nodes of the network has an intermediary position within the group, a person through which everybody
connects to the other participants in the net.

                              Figure 2. The social network diagram of the group
By looking at Table 2 we can identify the centrality of Agalvan in this network, with closeness of 100 and
betweenness of 2.58, much more than the other participants. It is also worth noting that despite the low rate of
betweenness (0.25) of UChernandez, he holds a central position in the network, as can be seen in Fig. 2. This
phenomenon is interesting in light of these participants' dialogic engagement in the Digalo discussion (see
Table 1). UChernandez's had an important contribution (#14) for widening the discussion in thread 1, which

© ISLS                                                                                                       135
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

apparently did not receive much attention or reactions from his fellows. It is possible that the other participants
did not take him seriously because of his low betweenness position in the SN. Based on pure SNA measures,
Agalvan does hold a central position, but his involvement in the dialogic space entailed mainly organizational or
moderator-like moves ("We can start from here but I see that we have to evaluate the other variables" [cont.
#18 thread 1]), which in some cases contained only poor advice to solve the problem posed (as in contribution
#19, in thread 3, where he tells the group that "the width of the junction and the distance that the car has to go
have two distinct units of measure" (?)).
Table 2. Measures of social network analysis
       Participant        No.  of connections         Farness            Closeness             Betweenness
Fmora                             10                    8                    75                   0.67
Agalvan                            9                    6                   100                   2.58
Mquinteroc (teacher)               9                    7                   85.7                  0.92
Ucgrozo                            9                    7                   85.7                  0.92
Fortizb                            6                    8                    75                   0.67
UChernandez                        6                    9                   66.7                  0.25
Jbuitragoc2                        3                    9                   66.7                     0

Discussion
The findings in our research point toward some possible advantages embedded in the comparison between, or
combination of the analysis of the dialogic space and SNA. One possible direction is the joint consideration of
SN connectivity measures, on the one hand, and the participants' contribution to the discussion and to solving
the problem, on the other hand. As for the former, it is possible that somebody like UCHernandez is found to be
central in SNA, but quite unnoticed or ignored (even if his some of his contributions were valuable) in the
dialogic space, in which most of his links (connectors) with the other participants were created by him and not
by them. Participation may not be enough, indeed, even if it brings valuable content to the discussion, as long as
the group does not take up the contributions seriously and assimilates them in deepening and widening threads.
These elements, as they find expression both in the discussion and the associated SN, may be the result of the
previous (pre-discussion) character of the group and the social interrelation of its members (Cho et al., 2007).
Another phenomenon is that of Agalvan. He is not the teacher (which is Mquinteroc), but he adopted a teacher
or mediator-like role. He is seen as central from an SNA viewpoint, with the highest betweenness measure.
When observed in the dialogic space, he shows involvement in the major strands of the discussion, especially as
one that gives advice and makes comments on how to advance. He does so, however, as a mediator between
other participants, providing only few elements or ideas likely to contribute to the solution of the problem.
Similar phenomena have been observed in SNA of (asynchronous) forums (De Laat et al., 2007). Our approach
may lead to an improvement in the way interventions take place in e-discussions.

References
Cho, H., Gay, G., Davidson, B., & Ingraffea, A.(2007). Social networks, communication styles, and learning
        performance in a CSCL community Computers & Education, 49 (2), 309­329
Cobb, P. & Bowers, J. (1999). Cognitive an d situated learning perspectives in theory and practice . Education al
        Researcher. 28, 4- 15.
Collins, A., Brown. 1.S. , & Newman . S.E. ( 1989) . Cognitive apprenticeship: Teaching the crafts of reading,
        writing and mathematics. In L.B. Resnick (Ed.), Knowing, Learning and Instruction: Essays in the
        honor of Robert Glaser(453 -494). Hillsdale. N.: Lawrence Erlba um Associates.
De Laat, M., Lally, V., Lipponen, L. & Simons, R. J. (2007). Investigating patterns of interaction in networked
        learning   and  computer-supported    collaborative learning:  a role    for  social  network   analysis.
        International Journal of Computer Supported Collaborative Learning, 2, 1, 87­103.
Dillenbourg, P., Schneider,D., Synteta,V., (2002) "Virtual Learning Environments", Proceedings of the 3rd
        Congress on ICT in education, Rhodes, Kastaniotis Editions, Greece, 3-18.
Mcloughlin, C., & Luca, J., (2002) A learner-centered approach to developing team skills through Web-based
        learning and assessment British Journal of Educational Technology 33 (5) 571-582
Wegerif, R., de-Laat,M., Chamrada,M., Mansour, N., & Williams, M. (2008) Exploring creative thinking in
        online graphically mediated  synchronous     dialogues A  paper  presented   at the  British Educational
        Research Association (BERA) annual conference at Heriot Watt University, Edinburgh
Wegerif ,R,. McLaren,   M, B.,  Chamrada,    M.,  Scheuer, O., Mansour,  N. &    Miksátko,   J.,(2010) Exploring
        creative thinking in graphically    mediated synchronous  dialogues Journal     Computers &    Education
        archive Volume 54 Issue 3, P.     613-621

© ISLS                                                                                                      136
