CSCL 2013 Proceedings                    Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

  Scaffolding a technical community of students through social
               gaming: lessons from a serious game evaluation
 Rzvan Rughini, University POLITEHNICA of Bucharest, Bucharest, Romania, razvan.rughinis@cs.pub.ro

        Abstract: In this paper we present and evaluate the serious game World of Operating Systems
        (WoUSO), designed to scaffold an emerging technical community of students. WoUSO is a
        voluntary, semester-long browser game that embeds quizzes and riddles in multiple forms of
        player    interaction. Game     evaluation indicates   that WoUSO    creates  shared experiences    in
        which     classroom    learning and  technical  skills become    resources  for fun  and sociability.
        Competition and player interaction are two main motivational engines of the game; they need
        to be judiciously calibrated in order to reduce incentives for rule bending, to accommodate
        multiple   styles  of   play,   and  to  diversify resources    for  self-presentation  and  positive
        reputations.

Introduction
There is a rich thread of experimentation with games as motivation resource in computer science education. We
have found several useful instances relying on individual play to foster concept learning (Hill et al, 2003; Eagle
& Barnes, 2008; Maragos & Grigoriadou, 2007). Another relevant body of research examines educational social
gaming as an occasion for engaging and meaningful interactions, which cultivate communities of practice and
support different forms of distributed learning (Hicks, 2010; Whitson & Dormann, 2011; Trausan-Matu, S.,
Posea, V.,  Rebedea,   T., &   Chiru,   C., 2009).  Game   play  supports   intrinsic motivation to  engage    with  the
curriculum ­ although it is often the case that students are required to play the games as part of coursework, and
students' performance in the game is consequential for their grade ­ making the game extrinsically motivated, at
least to some extent.
        We tackle the motivation problem from a slightly different angle. Instead of making game play a
means for the purpose of getting course credits, we make course learning a means for the purpose of play. We
thus propose to put to use an introductory university course in Linux as a resource for free, fun, intrinsically-
motivating and socially meaningful actions that rely on technical knowledge, constitute communities and create
positive school-related self-images and reputations.
        Since 2007 we have developed the World of Operating Systems (WoUSO) game (Deaconescu et al,
2011), associated  with an     introductory BS   course in Linux    for Computer   Science  students   in an European
University, in a team including faculty members, students (mostly former players) and alumni, organized on
three directions: 1) Content generation, 2) Framework development, and 3) Evaluation & Motivation - which we
have coordinated. We present here our recent work of evaluating the 5th edition of the game, implemented in
the fall of 2011.

Game presentation
WoUSO    is a browser   game    in which    students compete    individually and   collectively by  answering   sets of
questions about Linux, general CS concepts, computer science history and culture, as well as more whimsical or
`geek-ish' computer-related tests. The game is an open source project, and students may log in its development
interface to report bugs and suggest features. In each edition the game also enrolls out-of-competition senior
players, mainly faculty members and students in the 2nd and 3rd years. Players can use computers or other
mobile devices at any place or time to access the game, which means that they are in complete control of their
company, technology, and any other contextual elements of play.
        The game taps several motivational sources to captivate players: competition, immediate feed-back,
scaffolding, humor, curiosity, social interaction and self-assessment (Maragos & Grigoriadou, 2007; Whitson &
Dormann,   2011;   Malone,  1981).    The   5th edition also   had  an  elaborate story for `extrinsic fantasy'  allure
(Malone, 1981) and a new visual interface (see Figure 1).

© ISLS                                                                                                              141
CSCL 2013 Proceedings               Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

Figure 1. Visual interface of WoUSO                       Figure 2. Distribution of total game points by source
                                                              activity, for the 88 systematic WoUSO players

       The main game components require different combinations of knowledge, timing and sociability for
play. They are the Question of the Day, weekly quests, the final quest, challenges (duels) and special quests.
       1) The Question of the Day (QotD) is a daily, individual, quiz-type question based on the course
curriculum: "How many parameters may a bash script have?" [a) Unlimited b) None c) 1000 d) Only one].
       2)  Weekly Quests   are  series of weekly  computer   science-related    riddles. There are  no  predefined
strategies: players explore and test a wide range of interpretations and approaches, and they can also ask for
hints on the game forum. Players usually have an answer time of 24 hours to complete the quest ­ a period in
which  team  members   attend   to  students'  requests  for  clues.     For  example,   one  quest  riddle  was:
"baabbeb0b6b1dfacb7adbbb3aaf2f5" with the answer "ETAOIN SHRDLU" (the ASCII message was translated
to binary representation, negated, then formulated in hexa representation). The Final Quest is similar in style
but more complex, and it requires Linux configuration skills. The weekly and final quests are supposed to be
played individually; in practice, though, students often solve them collectively, especially those living in dorms.
Players also clandestinely communicate their solutions to friends and colleagues, contributing to the game's
social economy of exchange and generosity (Whitson & Dormann, 2011).
       4) A player may challenge another one to a duel. Each participant may activate the duel within the next
24 hours; upon activation, s/he receives  a  set of 5 quiz-type     multiple-answer questions,  from   the  course
curriculum, with 5 minutes answer time. One example of challenge questions is: "With what key combination
can one enter the "Insert" mode in VI?" [a) a b) i c) eof d) q e) ESC f) ENTER]. The player with the higher
score wins the challenge. In this edition a student could only initiate one duel per day ­ but s/he could accept an
unlimited number of invitations from others.
       Because duels could generate large amount of points, even up to 150 points, they have been the main
battleground for those aspiring to win the game; duel scores differentiated the top players (see Figure 2). The
most arduous players have also found solutions to push duels to the limits of game rules or beyond, by making
alliances or by asking colleagues who were not playing to donate them their accounts, which they could then use
to run fake duels. Such forms of rule bending have been, every year, a topic of controversy and also a reason of
disenchantment for some players. Each edition has implemented solutions to combat point harvesting; in 2011
duels were scored in direct proportion to the ratio of loser / winner total points, thus discouraging the use of
passive accounts and encouraging duels among players of similar rank.
       6)  The Special Quest    has been  introduced  in 2011       to bring some off-line  materiality to  player
interaction. It comprises `adventures' such as borrowing a book from the University library, making a group
photo with the coordinator of the development team, singing a song with a course professor, or getting 4
autographs from teaching assistants. Special quests are published weekly and are solved by teams of maximum
4 players, constituted by players at the beginning of the semester.
       The student with the highest final score is the game winner, and the top 10 players receive special
awards in a ceremony at the end of the semester. Also, there are prizes for the student series and group with the
highest cumulated score. Interestingly, the winning series in 2011 did not include most of the top 10 players,
winning through many lower-profile contributions.

Evaluation results and discussion
In the spring of 2012 we conducted the first systematic evaluation of WoUSO gameplay experiences, relying on
       a) Our observation of gameplay, in 2011 and in previous editions;

© ISLS                                                                                                         142
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                    Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

         b) A brief anonymous evaluation survey conducted after the game was completed;
         c) Interviews with 20 student players and 4 team members.

Scale
Although we did not expect all students to play the game, given that participation is voluntary and completely
unrelated to course assessment, we aimed to mobilize as many players as possible, in order to make the game an
effective resource for casual campus talk and relationships. In search of a point threshold for measuring and
comparing meaningful participation, we have decided to count players that have total scores equal or larger to a
conventional level of 25% of the average of the first 10 players. This leads to an estimate of 88 systematic
players in 2011, an increase in comparison to the 33 systematic players in 2010.

WoUSO as an experience of learning for fun
There are 175 students who have volunteered some open comments and / or suggestions concerning WoUSO in
our anonymous evaluation survey, and 51 of these comments explicitly point to the usefulness of game play for
learning, including learning the OS course content, more notions of Linux, and other knowledge of computer
science and  CS culture.   There are only 8  comments  that characterize the game    as `boring', `useless' or `a waste
of time' ­ although, of course, it is plausible that this opinion is also shared by some students who did not write
their evaluation. Another 4 students argue that questions were too difficult and thus unfit for `simple beginners'.
Therefore, as a rule, those who do express an opinion of the game see it in close connection to course learning;
the game is said to `stimulate the desire to learn', `help students' development in the OS field', `provoke users
to learn more about OS', `go through the entire course content' etc.
         Besides  positive     evaluations, we  have  also  expected,   hoped for   and  received several  enthusiastic
comments about the game. Some students in the anonymous survey describe the game as "Addictive, useful, a
good   way  of learning    the course content";  "It was   cool  and it creates   a type of addiction; "A  good  idea,
interactive, a good place for making friends, creates addiction". Two other anonymous users write that WoUSO
is "a captivating game which is mind blowing", "EPIC! It really is: this is all I did the entire semester and it was
great: I learned a lot of new things, I made a lot of friends, it helped for my exam", and that "WoUSO was at
first a shocking experiment because I didn't believe there can be so much interest from professors/TAs in the
Romanian    university system.    WoUSO      demonstrates  the  passion  of the   aforementioned   and they   make the
faculty very   attractive, in  spite of its high  difficulty level." We  have   also  found  such  experiences  in the
interviews. One respondent [P3] describes the game as addictive ­ especially because of the challenges: "[P3]
Really, you do become addicted to this thing, I mean... I know that in the last days I had a challenge, I played it,
and then I looked for others that could duel with me, `come on, isn't it that you can challenge me?'".

Game Reputations and Social Classification
Two  WoUSO      components     contributed   to the emergence    of  reputations: the forum,  and  the player  ranking
display. On the one hand, students posted on the dedicated game forum the results of their Special Quests ­ thus
displaying  their creativity,   humor,   and  also  skills to  negotiate rule-bending,    addressing   topics such as:
scheduling quests, fixing bugs, or unfair play. The main WoUSO reputation creation mechanism was the player
ranking: the top 10 players were visible at any time on the front page of the game, while all players were ranked
on a separate page, one click away.
         What was the social meaning of this ranking in the student community? We can answer this question
by looking at the `types of people' that students refer to. We notice two main interpretations of the hierarchy:
some recognize it as a ranking of effort and merit, while others challenge it as rewarding unfair play. For
example, students who wrote anonymous comments occasionally refer to various `types of people' such as
"those at the top", or "the interested ones". These expressions offer us clues for understanding game-related
social classification and reputation. One comment, which is also echoed in interviews, says: "Although I didn't
play I initially found the idea interesting, however my limited knowledge and the gap between myself and those
at the  top made   me  quit".   A former    player  presents his game    trajectory  by  saying that "[P2] Absolutely
interesting but... at some point you lose... if in the first week you don't play it full speed, you lose a lot in the
ranking and, if you are already on the 150th place, you don't feel like playing at all. But there, in top 10, they
play all around, those were playing all the time, they had all sorts of discussions." "Those at the top" are thus a
distinctive social category ­ loosely contrasted with those who lag, or drop lower in the ranking: "An interesting
game, but not for those who don't keep it up", writes another anonymous student. "Those at the top" are often
seen as the "best ones" [P2], or the "interested" students ­ contrasted to those who "don't even have Linux
installed". This positive reputation of the top players is even more visible in the evaluations of the faculty and
game developers; systematic WoUSO players are seen to be "[T2] people who are more competitive (...), those
more involved in the things that they do in the University", and to constitute the alternative meritocracy for the
OS course: "[T4] You don't get grades, but you win a score, you win a score to get to the top. Being in the top
you are one of the 10 winners, the grade it's not the only [thing that counts, A./N.]... for the OS course."

© ISLS                                                                                                             143
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                 Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

        Still, the overly competitive practices of the top players, who put in long hours of play and search for
rule-bending opportunities that allow them a competitive advantage, make other students disappointed with
game play, instantiating the "hard-core" versus "casual" player dynamics and discourse from MMORPGs. One
anonymous comment says: "In the beginning I thought it's a very good idea and I still claim this, but I lost my
interest because of the way it differentiates between players who know the course content and those who know
how to get by".  Another comment proposes that "A different scoring system should be implemented which
wouldn't strongly benefit those who play obsessively".

Conclusions
The WoUSO game scaffolds a technical community of students by engaging them into a semester-long series of
technical and whimsical tests and novel social interactions. Unlike other educational games, WoUSO play is
voluntary and unrelated to formal student assessment, although it is closely linked with the course content. The
game   has attracted a systematic   player community   of around   88 players  out of 347   registered   students.
Anonymous     evaluations from 175   students have indicated  that the game   is widely   considered useful  for
learning, fun, and a way of making new friends in the University; some of the most engaged players have even
described it as `addictive' and an out-of-the-ordinary academic experience.
        One of the main motivational engines of the game is individual competition between players, locally
(in duels) and globally (in the final ranking). The challenge for game designers is to carefully arbitrate it and
balance it with collaborative activities. Various forms of `cheating the system' are part and parcel of gaming for
some, but disenchanting for others. In this edition, duels have been the center of rule bending but also, it seems,
the most appreciated component of the game for the most engaged players. Future game development should
improve duel scoring to lower incentives for fake duels, and it should foster player collaboration, for example
by allowing team duels.
        Because the main reputation-creation arena of the game was players' overall ranking, particularly the
Top 10 list, self-presentation benefits were considerably larger for top players than for the more casual, lower
profile players. Future improvements should include a wider array of formulating and making visible players'
performances, on more dimensions (rapidity, perseverance, inventiveness, width of social network etc. ­ besides
their total score), at a lower level of aggregation (per week, per game component, and per player team).

References
Deaconescu, R. et al. (2011). World of USO. ROSEdu. Available from https://wouso.rosedu.org (03 May 2012).
Eagle, M. & Barnes, T. (2008). Wu's castle: teaching arrays and loops in a game. Proceedings of ITiCSE 2008
        (Madrid, Spain, June 30 ­ July 2, 2008) (pp. 245­249). New York, NY: ACM.
Hicks, A.  (2010). Towards   social gaming   methods for  improving   game-based   computer  science education.
        Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on the Foundations of Digital Games (Monterey, CA,
        USA, June 19-21 2010) (pp. 259­261). New York, NY: ACM.
Hill, J.M.D. et al. (2003). Puzzles and games: addressing different learning styles in teaching operating systems
        concepts.  Proceedings  of  SIGCSE'03   (Reno,  Nevada,  USA,  February    19-23, 2003) (pp.   182­186).
        New York, NY: ACM.
Malone, T.W. (1981). Toward a theory of intrinsically motivating instruction. Cognitive Science, 5, 4, 333­369.
Maragos,   K. & Grigoriadou,   M.  (2007). Designing   an Educational  Online  Multiplayer Game   for    Learning
        Programming. Proceedings of the Informatics Education Europe II Conference (Thessaloniki, Greece,
        Nov. 29-30, 2007) (pp. 322­331).
Trausan-Matu, S., Posea, V., Rebedea, T., & Chiru, C. (2009). Using the Social Web to Supplement Classical
        Learning. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 5686, 386­389.
Whitson, J.R. & Dormann, C. (2011). Social gaming for change: Facebook unleashed. First Monday, 16, 10.

Ackowledgments
This research has been supported by the EXCEL POSDRU/89/1.5/S/62557 grant.

© ISLS                                                                                                      144
