CSCL 2013 Proceedings                    Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

                 Cooperative Inquiry as a Community of Practice
                           Stephanie Ryan1, Jason Yip2, Mike Stieff1, & Allison Druin2
                    1University of Illinois at Chicago, 1240 W Harrison St, Chicago IL 60607
                 2University of Maryland, 2117 Hornbake South Wing, College Park, MD 20742
               Email: scunni2@uic.edu, jasoncyip@umd.edu, mstieff@uic.edu, adruin@umd.edu

        Abstract: In this paper, we demonstrate how direct student involvement in the design of
        curricular  interventions  and   educational  technologies  not    only  produces    meaningful   and
        creative designs, but also allows students to question their own assumptions about learning
        and   to  develop  a  deeper  understanding     of content. We     adhered   to the   perspective    of
        Cooperative Inquiry; that is, students were treated as partners in the design process. Using
        interview methods, we describe the perceived experiences of four student partners regarding
        their participation in developing a guided inquiry technology-based curriculum. We outline
        three   major  themes   (learning  outcomes,    community   and    philanthropic   outlet)   and  their
        implications for future design research.

Introduction to Cooperative Inquiry
The enactment and development of pre-designed curricula is not a simple task. In traditional models of design,
people in power develop materials and expect teachers to operationalize prescribed plans (Barnett & Hodson,
2001). However, these developments routinely fail to generate impact because they do not take into account the
complex interactions and culture of the classroom (e.g., Squire, MaKinster, Barnett, Luehmann, & Barab, 2003).
As a result, researchers are partnering with teachers in collaborative work-circles to develop learning activities
that accompany    educational  technologies   (e.g., Penuel,   Fishman,    Haugan    Cheng,  &   Sabelli, 2011).    Such
partnerships  allow  for a common     understanding   of   the goals,  core   ideas, and   learning  principles     of the
curriculum and can help address concerns and tensions within implementations. While collaborations between
teachers and researchers are a step in the right direction, we argue that students have often been overlooked as
participants in the design of new technologies for learning (e.g., Cook-Sather, 2002). More often than we wish,
adults tend to underestimate the insights and perspectives of students, particularly when it comes to making
decisions about student learning (Könings et al., 2010). Many design projects continue to involve students only
as testers, despite growing evidence that they can act as design partners at all stages of development (e.g., Bland
& Atweh, 2007).
        Participatory Design (PD) provides a mechanism to attend to student perceptions and desires during the
design process. Generally, PD is used to include any design activity with an end-user; such roles include user,
tester, informant, and design partner (Druin, 2002). The most involved method of PD is the philosophy of
Cooperative Inquiry (CI). In CI, the user becomes fully integrated in the design process in the early stages of
development. CI recasts users as representatives in work circle development teams who actively participate in
setting design goals, planning prototypes, and making decisions that ensure the final design meets the needs of
future users. Design   partners use  their  experiences  to  assess the    current design    and give   opinions    on  its
shortcomings.   Researchers  suggest  that if students  are given   the chance   to  be directly  involved    in making
decisions on their learning and the learning of others, they might be more inclined to learn more from both an
academic and a democratic standpoint (e.g., Bland & Atweh, 2007; Cook-Sather, 2002). In the present study, we
examine the ways in which student designers benefit directly from participating on a large-scale technology-
infused chemistry   curriculum  development    project. Our  analysis   demonstrates    that the use  of  CI  can   foster
increasingly positive attitudes towards learning, develop a sense of community, and fulfill philanthropic ideals.

Methods and Analysis
We   asked students  to  participate in  curriculum  development    by  having   them   provide  feedback    on  written
materials and ideas for the design of new simulations for teaching high school chemistry. The curriculum, The
Connected   Chemistry    Curriculum,  utilizes simulations   modeled    in  a user-controlled    microworld      to teach
chemistry at the submicroscopic level (Stieff, 2011). The simulations are paired with a structured workbook to
introduce vocabulary and concepts through guided inquiry. In the beginning stages of the design process, we
asked  students  to make   important  user interface  design   choices  for the  simulations.    In the later stages    of
development, students provided suggestions for presentation of that content. The participants in this exploratory
study  were  four freshman   female   students who    had  completed    one high   school    science course   and   were
currently enrolled  in preparatory   college  chemistry. Preparatory    chemistry   provides  remedial    instruction   to
students seeking to enroll in general chemistry. Kim loved science and eagerly participated in the project. Sarah
was excited to participate and contributed readily, but worried that her content knowledge was lacking. Amanda
was  a  self-professed   `non-scientist' who   expressed   disinterest  in  the activities   and  completed     activities

© ISLS                                                                                                                 145
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                  Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

perfunctorily. Beth was a pre-medicine major who enjoyed developing materials to help students transfer ideas
between units.
        We     obtained  student feedback  regarding     the workbooks    and  simulations  through    six three-hour
interviews with a single design researcher over the course of an academic year. We chose to use a one-on-one
interview process to protect the anonymity of the participants and to allow students to be candid with their
responses  outside the  larger team.  In each   session, students  reviewed drafts   of written materials  and   alpha
versions of software. We asked them to complete each draft activity and provide critiques and ideas for future
materials. Student design partner ideas regarding workbook format and software user interface were compiled
and communicated to the entire team as recommendations for revisions. Team members revised the materials
and created new drafts using these recommendations. The format of each interview was loosely structured to
accommodate the student design partners: some interviews began with an explicit probe of their opinions about
various components    of  the curriculum  and   some interviews    began  with students  working   directly with  the
materials with no prompting. At the end of the academic year, each student participated in a 1.5-hour exit
interview.  The  exit interview  was  semi-structured    to  allow each  participant to  comment    on her   personal
experience as a student design partner. The exit interviews were used for the present analysis. All exit interviews
were videotaped for later analysis. Each video was analyzed using a constant comparative method (Strauss &
Corbin, 1994). We analyzed the videos using an initial open coding scheme that yielded the following codes:
Positive Attitude Toward Science, Learned Something, Part of the Team, Test Subject, Don't Deserve Credit,
Used Later, We Listen, Helping Others, Paid, Tutoring, Appreciation for Process, Appreciation for Teachers,
and Conflict/Tensions. Three themes emerged from axial coding. The Learning Outcomes theme captured
changes in the participants' chemistry content learning that included changes in content knowledge, attitude
toward  science  learning,  and  epistemology    regarding   science learning. The   Community      theme    captured
changes in the participants' identity as designers and their sense of belonging to a community of practice.
Finally, the Philanthropic Outlet theme captured the participants' feelings of satisfaction that their ideas and
efforts were contributing to a larger project that potentially might help other students in the world.

Three Themes in Cooperative Inquiry Participation
The first theme reflects the learning outcomes (Theme 1) of the students. The students each noted that they
gained skills or knowledge by participating in the design of the curriculum. First, the students expressed that
they were motivated to participate because they saw the design interviews as a tutoring experience and that
reviewing curriculum materials improved their understanding of chemistry. Specifically, each student noted that
working with computer simulations provided a deeper appreciation for molecular phenomena. Sarah and Kim
indicated that they referenced the simulations outside of the design interviews and applied them to coursework
to visualize concepts. Second, the students reported gaining communication and professional skills such as
offering constructive criticism and use of vocabulary. Third, all four students expressed newfound appreciations
for learning science. Importantly, this appreciation extended beyond content learning to include an appreciation
for how learning occurs as well as an appreciation for science teachers and text authors. Beth and Sarah voiced
changes in their own understandings of the learning process in science as an iterative process. Finally, working
as a student design partner in the construction of curriculum materials helped Sarah and Beth change their views
of science. Sarah left the project with additional content knowledge that led to the realization that scientific
knowledge was more accessible. Because she felt that the content was easier to interpret, she found science
more interesting; thus contributing to a more positive view of science for her. Throughout the design process,
Beth found that the content was more applicable than she had previously thought and the content knowledge she
learned has applications to other careers outside the laboratory.
        The second theme reflected student beliefs about community (Theme 2). This includes their view of
their own role within the project, how they felt they had a voice that was heard, and whether they deserved
recognition for their participation. These themes indicate that the student design partners developed a sense of
belonging   to a project  team   and a   larger community    of practice  (Lave   &  Wenger,    1991)  populated  by
individuals with   a  commitment   to  educational  materials   development.   All   members    of the project   team
including teachers, researchers, and software developers have voiced commitments to creating new technologies
and curriculum   activities to improve   student  learning   in different ways.   As  the  student  design  partners'
participation  continued, they too   began to   express  such commitments     and a  sense of   ownership   that they
discussed in the exit interview. Student utterances in this category varied in perceived impact or influence on
materials development. These students viewed the design partnership as a positive experience in which they
could share their ideas in a way that could have impact. Kim even noted the partnership generated a sense of
responsibility that created feelings of stress because she was invested in the project to the extent she worried
about the consequences of her design recommendations. Rather than thinking of herself as a simple user or
informant, Kim expressed feelings common among all members of the design work circle and acknowledged
ownership of her ideas and input. Although the student design partners acknowledged that other team members
heard their input and valued their opinions, they also expressed doubts about whether they deserved any credit

© ISLS                                                                                                           146
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                    Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

for their participation. Language from the participants indicated that at times they felt like designers and at other
times like a `test subject.' For example, Beth felt as though any student could fill her role, but noted her
individual  impact   when  she  recognized    a curriculum    modification     based  on   h er recommendation.    Amanda
suggested that she would have felt more involved had she been provided with the edited materials regularly so
that she could see her impact on development. Amanda and Sarah recommended that they would feel more part
of the community of practice by attending regular work circle meetings. However, Beth and Kim preferred the
anonymity   of  the  one-on-one   interview   setting.  Despite    the   one-on-one   interview   setting, the students   all
expressed sentiments that they did feel as though they were part of the community with some students feeling
more open and comfortable than others with the individual interviews.
         The final theme of philanthropy (Theme 3) captured all four students' expressions that the interview
functioned as an outlet in which their contributions would help future students learn chemistry. When students
are asked for their opinions on how to better their schools, often times they will want to engage in pro-social
behaviors that benefit others in their communities and will gain a sense of empowerment as a result (Thomson,
2009). We found that when we asked our student design partners for their opinions on the curriculum, they
wanted   to help  others. Kim    noted her input    "could    help   the younger   generations."    Even   Amanda,  a   self-
professed `non-scientist,' stated, "I helped people...the thought of knowing that I helped other people I feel
good about it." Kim and Sarah spoke to the fact that they were uniquely qualified as students themselves to help
others in this role. The students felt as though they were making a contribution and the interview was an activity
that helped serve their own personal desires of philanthropy.

Discussion & Concluding Remarks
Our analysis of the student reflections about participation in a CI design project suggests that CI design not only
improves the quality of designed materials and educational technologies, but that the process can engender
important changes in the students themselves. While we as researchers gained benefits from their insightful
views, we saw that the students gained positive aspects from our partnership. First, as seen in Theme 1, CI can
give  student   designer  partners more    opportunities     to  take    responsibility for   their learning.  During   this
collaboration, what becomes important is the creation of an atmosphere in which students are aware they can
negotiate   through  dialogue,   exercise  responsibility,    and    achieve  goals   that   have   personal  meaning   and
motivation for them (Whitehead & Clough, 2004). CI design of learning activities can help student designers to
take  responsibility for  their learning  outside   of the  project.   Here,  each  of  the  student   designers  noted that
through participation they not only learned more, but they became more invested in their own science learning;
for some participants this included an increased interest in pursuing a science career.
         Equally important, the co-designers also gained a sense of belonging through their participation (Theme
2) and personal satisfaction from doing work that might help other students learn science (Theme 3). This sense
of belonging to a larger community of designers was not uniform across the students. Each student expressed
surprise that her ideas were seriously considered and that they had a direct impact on materials development.
Their collective position on participation suggested that they came to the project with prior beliefs that their
contributions had no merit or that their contributions would be dismissed or minimized by other project team
members. In fact, some students expressed this belief until confronted directly with evidence that she had made
an important contribution that was carried forward throughout the design process. We believe that regardless of
the student's career aspirations, developing a sense of belonging in this way is an important benefit that may last
outside the project.
         Despite the perceived benefits to design, adult designers and students, working with student design
partners can produce tensions we must recognize and balance. Grundy (1998) argues that collaboration between
researchers and teachers is already difficult and complex enough. If teachers and research designers have these
dilemmas, arguably working with students is even more complicated. The capacity to have students make design
decisions   in an equal   democratic  fashion   like   adults can    be  a challenge.   Often,  researchers,  teachers, and
students come into projects with different agendas (Atweh, 2003), and university sponsors are under ethical and
legal obligations   and  constraints to  protect  students    (e.g., Bland    & Atweh,     2007).   In our  case, while   we
protected Amanda's identity, she would have preferred to be credited for her work on the materials in a public
fashion.
         Similarly,  students'  perspectives    can  easily  be  twisted   to conform    to  existing  school  traditions or
adults' preferences (Mannion, 2007). To prevent us from imparting our biases over the students, we took great
care  to inquire  about  their  perspectives.   We   strived  to avoid     a scenario   that allowed   only  for  superficial
involvement of students (e.g., Bland & Atweh, 2007) by visibly taking notes as a student spoke and asking for
clarifications. From these notes, we made changes to the curriculum and the workbooks. If researchers work
with student partners in design, we recommend that designers document and credit what changes were made
through students' suggestions. Although students gave many suggestions, we could not implement every idea.
         We believe it is critical to describe and make clear the role of student participants. In doing so, this will
help students understand that when their ideas are not used it is not meant to belittle their contributions. In

© ISLS                                                                                                                  147
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                      Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

conclusion, as others have advocated (e.g., Druin, 2002) we have seen that such collaborations not only enrich
the products of our design efforts, they have enriching and potentially lasting impacts on the student design
partners themselves. We saw that students utilized the design interviews as a philanthropic outlet, realized a way
to gain content knowledge through participation, and developed a sense of community. Although researchers
suggest that communities of practice are developed through face-to-face interactions with an entire group (e.g.,
Lave & Wenger, 1991), we found that our student design partners engaged in a design community utilizing one-
on-one interviews through maintaining a student empowering role in the project, creating a professional and
welcoming   atmosphere,     and making     clear  to students that  we   were  actively   listening and   integrating their
opinions and ideas into the curriculum.

References
Atweh,  B. (2003).    On   PAR  with     young   people: Learnings   from    the  SARUA    project.  Educational    Action
        Research, 11(1), 23­40.
Barnett, J., & Hodson, D. (2001). Pedagogical context knowledge: Toward a fuller understanding of what good
        science teachers know. Science Education, 85(4), 426­453.
Bland, D., & Atweh, B. (2007). Students as researchers: Engaging students' voices in PAR. Educational Action
        Research, 15(3), 337­349.
Cook-Sather, A. (2002). Authorizing students' perspectives: Toward trust, dialogue, and change in education.
        Educational Researcher, 31(4), 3­14.
Druin, A. (2002). The role of children in the design of new technology. Behaviour and Information Technology,
        21(1), 1­25.
Grundy, S. (1998). Research partnerships: Principles and possibilities. In Bill Atweh, S. Kemmis, & P. Weeks
        (Eds.),   Action   research   in   practice: partnerships   for  social   justice in education    (pp.  37  ­  46).
        Psychology Press.
Könings,  K.    D.,  Brand-Gruwel,     S., &   Van   Merriënboer,    J. J. G.  (2010).    An approach     to participatory
        instructional design in secondary education: An exploratory study. Educational Research, 52(1), 45­
        59.
Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge, England:
        Cambridge University Press.
Mannion, G. (2007). Going spatial, going relational: Why "listening to children" and children's participation
        needs reframing. Discourse: Studies in the Cultural Politics of Education, 28(3), 405­420.
Penuel, W. R., Fishman, B. J., Haugan Cheng, B., & Sabelli, N. (2011). Organizing research and development at
        the intersection of learning, implementation, and design. Educational Researcher, 40(7), 331 ­337.
Squire, K. D., MaKinster, J. G., Barnett, M., Luehmann, A. L., & Barab, S. L. (2003). Designed curriculum and
        local culture: Acknowledging the primacy of classroom culture. Science Education, 87(4), 468­489.
Stieff, M. (2011). Improving representational competence using molecular simulations embedded in inquiry
        activities. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 48(10), 1137­1158.
Strauss, A., & Corbin, J. (1994). Grounded theory methodology. In N. Denzin & Y. Lincoln (Eds.), Handbook
        of qualitative research (pp. 273­285). Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE.
Thomson, P. (2009). Involving children and young people in educational change: Possibilities and challenges. In
        A. Hargreaves, A. Lieberman, M. Fullan, & D. Hopkins (Eds.), Second international handbook of
        educational change (Vol. 23, pp. 809­824). New York, NY, USA: Springer.
Whitehead,   J., &   Clough,  N.     (2004). Pupils, the forgotten   partners  in  education   action zones.    Journal of
        Education Policy, 19(2), 215­227.

Acknowledgments
The research reported   here  was    supported by the  Institute of Education  Sciences,  U.S. Department    of Education,
(R305A100828) and grants from the Maryland Higher Education Commission (ITQ-09-708, ITQ-10-814). The opinions
expressed are those of the authors and do not represent the views of these agencies. We are especially grateful to our student
design partners  for their insights  and recommendations.  We    would  also like to thank Mona     Leigh Guha  for helpful
discussions on participatory design.

© ISLS                                                                                                                148
