CSCL 2013 Proceedings                     Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

    Collaboratively generating and critiquing technology-enhanced
                   concept maps to improve evolution education
          Beat A. Schwendimann, University of California, Berkeley, Graduate School of Education,
                          Berkeley CA 94720, Email: beat.schwendimann@gmail.com

         Abstract: Students hold a rich repertoire of alternative ideas of evolution that are often quite
         resistant to change. One cause could be a disconnection between genotype and phenotype
         level ideas. Making these connections explicit might help students build a more coherent
         understanding   of evolution.    This study   investigates  how  a   novel form     of collaborative
         technology-enhanced concept map, called Knowledge Integration Map (KIM), can support
         students'  learning   from    an  inquiry-based,  technology-enhanced      evolution    curriculum.
         Findings  indicate    that KIM   activities can  facilitate the generation   of  cross-connections
         between   genotype    and  phenotype  ideas  and  support   students distinguishing    central ideas.
         Results suggest  that   students'  used   fewer non-normative   teleological ideas.    Furthermore,
         results suggest that critiquing KIMs might be a more time-efficient alternative to generating
         KIMs from scratch. Findings from this study are valuable for the design of efficient learning
         environments to support more integrated understanding of complex scientific ideas.

The  theory of  evolution   is a unifying   theory of modern    biology, and   notoriously   difficult  for students  to
understand (Alters & Nelson, 2002). Evolutionary theory is difficult to understand because it is, to some degree,
counterintuitive (Evans, 2008). Our intuitions are formed throughout our childhood. In an early stage, children
see the  world  filled with    intentions (Piaget, Gruber, &    Vonèche,  1977).    Children    apply  this teleological
understanding to biology, for example, to develop their own criteria to distinguish living from non-living things
by attributing to them "needs" (goal-directed behavior) (Carey, 1985). Southerland (2001) identified "need" as a
common alternative idea in people's reasoning about evolutionary change. This study explores the hypothesis
that the continued use of the alternative idea "need" to explain evolutionary change is caused by a disconnection
between phenotype and genotype level ideas. Students who build more connections between genotype and
phenotype level might identify "mutation" as a central idea of evolution and decrease the use of the alternative
idea "need". The distinction between phenotype and genotype level ideas is fundamental to the understanding of
heredity and development of organisms (Mayr, 1988). To make connections between genotype and phenotype
levels ideas explicit, this study implements a novel form of collaborative technology-enhanced concept map,
called  Knowledge   Integration     Map   (KIM).     Previous  studies (Schwendimann,        2008) suggested     that a
combination of generating and critiquing KIMs can effectively support integrating evolution ideas, but also that
the combination of activities can be time-consuming. As time in science classrooms is limited and valuable, this
study aims to identify and develop more time-efficient KIM activities by distinguishing the time requirements
and learning effects from either co-generating or co-critiquing KIMs. Both co-generation and co-critique of
KIMs is expected to facilitate learning gains but they might differ in their time requirements.
         This study aims to answer the research questions: Can the novel technology-enhanced collaborative
concept map form "Knowledge Integration Map" support students' knowledge integration of evolution ideas?
How can Knowledge Integration Maps track changes in students' integration of evolution ideas? Is critiquing or
generating Knowledge Integration Maps a more time-efficient method to support knowledge integration?

Theoretical Framework
This study used the Knowledge Integration (KI) framework (Linn, Davis, & Eylon, 2004) as its operational
framework.  Students   who  integrate  ideas across   different levels might  be  better  at distinguishing   important
evolution ideas from less important ones. For example, students with more integrated evolution ideas might use
the idea "mutation" more frequently in their explanations than students who have a disconnected understanding.
Knowledge Integration Maps are a novel form of concept maps that divide the drawing area into the evolution-
specific levels genotype    and  phenotype   (see  Figure  1).  Learners  receive a  list of    ideas  that need to   be
categorized, placed in the corresponding areas, and connected within and across levels. As each connection
between two ideas can consist of only one link, students need to negotiate which connection to make. This
constraint requires student dyads to negotiate and make decisions about which connection to revise or add,
which creates an authentic need for effective criteria and supporting evidence to distinguish among ideas in
students' repertoires (Berland & Reiser, 2009).

© ISLS                                                                                                            153
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                  Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

Methods

Curriculum design
KIM activities were embedded in a weeklong technology-enhanced inquiry-based evolution module, Gene Pool
Explorer, which used the web-based inquiry science environment (WISE) (Linn & Hsi, 2000). As electronic
concept mapping tools can facilitate construction and revision of concept maps better than paper-and-pencil
tasks (Royer    2004), the java-based  concept-mapping    tool  Cmap   (Canas,   2004) has been used   for  all KIM
activities.
          Curriculum sequence: After a teacher-led introduction and KIM training phase, students individually
took identical pretests and posttests delivered through the WISE environment (see Table 1). After completing
the section on genotype-level ideas, student dyads either generated or critiqued a genotype-level KIM. The
second section focused on phenotype level ideas. Student dyads then either generated or critiqued phenotype-
level KIMs.     KIMs for  both  groups (generation   and  critique)  consisted of the same set of ideas   and   had a
drawing area divided into the same evolution-specific areas genotype and phenotype to make connections
within and across levels visible. Treatments for both groups were kept the same except for the two embedded
KIM activities (see Table 1).

Table 1: KIM tasks

 KIM task        Training          Pretest              Embedded KIM       Embedded KIM 2:        Posttest
                 (individual       (individual)         1: Genotype level  Phenotype level        (individual)
                 and in dyads)                          (in dyads)         (in dyads)
 Generation      KIM               Genotype &           KIM generation     KIM generation         Genotype &
 group           generation        Phenotype KIM        map 1              map 2                  Phenotype
                 and critique      generation and                                                 KIM
                 activity          critique activity                                              generation and
                                                                                                  critique activity
 Critique        KIM               Genotype &           KIM critique       KIM critique           Genotype &
 group           generation        Phenotype KIM        map 1              map 2                  Phenotype
                 and critique      generation and                                                 KIM
                 activity          critique activity                                              generation and
                                                                                                  critique activity

          Student  dyads  in  the generation  group    created their own  connections  from a  given   list of  ideas.
Generating their own connections allows students to elicit their existing and missing connections and organize
ideas in context to each other.
          Student dyads in the critique group received identical KIMs (consisting of the same ideas as the KIM
generation group received) but with errors in connections and idea placements (based on common alternative
evolution ideas documented in the literature). Students were instructed to generate their own criteria to review
the presented KIM and negotiate with their partner how to revise the map. Generating your own criteria was
expected to improve students self-monitoring.

Participants
The WISE module Gene Pool Explorer was implemented by an experienced science teacher in four classes in a
high school with an ethnically and socio-economically diverse student population of 9th and 10th grade students
(n=93). The teacher randomly grouped students into dyads. Student dyads in each class were randomly assigned
to either   the KIM  generation   (n=41)  or  critique (n=52)  task. Students  worked  collaboratively in   dyads by
sharing a computer throughout the project.

Data Sources
This  study  used  a pre/posttest  design  to measure   individual   students' prior knowledge  and  illustrate their
learning gains. The tests consisted of identical multiple-choice items, short essay items, a KIM critique task, and
a KIM generation task. Additionally, embedded assessment items, field notes, and teacher interview data were
collected.

Analysis
Pre- and posttest analysis: Pretest and posttest items were scored using a five-level knowledge integration rubric
(Linn et al., 2006). Higher knowledge integration scores indicate more complex normative links among different
ideas relevant to the genetic basis of evolution. Paired t-tests, chi-square tests and effect sizes were calculated.

© ISLS                                                                                                          154
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                  Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

Multiple regression analysis and ANOVA was used to investigate whether the two KIM task groups (critique
and generation) differed from each other in learning gains and changes in ideas.
         This study  used  a  multi-tiered  KIM analysis   method   to  identify students'  alternative  ideas about
evolution and track changes throughout the sequence of concept maps: Presences or absence of connections,
quality of connections, network density, and spatial placement of ideas.
         KIM generation analysis used a five-level knowledge integration rubric (Schwendimann, 2007) to
determine   changes  in quality    of overall and    expert-selected   essential links.   To   capture  the network
characteristics of KIMs, network analysis methods were used to identify changes in the prominence (incoming
and outgoing connections) of expert-selected indicator ideas: "Mutation" for the genotype-level and "natural
selection" for the phenotype level. Multiplied with the KI score for each connection, a "weighted prominence
score" for each of the two indicator ideas was calculated.
         KIM critique analysis: KIM critique activities in the pre- and posttest included common alternative
evolution  ideas in three  different  forms (proposition   error, label error, and   direction error). The  analysis
distinguished between error detection and error correction using a four-level rubric.

Results
Pretest-posttest results: Findings indicate that students overall made significant learning gains from pretest to
posttest [Paired t(93)  =  6.08,  p<0.0001  (two-tailed);  Effect  size (Cohen's   d)=0.63     (SD  pretest=2.24, SD
posttest=2.41)]. Students in both KIM task groups (critique and generation) used the alternative idea "need"
significantly fewer times in the posttest than in the pretest (t(96) = -2.67, p<0.01).
         KIM generation results: Multiple regression analysis indicates that both groups gained significantly in
their average KIM knowledge integration scores, R2=2.013, F(2, 88)= 11.09, p=0.000. Both KIM task groups
significantly increased the number of cross-links between genotype and phenotype ideas from pretest to posttest,
(N=94):  Pretest Mean=2.52    (SD=1.66),    Posttest Mean=1.03    (SD=1.15).   t(93)   = 7.49, p<  .001; Effect size
(Cohen's d) = 1.04. This indicates that students gained in integrating genotype and phenotype ideas after the
WISE module Gene Pool Explorer.

Figure 1: Example of a student's pre- (left) and posttest (right) KIM (critique group). Indicator ideas highlighted.

         In accordance with gains in prominence of the KIM indicator ideas "mutation" and "natural selection",
multiple regression analysis suggests that students overall used normative evolution ideas more often than non-
normative ideas (such as "need") in the posttest than in the pretest (R2 =0.18, F(1,94) = 20.18, p < .001 (see
Figure 1).
         Findings from network analysis suggest that students in both groups created significantly more links to
the two indicator ideas in the posttest: "Mutation" (t(93) = 5.39, p=0.00) and "natural selection" (t(93) = 5.83,
p=0.00). These observations indicate that the two indicator ideas gained in explanatory strength in students'
repertoire of evolution    ideas. The  KIM    variables "weighted     prominence  score"   for  the indicator   ideas
"mutation" and "natural selection" are strongly correlated with the overall KIM KI score: "Mutation" r(94) =
0.75, p<0.001, and "Natural Selection" r(94) = 0.70, p<0.001. These correlations suggest that coding only the
links to and from indicator ideas can be a more time-efficient way to score KIMs than coding all connections.
         KIM critique results indicate that the embedded KIM activities helped both groups to critically reflect
on KIMs, revisit, and revise connections between evolution ideas: R2 = 0.27, F(1, 94) = 36.25, p < 0.001.
         Students in both KIM task groups spent about the same average amount of time on the pretest KIM (14
minutes) and posttest KIM (13 minutes). Both groups showed equal KIM posttest performance, but the critique
group was significantly more time-efficient in the embedded KIM activities. Student dyads in the critique group
were significantly  faster on the  embedded   KIM     activities than the generation    group, p<0.05.   (t(27)=2.72,
p=0.01. These results indicate that the KIM critique tasks were more time efficient than the KIM generation
tasks while leading to the same KIM posttest performance.

© ISLS                                                                                                          155
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                    Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

Discussion
Overall, findings suggest that the combination of collaborative Knowledge Integration Map and technology-
enhanced    learning environment   WISE    Gene   Pool Explorer   facilitated students'   generation  of  connections
between and across genotype and phenotype level ideas. Results support the hypothesis that building more
connections between genotype and phenotype level ideas can reduce the usage of the alternative idea "need"
when  generating   explanations  of  evolutionary  change.  Students    in both KIM    task groups    generated more
coherent links to the normative idea "mutation" in the posttest map, which coincided with fewer uses of the
alternative idea  "need"   in posttest explanations.  This study   suggests   that cross-link analysis    and network
analysis of indicator ideas "mutation" and "natural selection" can serve as a time-efficient and sensitive method
to track changes in students' understanding of complex ideas, such as evolution.
         As anticipated, students in both KIM task groups showed equal improvement in the posttest tasks. This
could be explained by the relatively short duration of the embedded KIM activities (only about twenty minutes
out of a weeklong inquiry module), the similarities of the tasks (same given ideas, same drawing areas), and that
both generation and critique activities can support knowledge integration. Despite the similar outcomes, the
critique group   required  significantly less time to  complete   their two   embedded    KIM  activities.  Based  on
quantitative results and qualitative classroom observations, the critique group might have been faster because
generating new relationships from scratch can be more challenging than revising existing connections and it
limits in-depth reflection to a small selection of propositions.
         Critiquing KIMs that include common alternative ideas can generate genuine opportunities for students
to critically reflect on their own ideas. Critiquing KIMs can encourage knowledge integration by fostering self-
monitoring of learning progress, identifying gaps in knowledge, and distinguishing alternative evolution ideas.
As time in the science classroom is limited and precious, this study suggests that collaborative KIM critique
activities can be a beneficial and more time-efficient alternative to generating concept maps from scratch.

Significance of Work
A deep understanding of evolution is pivotal to understanding modern biology and a prerequisite to thinking
systematically and critically about complex systems, continued learning about the biology, and application of
biological  principles  in diverse contexts.  Findings from  this   study   indicate that collaborative   technology-
enhanced KIMs can foster the integration of genotype and phenotype level evolution ideas. Connecting ideas
within and across areas is important in many areas of science and the humanities. Findings from this study are
valuable for the design of effective collaborative learning activities and more time-efficient analysis methods to
support more integrated understanding of complex ideas.

References
Alters, B. J., & Nelson, C. E. (2002). Perspective: Teaching evolution in higher education. Evolution, 56(10),
         1891-1901.
Berland, L. K., & Reiser, B. J. (2009). Making sense of argumentation and explanation. Science Education,
         93(1), 26-55. doi:10.1002/sce.20286
Canas,   A. J.  (2004). Cmap   tools - knowledge   modeling  kit  [Computer   Software].   Institute  for Human   and
         Machine Cognition (IHMC)
Carey, S. (1985). Conceptual change in childhood. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Linn, M. C., & Hsi, S. (2000). Computers, teachers, peers: Science learning partners. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
         Erlbaum Associates.
Linn, M.    C., Davis,  E. A., &   Eylon, B.  -S. (2004).  The   scaffolded  knowledge    integration framework   for
         instruction. In M. C. Linn, E. A. Davis, & P. Bell (Eds.), Internet environments for science education.
         (pp. 47-72). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Mayr, E. (1988). Towards a new philosophy of biology: Observations of an evolutionist. Cambridge: Harvard
         University Press.
Piaget, J., Gruber, H. E., & Vonèche, J. J. (1977). The essential Piaget. New York: Basic Books.
Royer, R., & Royer, J. (2004). Comparing hand drawn and computer generated concept mapping. Journal of
         Computers in Mathematics and Science Teaching, 23(1), 67-81.
Schwendimann, B. A. (2007). Integrating interactive genetics visualizations into high school biology. In Annual
         meeting of the American Educational Research Association (AERA). Chicago, IL.
Schwendimann, B. A. (2008). Scaffolding an interactive dynamic model to promote coherent connections in
         high school biology. Annual meeting of the American Education Research Association (AERA). New
         York, NY.
Southerland, S. A., Abrams, E., Cummins, C. L., & Anzelmo, J. (2001). Understanding students' explanations of
         biological phenomena: Conceptual frameworks or p-prims? Science Education, 85(4), 328-348.

© ISLS                                                                                                           156
