CSCL 2013 Proceedings                 Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

       The Contagious Effect of Dialogism with New Technologies
                   Benzi Slakmon, Baruch B. Schwarz, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem,
                         School of Education, Mount Scopus, Jerusalem, 91905, Israel
                    Email: benzion.slakmon@mail.huji.ac.il, baruch.schwarz@mail.huji.ac.il

         Abstract: Most of the CSCL tools have been studied in short term interactions. Argunaut
         encapsulates many layers of ideas about dialogue and bears potential for dialogic education. In
         this paper, the intermittent use of Argunaut over a yearlong philosophy course is described.
         We focus on the trajectories of participation of two students. Two discursive phenomena are
         discussed: the transformation of a student, as a consequence of participation in a different
         group discussion, into a carrier of discursive norms previously unknown to its original peers;
         and the move into a multi-registered, double-voiced performance by another student. The role
         of the peers in these transformations is elaborated. The role of the tool Argunaut which was
         designed to support dialogic argumentation is also considered.

Introduction
The  study   of  trajectories  of  participation   (Ludvigsen   et  al.,  2011)  can  help  in  understanding     the
interdependencies between historical and specific situations. One of the domains in which CSCL tools is by now
the most popular is the domain of dialogic teaching (Alexander, 2004). In this paper, we analyze specific
trajectories of participation in a program intended to foster philosophical activity. We used the Argunaut system
intermittently. The use of the system by groups yields artifacts ­ argumentative maps, which can be capitalized
on by the teacher and the students in subsequent activities. The Argunaut system was developed to facilitate
moderation   of group  e-discussions with   the Digalo   tool (Schwarz   &  Glassner, 2007), a  tool for enhancing
dialogical teaching through argumentative practices. Argunaut provides moderators with awareness indicators
and alerts, a remote control intervention panel, and classifications of important dialogue features. These aids
were envisioned to help moderators monitor, evaluate, and guide discussion without disrupting the flow of the
ongoing collective argumentation (Schwarz & Asterhan, 2011). Figure 1 shows some of the most important
functionalities of the Argunaut Moderator's Interface.

                             Figure 1. Argunaut's Moderator's Interface and its main features.

         Most   of the CSCL    tools have   been   studied in  short term  interactions between   users. However,
Argunaut encapsulates the fact that dialogue is not only a tool for knowing but also an object to be reflected on.
Like in  the case  of  other  CSCL   tools, almost  no   study was   done  to describe  trajectories of students   in
heterogeneous scales of time (for exceptions see: Ludvigsen et al., 2011). Without those descriptions, without
observing the intersections of trajectories in elaborating meanings, tools and ideals miss their missions.
         The philosophy course took place with 28 Grade 8 students. The school is a junior high-school whose
policy is to integrate students with very different socio-economic levels. Thematically, the course was organized
around three major ideas examined through its manifestations in three planes: (1) Justice, through the notion of
'inequality'; (2) Truth, through the notions of 'understanding' and 'interpretation'; (3) The Good, through the
notion of the   'good conversation'. The    course deployed   throughout   an entire year, six hours  a  week.    The
argunaut  sessions  were implemented    as  an  integral part  of  the curriculum.   Two   personal  trajectories are
examined here: the trajectories of Yoel and Avi, who generally belonged to the same discussion group. The two

© ISLS                                                                                                            161
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                        Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

are followed over three consecutive sessions. It is worth mentioning that their activity took place simultaneously
with other discussion groups in the classroom.

The Analysis of two trajectories of participation
First Argunaut session. Groups were asked to read an authentic philosophical story composed by a classmate,
dealing with the dilemma of stealing food in difficult times. The assignment was to describe the "great question"
(as opposed to non-philosophical ones), and try to deal with it. Although their discussion lasted 17 minutes, it
ended up with only one formal contribution, as Yoel is saying: "I'm alone in the conversation". But actually this
utterance is not the only one: all other contributions were erased by participants, thus leaving the space empty
and clean. Table 1 brings the full transcript. The numbers indicate the order of operation; the left column shows
the contributions; the right column shows the deletions.

Table 1: First session's transcript

          1.   Avi: yoellllll, ya stinkkkker!!                     2.  Avi: yoellllll, ya stinkkkker!!
          3.   Avi: yoell, ya stinkkkkkkkkkkkkker!                  4.  yoell, ya stinkkkkkkkkkkkkker!
          5.   Gabby:  schnitzel  [wrongly        writes in         6.  Gabby: schnitzel  
               English letters instead of Hebrew]  
          7.   Gabby:  Nathan    Sulem    [a classmate's            8.  Gabby: Nathan Sulem loves schnitzels
               name] loves schnitzels
          9.   Avi:  Sandra  [name     of a  classmate's            10. Avi: Sandra
               mother]
          11.  Avi:  let's  crash  stinker   Amos..      [a     
               classmate]
          12.  Gabby: c'mmon, letz [let's]                          13. Gabby: c'mmon, letz
                                                                   14. Avi: let's crash stinker Amos..  
          15.  Gabby: Sulemmmm                                  
          16.  Avi: is it right to steal for foodd?!                17. Gabby: Sulemmmm  
          18.  Gabby:  ye[,]  what[,]   didn't    you    see    
               Sulem doing it
          19.  Yoel: why not?                                       20. Gabby:      ye what didn't you  see Sulem
                                                                        doing it  
          21.  Avi: let's do super [market] today...                22. Avi: let's do super today...  
                                                                    23. Yoel: why not?  
          24.  Yoel: I'm alone in the conversation              
  

Second Argunaut session. Avi and Gabby were absent, and Yoel joined to Agam, Lea, and Noa, who generally
collaborated as a discussion group. The session dealt with the ethical issue of ends, means, and justifications.
The session lasted for 34 minutes (twice longer than the first session), and contained 39 utterances. All 39
utterances were on-task (2 out of 13 in the first). Yoel was not active. The first ten minutes consisted of a
dialogue solely between Lea and Agam. They were calling for his participation vigorously: "are you alive?"
Yoel remained unresponsive. Four minutes later Agam asked: "Yoel, what do you think of the story?". At the
same time Lea interjected: "Yoel???". After 15 minutes of idleness Yoel wrote his first contribution: "I haven't
finished      rading [reading]".  After   another    seven   minutes   Lea  asked   "Yoel,  what   are  you thinking?"   Three
minutes later, as the other discussant seemed to agree upon the philosophical problem, Lea called upon Yoel
again. Agam also tried to stimulate him: "so, c'mon what are you waiting for the lesson is over in a second.!!!".
Yoel replied: "I finished [,] just don't have what to write", but this was neither what Lea had in mind ("what do
you      think about  the  story??."), nor   Agam     ("so   turn  on  your brain   and  start writing  right now!!!!"). Yoel
responded, making a mockery out of Agam's pressure ("here [,] I wrote"). Agam kept pushing him, demanding
his words about the story ("verrrrrrrry funny now writttte what you think of the storyyyy"). Only two minutes
later, three minutes before the session ends, Yoel reacted: "in my opinion, he should help him". This was his
final contribution.

              Third Argunaut session. The session was dedicated to Singer's (2009) argument about poverty in the
third world and the imperative for redistribution of global (and personal) wealth as a just consequence of it.
Singer equals avoiding from active redistribution to murder. Avi, Gabby, and Yoel were teamed together again
as a regular group. The session lasted for 24 minutes (13 in the first). Here is their discussion:

© ISLS                                                                                                                    162
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

        1.  Avi: yoel, ya [you] stinker

        2.  Gabby: hjgl [???]

        3.  Avi: what's to do?

        4.  Yoel: need to talk about what Benzi wrote

        5.  Yoel: it's not fair that there are people who need to pay for other people but you can't let them
            starve.

        6.  Avi: eef [if] I didn't have money for food I would steal...

        7.  Yoel: but it is not considered murder

        8.  Avi: look left -------à you stupid (,) it's right

        9.  Avi: right, it is not considered murder...

        10. Yoel: is it right to steal eef [if] you don't have money for food?

        11. Gabby: I also don't think it is considered murder (,) I think it is one's own right to decide what to
            do with his money

        12. Avi: yeahhhhh... ..

        13. Yoel: right

        14. Avi: in sum (,) you can steal for food but only for food!

Just like in the first session, Avi started by attacking Yoel (1), but this time, Yoel is placing a blank claim form
on the conversational space and from it sends an arrow signaling critique towards Avi's accusation. Avi deletes
his utterance, and so does Yoel. Then Avi asks for instruction (3), and it is given by Yoel (4), who's also starts
referring to Singer's argument (5). Avi is replying, but from reading his contribution one can only suggest he is
referring to the first discussion's subject. Yoel does not seem to be aware of that as he keeps with his thinking
(7). Avi is contributing a comic writing based joke, gets no response and keeps contributing by returning to
things at stake as he agrees with Yoel former contribution. Avi, unaware of the fact there was another topic
besides what he figured out to be the one, summarizes with a stark moral rule: not only he uses exclamation
mark, he   also enlarges the  contribution form  on    the virtual space  to an  extent much   bigger than    other
contributions. Session ends.

Discussion

Yoel was forced to move into Agam's group. Because of his different participation norms, he was exposed to
pressure to participate and contribute to the joint effort of his peers. Agam's discussion demonstrated values
such as serenity and directedness which were unfamiliar to him. All other peers were capable discussants; they
could abandon Yoel in his passiveness, but they demanded his participation and constantly confronted him with
his silence; moreover, they held him accountable for the genuine performance of the entire group. As much as
their attitude failed to bear immediate fruits, indeed it changed Yoel's personal trajectory, and consequently, his
group trajectory  as well. As  he reunited  with his   former   group, he carried with  him   the directedness    of
responsibility for the other. As opposed to the first session, Avi harassment directed at him was not answered
with silence- or with personal counter attack, but with a demonstration of disagreement with such a behavior; he
uses the form of critical arrow and points towards Avi's insulting contribution in the dialogic space until he
removes it. Furthermore, he takes an active role, moderating it into an on-task discourse; he gives instructions
and responding with continuity and generalizations, trying to develop the conversation.

        One of the main differences between traditional lessons to the Argunaut discussion presented is the
lack of teacher-moderation in the latter. Baker and his colleagues have already showed the rise in off-topic and
social-talk contributions as students of poor argumentative participation habits use a CSCL environment (Baker
et al. 2011). Same students maintained off-topic and social-talk during a whole subclass moderated debate, but
as debates begun,  none  of  the above  categories lasted.    We argue  that looseness  of performance in  CSCL
environment is a result of the fact there was no participant to voluntarily play the moderation role usually

© ISLS                                                                                                        163
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                   Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

enacted by the teacher. Some students did not identify this institutionalized voice in them, therefore did not
voice it without external supervision. In Agam's discussion, the supervision was so internalized that the space
was saved only to on-task contributions. This is the norm Yoel was exposed to. He witnessed how talk goes on
without an institutionalized moderator and felt the group's pressure when he did not perform as expected. We
see Yoel taking that role in the following discussion, acting out his recently-appropriated norm. The willing to
accept the presence of the formal educational genre 'within' oneself, is a preliminary condition for entering the
discussion, and this is where Yoel's importance as discursive norms carrier makes its central contribution, as he,
an in-group member, worthy of trust, mediates the gap between genres with his way of existing in both worlds.

        Avi's contributions are polarized, mostly off-topic, ad hominem and pidginized. Yet, once in a while,
Avi moves into another register, uses a different function of the language and contributes on-task utterance. We
argue that the Argunaut dialogic characteristics have a unique contribution to this kind of smooth movement
across registers. Argunaut opened the space and afforded the tolerance towards Avi, thus contributed to the
development of Avi's voice. The Argunaut system nurtures this kind of existence by doing three things:     first, by
eliminating the prosody of the utterances and by doing so, somewhat softens the immediate attribution of a
contribution to a certain register; second, responses are always delayed, and are mediated through writing. There
is a greater `wait time' between the act of reading and the reaction of writing. The possibility of bursting at
someone is mediated through the written, thus making the discursive behavior unnatural in a sense. One cannot
use his old way of bursting, he needs to modify it. Third, the burden of immediate turn-taking is off: not only
the response does not have  to  come    immediately,   but some  utterances are not  directed towards   a  specific
addressee. Hence, participants respond intentionally after selecting what's worth replying and after formulating
the appropriate response. Thus, although the utterance is ever present, it is detached from its creator, so the other
participants can relate to it and can remain less obliged to the speaker. This detachment of the utterance from the
speaker/writer reduces the power of imposition the speaker has on the other discussants, or if seen from the
other side of the dialogue, it gives greater freedom to the addressees. The interesting finding here is that the
described relatively detachment between the speaker/writer to the utterance has a liberating effect on certain
students general contribution; they are not obliged to speak from a fixed position, they can afford themselves to
be incoherent, i.e., to get involved in the on-task conversation at the same time they are keeping their old ways
of talking in the conversational space.

        Avi is broadening his range of contributions, becoming more engaged with task-focused activity, and
while doing so, keeps sending off-task contributions. How does it happen? Avi addresses an insulting utterance
but the pattern changes: Yoel's ignorance-that is made possible through the fact that he is remote and not having
to respond immediately- serves as an opportunity for Avi to broaden his voice and try different register. All of
Avi's utterances are response-oriented. Because of that, the importance of the delayed-response is crucial. Avi is
capturing himself in his own prison of one-dimensional voicing, a voice of insult and harassment, especially as
we place it in the context of his dialogicality, that is, his reliance on the other for the sake of getting responses.
Yoel and Gabby are his points of reference and he acknowledges that. In a sense, Avi's case epitomizes the
inner inadequacy between the particularity and communality (Nikulin, 2006). The Argunaut afforded ways to
balance between the two, through its decentralizing effect and by changing the immediate dialogic sequentiality.

        The study presented two extremely important discursive phenomena for the development of dialogic
pedagogy:  the emergence of discursive    norms   carrier and the development   of  multi-voicing, in a way   that
mediates the sometimes unbridgeable gap between the teacher's authoritative voice and the student. We tried to
highlight the crucial role the Argunaut tool plays in this becoming. From a methodological point of view, the
study demonstrates the vast potential trajectories of participation has when used for horizontal purposes.

REFERENCES
Alexander, R. (2004). Towards Dialogic Teaching (4th edition), Dialogos.
Baker , M., Bernard, F.-X. & Dumez-Féroc, I. (2012). Integrating computer-supported collaborative learning
       into the classroom: the anatomy of a failure. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 28, 171-186
Ludvigsen, S.,  Rasmussen,  I., Krange,    I., Moen,   A., Middleton,   D.  (2011). Intersecting Trajectories  of
       Participation; Temporality and Learning. In:    Ludvigsen, S., Rasmussen, I., Lund. A., & Säljö, R. (eds.)
       Learning across Sites. New York: Routledge.
Nikulin, D. (2006). On Dialogue. Lexington Books.
Schwarz, B. B. & Glassner, A. (2007). The role of floor control and of ontology in argumentative activities with
       discussion-based  tools. The     International Journal of  Computer-Supported   Collaborative    Learning,
       2(4), 449-478.
Schwarz, B. B. & Asterhan, C. S. C. (2011). E-moderation of synchronous discussions in educational settings:
       A nascent practice. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 20, 395-442.
Singer, P. (2009). Practical Ethics (Moosar Halacha Lema'ase), Jerusalem: Magness Press (In Hebrew).

© ISLS                                                                                                       164
