CSCL 2013 Proceedings                  Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

               Students' Capacity for Autonomous Learning in an
          Unstructured Learning Space on a Mobile Learning Trail

            Esther Tan, Ludwig-Maximilian University, Munich, Germany, Esther.Tan@psy.lmu.de
  Hyo-Jeong So, Nanyang Technological University, 1 Nanyang Walk, Singapore, hyojeong.so@nie.edu.sg

          Abstract: This research study investigates learner autonomy in the unstructured learning
          space  on a  mobile   learning trail. Specifically, we   examine   how  students  leverage  on
          knowledge resources and the physical affordances of the outdoor learning environment, to
          pursue their line of inquiries. Adapting Fischer and Mandl's (2005) coding scheme for the
          content  dimension,  we  coded  two   groups'  discourse, to  examine  the use  of knowledge
          resource  types. Analysis   showed  that contextual  resources   and the  interaction with  the
          physical affordances play a significant role in learners' capacity to see relations between
          given case information   and   new    conceptual  knowledge,   as  well   as, activating  prior
          knowledge   resources. Overall findings indicate that autonomous learning rests essentially
          on the learning design, the appropriate measure at pre-structuring, as well as, student-and-
          teacher readiness.

Introduction
Building  on our  previous   research efforts on   small group   collaborative learning  in inquiry-based  mobile
learning  (Tan &  So, 2011),  this study takes   a step  further to  explore students'  capacity  for autonomous
learning (Little, 1995) in unstructured learning space on an inter-disciplinary mobile learning trial. Here, we
give emphasis to creating the conditions to support learner autonomy, where the entire learning environment be
conceived as a whole in the design approach. Specifically, our research question reads:
          RQ 1. What   type  of knowledge     resources  do   students use, in pursuing   their line  of  inquiries/
          hypotheses in the unstructured learning space on a mobile learning trail?
          RQ 2. To what extent do the following design constructs impact students' capacity for autonomous
          learning in the unstructured learning space?: a) task type & level of pre-structuring (we conceived of
          learning objectives, task-type and level of pre-structuring as mutually constitutive, as such, these shall
          be investigated as a whole); b) technological mediation.

Research Methodology
Research Context
We defined an unstructured learning space on a learning trail as a white space, designed with specific desired
learning outcomes and is set apart for learners to pursue their own line of inquiries, leveraging on the physical
affordances of the trail site, with minimal teacher supervision given the level of pre-structuring and scaffold
support. Participants are two classes of secondary two students at one of the Singapore future schools. The
mobile learning trail and the unstructured learning space took place at the Singapore River. To examine more
closely the use of knowledge resource types and the impact of trail design on autonomous learning, we observed
two groups of students from each of the two classes. Group A consists of four students and group B, five
students.

Design Considerations
A Contextualized Learning Design
We employ a process-oriented framework (Strijbos, et al., 2004) to scaffold and to support learner autonomy.
First, we position the learning trail as part of the larger continuum and the phasing in of an unstructured learning
space was   to enable greater  learner autonomy    in context,   as aforementioned,   learners  can  only exercise
autonomy within legitimate frames of reference. Pre-to-post trail activities were co-designed by the research
team and the collaborating teachers from  the   Geography,    History  and  Biology  department, to   see how    the
three  subjects can lend content to each other in the trail activities. To scaffold and support students learn
process, collaborating teachers guide the inquiry-based learning trail by observing a gradual progression from
well-structured task-types (performative and applicational) to less-structured task-types (knowledge generative
and synthesis). Further, to facilitate the integration of conceptual understanding of the three different subjects on
river, civilization and change, an overarching big question on "why does civilization begin at the mouth of a
river?" was put in place. Pre-trail lessons on famous rivers in the world serve as a tune-in, as well as, a platform
for students (in groups of four to five) to develop own line of inquiries relating to the big question. Likewise, the
trail tasks at the three learning stations along the river, form part of the efforts at pre-structuring and scaffolding
of learner autonomy. Students, in small group of fours or fives, were given thirty to forty minutes to pursue their

© ISLS                                                                                                        169
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                  Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

pre-trail inquiry along the river vicinity, after completing all trail activities. Post-trail activities was a measure
for follow-up  and debrief, allowing   groups to share    their findings, and attempt  a `rise-above'  phase   of   the
knowledge building progressive inquiry cycle.

Technology Mediation
The appropriation of technological tools to support learner autonomy in the unstructured learning space lies
primarily in two considerations: one is the requirements of the task types in relation to the trail site; two, is the
students' comfort level with the mobile devices and software applications. As an initial study to investigate
students' capacity for autonomous learning, the deployment of mobile technologies is, hence, viewed in the
context of the learning design, desired learning outcomes, and with the intent to empower students to take on
"user-led education", creating their own content with peers beyond the four walls of the classroom. Each small
groups of four to five, was equipped with two iPads and two data-loggers and probes (to measure the water
condition). And to reduce the physical presence of the teacher and frontal loading of information, all trail
activities are hosted on the web-based platform (see Figures 1 & 2). Students were also able to host all their
findings and collated artifacts (pictures etc.) on the web-based platform. The provision of the broadcast alerts
and feedback features seek to enable immediacy of teacher facilitation and inter-group communication on the
mobile learning trail.

Figure 1. Web-based platform hosting all trail activities       Figure 2. Well-structured task on measuring water
        and customised Google map of trail site                 conditions at three different sections of the river

Data Collection and Analytic Approach
Group   discourse  and   interaction  of  the two    experimental groups, A and       B, was    video-  and    audio-
recorded and transcribed (app. 38 pages in total) for analysis. Excluding non-task talk and the sporadic private
conversations, we  studied  and    analysed a total  of   113   segments  of content-  and   task-related statements
(questions statements   inclusive) in the  group's  discourse   - pursuing   their inquiries and hypotheses    in   the
unstructured learning   space. Chi  (1997)  proposes the   use  of semantic   boundaries  to  determine   the unit  of
analysis as an idea may require a few sentences to put across, and moreover, similar idea could be surfaced
several times by team members who are more vocal. Hence, each of the 113 segments forms a unit of analysis
and may contain one or more than one statements/ question statements depending on the discussion threads,
ideas and turn of talks. To ensure consistency and validity, three rounds of coding were conducted by the first
author.
         We adapted the coding scheme for the content dimension from Fischer and Mandl's (2005, p. 416)
where they investigate the knowledge resource types learners leverage on, in the group discourse. Fischer and
Mandl (2005, p. 406) argue for the significance of "transactivity in discourse" and the need to investigate how
learners build on and advance one another's ideas to negotiate and to converge at shared meanings. More
specifically, they proposed an investigation of how learners leverage the knowledge resources available and
accessible to them, ranging from prior knowledge to given contextual resources, to collaboratively create and
construct new knowledge and meanings. There are five categories of knowledge resources that learners use in
the unstructured learning space, pursuing their inquiries and hypothesis: (1) Contextual Resources (CR), (2)
New Conceptual Resources (NCR), (3) Relations Between Contextual Resources & New Conceptual Resources
(CR & NCR), (4) Prior Knowledge Resources (PKR), and (5) Relations Between Contextual Resources & Prior
Knowledge Resources (CR& PKR). Considering the mobile learning context and the learning design for our
research study, we define contextual knowledge (case information) as resources made available at the pre-trail
activities, the overarching Big Question, as well as, the trail activities at the trail site, and by theory text, it refers
to the integrated conceptual understanding of the three subjects, Biology, Geography and History and Biology
on river, civilization and change.

Findings

© ISLS                                                                                                            170
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                  Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

A Comparison of the Frequency of Knowledge Resource Types Used
Table 1 depicts the frequency of the range of knowledge resources both Group A and Group B tapped on, in the
course of pursuing their line of inquiry in the unstructured learning space. Both groups showed relatively high
usage of contextual resources as compared to other knowledge resource types. Another noteworthy finding is,
students display the ability to develop new conceptual resources arising from harnessing contextual resources,
as well as,  the interaction with  the physical environment    of  the  riverside.    Further, they   were able to  draw
connections between contextual resources and new conceptual resources.

Table 1: Frequency of Knowledge Resource Types Used in Group Discourse

        One    distinguished  difference between    both  groups   lies in   the activation    and application  of  prior
knowledge    resources. Group   B  generated  significantly  higher   number     of   statements   (question statements
inclusive) harnessing prior conceptual knowledge (ref to Table 3). We attribute this phenomenon to the nature of
Group B's pre-trail inquiry on the "timing of the clean river campaign in the 1980s" and their hypothesis on
possible significant events that could have impacted the phasing in of the clean river campaign. Contextual
resources in the physical  environment   were insufficient  for their   line of  inquiry. Likewise,   student's capacity
to develop   and   affirm new   conceptual   resources    and/  or see   relations     between    these resource   types,
became  unwittingly  contained  within   the availability and   accessibility    of  the  options  and  resources  at the
learning trail. Analysis of the discourse moves in the group's discourse and field notes showed them making
reference to significant events and developments in the Singapore during the researched period, and affirming
these inferences with authoritative sources on the Internet, before they could eventually converge at shared
understanding. Conversely, group A's pre-trail inquiry on "what happened to the Singapore River as a trading
point, and why it was removed and what is it now?" afforded them greater leverage on contextual resources and
the physical affordances of the river site to affirm their new conceptual resources, and to draw valid inferences
between   contextual and  new  conceptual  resources.  The   application     of  prior knowledge    resources   was   also
rendered more effortlessly. Similarly, it was easier for the group to identify and affirm relations between the
contextual resources and the prior knowledge resources.

Impact of Learning Design and Physical Affordances on Use of Knowledge Resource
Types
Pre-trail tune-in activities on famous rivers and the introduction of the big question on "Why civilization start
at the mouth of a river", serve as an essential platform for students in small groups to generate their line of
inquiry and hypothesis, they intended to pursue. Albeit that the eight groups from the two classes formulated
varied inquiries and  hypothesis,  yet their intended  research    inquiries    fall within  the parameters  of the   big
question and the integrated conceptual understanding of the three different subjects on river, civilization and
change. However, the scope and subject matter of the various groups' inquiries do determine to a considerable
measure the knowledge resources types they are inclined to use in their group discourse - negotiating and
affirming findings and new conceptual understanding as exemplified in the case of Groups A and B, where the
latter activated more prior knowledge resources to make valid inferences to their inquiries.
        Noteworthy    is  also the immediacy    and   interactive  feature   of  the   knowledge    resource types    that
students are able to identify with and make reference to. Trail activities ranging from well-structured tasks
on measuring   water conditions   to ill-structured tasks on importance      of water  quality   also form a significant
component   of the contextual  knowledge   resources   students   could  leverage     on, in the   unstructured learning
space. Table 3 shows a high usage of contextual resources in contrast to other knowledge resource types. A
simple reason is the "immediacy" of this measure of contextual resources (trail activities that take place prior to
the unstructured learning space) and the "currentness" of the interaction with the learning environment where
learners are empowered to develop new conceptual resources and to draw sound relations between contextual

© ISLS                                                                                                                171
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                       Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

resources and their new conceptual understanding. The same is also true for the activation and application of
prior  knowledge     resources  and    the relations they   make    between   contextual   resources   and   prior  knowledge
resources as shown in the discourse moves. Students' capacity to draw valid inferences is largely contingent on
the "sense of place" to make sense of the contextual resources, and importantly, on the interaction with the
physical environment to apply prior knowledge resources.

Role of Technology in Learner Autonomy Support
The   analysis   of  the groups'    discourse    shows   technology     assumes   more    than  a  mediatory     role  in  some
instances.  It depends   on  the  type  of knowledge     resources,    learners  deploy.  Google   map    of the trail site  (see
Figure 1) with location pins indicating the three learning stations affords students a "sense of place" in relation
to  the vicinity   and  the surrounding.    Both  groups    displayed   a   heavy reliance   on   the Google    map    to  locate
environmental     artifacts for evidences    to support    their   hypotheses and  affirm  findings   to  their  inquiries.  For
Group B, the Google apps enable location mapping and navigational possibilities (e.g. directions, bearings,
distance and scale) to test their hypothesis on the clean river campaign and possible significant events. Further,
for  Group     B in  particular,  in   the absence   of    the physical     presence of   teachers,   they   made   use   of the
authoritative    sources via  the   Internet  to affirm    their   new  conceptual   resources    relating   to the contextual
resources. Likewise, the application of prior knowledge resources was made possible via technology-mediated
cognitive tools to confirm their inferences.

Discussion and Conclusion
Our findings carry two important implications/ challenges on promoting learner autonomy in the context of
collaborative mobile learning. First, we do not ascribe autonomy to the learners, rather, we prescribe, and we do
so, by means of designing the learning situation and scaffolding their learn process. The staging of the learning
continuum      from  pre-to-post  trail was   a  necessary     and  pivotal   measure   to facilitate  the   execution    of the
unstructured learning space and to provide learners with the cognitive autonomy support. For instance, the rich
integration of the three subject areas in the design of the activity questions and the framing of the big question
on civilization and river, serve as crucial cognitive support for the learners when they become agents of their
own learning in the unstructured learning space. Second, the efforts of prescribing learner autonomy do not rest
solely  on  an   excellent  learning   design,   as  the   student  and teacher   readiness   remain   issues   of  challenges.
Promoting student autonomy is contingent on promoting teacher autonomy for the teacher possesses the content
and the professional expertise to determine the scope and the measure in releasing autonomy to the learners by
appropriating    the relevant   scaffolds  and   creating   the    learning conditions   (Little, 1995).   Students    exhibited
hesitations    and  uncertainties   in  affirming    their findings    and  inferences,   as  they  still  perceive    the  final
endorsement from the teachers as a legitimate source of confirmation of the direction they are taking.
          Although we witnessed some promising results in this initial research study on learner autonomy in
unstructured learning space, we acknowledge that there could be limitations such as the integration of other
disciplines    whose   cultural  and   social practices    differ  with changing     learning  contexts.   However,     we   are
persuaded that promoting learner autonomy calls for more than a situation of integrating state-of-art technology
into  teaching   and learning.   It  necessitates   the  orchestration  of   the entire  desired  learning   situation  for  the
desired learning outcomes.

References
Chi,  M.    T. H.  (1997).   Quantifying    qualitative    analyses  of verbal   data:  A  practical  guide.    Journal   of the
         Learning Sciences, 6(3), 271-315.
Fischer, F., & Mandl, H. (2005). Knowledge convergence in computer-supported collaborative learning: the
          Role of external representation tools. Journal of the Learning Science, 14(3), 405-441.
Little, D.  (1995).  Learning    as  dialogue:   the dependence     of  learner  autonomy    on   teacher  autonomy.    System,
          23(2), 175-181.
Strijbos, J. W., Martens, R. L., & Jochems, W.M.G. (2004). Designing for interaction: Six steps to designing
          computer- supported group-based learning. Computers & Education, 42, 403­424.
Tan,  E.,   &  So,   H.  J. (2011).  Location-based      collaborative   learning    at a  Geography     tail:  Examining    the
          relationship   among    task  design,     facilitation   and  discourse  types.  In   Proceedings     of  the   CSCL
          conference (pp. 41-48). Hong Kong, China: International Society of the Learning Sciences.

Acknowledgments
This research is supported by the FutureSchools@Singapore project under the National Research Foundation's
(NRF) Interactive and Digital Media (IDM) in Education Research and Development (R&D) Programme. We
thank   all SST    collaborating  teachers   and  students,    all software  engineers   and  Researchers      Wei  Yu,   Zhang
Xujuan, Corrine Ho for their contribution in this research.

© ISLS                                                                                                                       172
