CSCL 2013 Proceedings                 Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

       Collaborative learning in Facebook: Can argument structure
                           facilitate academic opinion change?
                    Dimitra Tsovaltzi+, Armin Weinberger+, Oliver Scheuer^, Toby Dragon^,
                                             Bruce M. McLaren^#
            +Educational Technology, Saarland University, Saarbrücken, Germany, P.O. Box 151150
                            ^CeLTech, Saarland University, Saarbrücken, Germany
                               #Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
                                   Email: Dimitra.tsovalzi@mx.uni-saarland.de

          Abstract: Social networking services (SNS), such as Facebook, are an increasingly important
          platform for computer supported collaborative learning (CSCL).       However, little is known
          about whether and how academic opinion change and argumentative knowledge construction
          (AKC) can be facilitated in SNS. Existing argumentation practice in informal SNS discussions
          typically lacks elaboration and argumentative quality. We investigate the potential benefits of
          argument structure provided through individual computer-supported argument diagramming to
          foster academically sound opinions in the context of Facebook. In a quasi-experimental lab
          study, we  found evidence  of academic    opinion change along     with correlations of opinion
          change with knowledge gains.

Argumentative Knowledge Construction in SNS
Social networking services (SNS), such as Facebook, Twitter, Google+ etc., are rapidly growing communication
platforms. SNS provide easy platform-independent access and almost unrestricted interactivity for sharing ideas
and opinions, and may therefore be conducive to argumentative knowledge construction (AKC; Weinberger &
Fischer, 2006). AKC is the deliberate practice of elaborating learning material by constructing formally and
semantically   sound arguments  with the  goal  of  gaining  argumentative    and   domain knowledge.   Argument
structure provided through individual argument diagramming is among the most prominent approaches to foster
AKC    in CSCL    environments (Scheuer  et al, 2010). However,    there is  little known  about  the extent these
approaches can be applied to learning in SNS (McLoughin, & Lee, 2010; Tsovaltzi et al, 2012).
          Current argumentation practice in informal SNS discussions lacks argumentative quality. Elaboration,
evidence testing, and the evaluation of new knowledge are rare (Kanuka, & Anderson, 1998). This may not be
surprising, since SNS were created for interactions at the personal level with users typically airing private
opinions. However, academic opinions, i.e. opinions about academic and school subject matters are also shared,
and potentially formed, through SNS (Roblyer, McDaniel, Webb, Herman, & Witty, 2010). Existing studies
show that purposeful use of social media can support information sharing, communication and collaboration
(Dabner, 2011), as well as learning (Laru, Näykki, & Järvelä, 2011). Yet, there is little systematic research on
the educational potential of SNS for academic opinion change or formation, and the facilitation of learning.
          Research results learning suggest that argumentative elaboration can promote individual knowledge
construction, and can greatly benefit from additional support through scripting, i.e. socio-cognitive structures
that specify what learners are to do in collaborative learning scenarios (e.g. Baker & Lund, 1997; Weinberger,
Stegmann & Fischer, 2010). Learners, for instance, can be prompted to provide support or counterarguments for
their  claims. This  can help  them  elaborate  the task, gain argumentative      knowledge,   understand multiple
perspectives,  and  promote knowledge   convergence   (Weinberger  et   al., 2010).  An alternative   way to script
learners is to let them first work on a task individually and then compare and combine their individual solutions
(e.g., Weinberger,   2011;  Asterhan &   Schwarz,    2007). Such   approaches     may  prevent  process   losses of
simultaneously following diverse instructions, also characterized as over-scripting (Dillenbourg, 2002), which
can hinder AKC. Moreover, learners in online discussions often dismiss conflicting opinions and inconsistencies
rather than try to resolve them. Raising awareness of opinion conflict is one way to foster critical argumentative
elaboration during collaboration and take advantage of the dialogic potential of SNS (Bodemer, 2011).
          In this paper, we investigate the potential benefits of argument structure provided through individual
computer-supported   argument  diagramming     for academic  opinion change    in   Facebook and  its influence  on
learning, compared   to  standard SNS   discussions.  We    hypothesize that  collaborators  will resolve  opinion
conflicts productively by building on sound argumentation and attain higher knowledge gains after individual
argument preparation as opposed to no individual preparation (Darnon et al, 2006). Our hypotheses are:
  H1: Argument structure provided before SNS discussions will foster more academic opinion change than
  standard SNS discussions.
  H2: Opinion change will correlate with knowledge gains.

© ISLS                                                                                                        177
CSCL 2013 Proceedings              Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

Methods
To test our hypotheses, we conducted a quasi-experimental lab study. We compared two conditions: argument
structure (ArgStr), which included individual construction of computer supported argument diagrams prior to
the collaborative discussion in Facebook, vs. no argument structure (NoArgStr), which included collaborative
discussion in Facebook only. The participants were randomly assigned to condition.
        Forty (40) students at a German university ­ ten dyads per condition ­ took part in the study. Dyads
were chosen to maximize conflict on ethical aspects of the discussion topic (behaviorism in the classroom)
based on a questionnaire (see Section 2.2).  Socio-demographic data,     reported        on an 1-5  Likert scale and
analyzed with the MannWhitney-U-Test, showed no significant differences between conditions in frequency of
SNS use, purpose of Facebook use (e.g., social contact and information exchange), ambiguity tolerance, interest
or prior knowledge, self-assessed domain knowledge, and familiarity with SNS and computer.

                   Figure 1. Abbreviated example of argument representation in LASAD

Due to privacy concerns, data collection for the experiment was done      through        specially created Facebook
accounts. To maintain the effect of opinion conflict awareness, which is native in Facebook, we posted strong
statements on behaviorism along two dimensions (effectiveness and ethics of behavioristic principles) and asked
participants in dyads to use the "like" button to indicate agreement with these statements. An example statement
on the ethical aspect is "The free will of a child must be facilitated at all costs."
        Students in the argument structure condition used the web-based system, LASAD, to create individual
argument diagrams (Loll, Pinkwart, Scheuer, & McLaren, 2012; see Fig. 1). Two types of boxes were available,
one to represent "claims" and the other to represent "evidence". Students could choose from a dropdown menu
whether (a) claims relate to the "effectiveness" or "ethics" of Behaviorism as a teaching method, and (b) whether
evidence was based on "scientific results," "examples," or "everyday knowledge". Boxes could be related to one
another through color-coded arrows, which indicated "support" (green arrows) or "opposition" (red arrows). The
diagrams aimed at helping students to construct arguments for and against Behaviorism as a teaching method,
contemplate the validity of arguments, as well as share and discuss the related evidence.
        All students took an online pretest prior to the intervention in the Lab and a posttest. They also briefly
read an essay on Behaviorism that could be used as reference during the intervention. The duration of the
intervention was 55 minutes. NoArgStr used the entire time discussing on Facebook and trying to reach an
agreement on the topic "Should behavioristic principles be applied in the classroom?" ArgStr used the first 25
minutes prior to the Facebook discussion to individually create an argument diagram with LASAD on the topic.

Opinion Conflict, Formation and Change
Opinion conflict, used to group dyads, was measured with a questionnaire in which participants had to state their
agreement with statements on the effectiveness and ethical aspects of the principles of behaviorism for learning
on a 5-point Likert scale. A statement on effectiveness, translated from the German original, is "Behaviorism
can be applied with learning success on simple tasks", and on ethics, "It is potentially wrong to use negative
reinforcement on kids." To analyze opinion formation independent of the direction of opinion change (that is,
opinions becoming more or less favorable), we used a t-test of the absolute difference between the mean pre-
statement score and the mean post-statement score of each participant.

Knowledge Test
Our knowledge test comprised twenty-four multiple-choice and two open questions ("Name some weak/strong
points of behaviorism."), evaluated by two raters. The inter-rater-reliability was substantial for pre and posttest
for the first question, Cohen's kpre =.86; Cohen's kpost =.86, and moderate for the second question, Cohen's kpre
51; Cohen's kpost =.44. To compare the knowledge scores we used the GLM Univariate procedure.

© ISLS                                                                                                           178
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                    Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

             Overall                      Effectiveness                Ethics
         4.2                             4                          4.2
                                                                                                     NoArgStr
             4                          3.8                            4                             ArgStr
                                                                    3.8
         3.8                            3.6
                                                                    3.6
         3.6                            3.4
                                                                    3.4
         3.4                            3.2                         3.2
         3.2                             3                             3
                    Pre      Post                 Pre     Post                Pre       Post

                            Figure 2. Opinion comparison: Overall, Effectiveness, Ethics

Results

Academic Opinion Formation and Change
Both conditions changed their overall opinion significantly, t(39)=8.84, p<.001, d=1.40, as well as on the two
dimensions, effectiveness, t(39)=8.10, p<.001, d=1.28; ethics, t(39)=9.04, p<.001, d=1.43. With respect to H1,
the influence of argument structuring on opinion change, the results showed that neither condition changed their
opinions more than the other between pre- and posttest, either for the overall opinion, F(1,38)=.09, p=.77, or for
the separate dimensions, ethics, F(1,38)=.17, p=.68, and effectiveness, F(1,38)=.84, p=.36. Since prior research
suggests that cognitive conflict is predictive of collaborative learning in the context of social media (Kanuka
&Anderson, 1998), we tested if the number of conflicts per statement would differ between conditions. Indeed,
an ANOVA showed neither a significant difference between conditions on the mean number of conflicts per
statement overall, F(1,16)=.99, p=.33, nor on ethical aspects vs. effectiveness separately, F(1,16)=1.93, p=.17.
        To   get a   better idea of  how    these  new opinions   were   formed   between    groups,  we  compared   the
direction of opinion change from pre- to posttest between groups (Figure 2). Prior to the learning intervention,
ArgStr dyads judged Behaviorism as a teaching method more positively than NoArgStr: overall, F(1,38)=6.80,
p=.013, p2=.15;     ethics, F(1,18)=5.63, p=.023, p2=.13; and effectiveness, F(1,18)=3.20, p=.08, p2=.08 (trend
only). The attitude of the two conditions changed after the intervention giving interaction effects for all scores.
NoArgStr dyads became less and ArgStr dyads more critical in their overall judgment, resulting in a strong
interaction, F(1,38)=9.70,   p=.003,    p2=.20.   Both conditions  evaluated   ethical  aspects of   Behaviorism   more
favorably between pre- and posttest, F(1,38)= 7.91, p=.008, p2=.17), but the ratings of the NoArgStr dyads
increased more than those of the ArgStr dyads, producing a significant interaction effect, F(1,38)=4.53, p=.04,
p2=.11.  An    even  stronger interaction   effect can   be observed   between    pre-  and  posttest on    effectiveness,
F(1,38)=  10.79,    p=.002,  p2=.20     (Fig. 3).  Here,  the  ratings   of   NoArgStr   dyads  changed     in favor of
Behaviorism's effectiveness, whereas the ratings of ArgStr dyads became less favorable. A plausible reason for
the opinion change may be that conflict awareness helped partners in both conditions to transact on another's
opinion. This active cognitive engagement with conflicting views may have destabilized their original opinions
and caused changes that are depicted in the strong interactions.

Domain Knowledge Gains
The comparison of the conditions in the pretest showed a significant difference in the pretest for the percentage
of correct answers, F(1,38)=18.59, p<.001, p2=.33. Both conditions did significantly better on the posttest than
the pretest, F(1,38)    = 87.55, p<.001,    p2=.70.   The knowledge    gains   of the   two  conditions   did not differ,
F(1,38)=.73, p=.399, p2=.02.
        The opinion formation and change reported in the previous section is particularly interesting as it may
signify a potential for knowledge gain via a deeper processing of domain knowledge in SNS. This is one of the
biggest promises     of ACK   and    of co-construction   of  knowledge.      To  test this  possibility, we   calculated
correlations between opinion change and knowledge gains. The correlation between overall opinion change of
both conditions  together   and  the overall   knowledge    gains just missed    being  significant, r(40)=.31, p=.050.
Although this effect seems to confirm H2, a closer look shows that the correlation for both conditions together is
probably due to the very high correlation found for NoArgStr alone, r(20)=.54, p<.05, but not for ArgStr.

© ISLS                                                                                                              179
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                     Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

Discussion
Despite the generally held opinion that Facebook is shallow and non-serious, we found evidence that it can be
used  for academic    opinion  formation  and   change    when  sufficiently supported.  We   theorized  that   argument
structure as support for sound academic argumentation would favor academic opinion formation more than
standard SNS discussions when opinion conflict is highlighted. This did not prove to be the case. Moreover, we
could not establish a correlation between opinion change and knowledge gains for argument structure. On the
contrary,  we  found   highly  significant  correlations   between  opinion   change   and   knowledge   gains   for the
NoArgStr condition. A possible reason for these results could be the higher prior knowledge of the NoArgStr
condition, which may benefit opinion change in the context of AKC (Darnon et al., 2006).          However, it is worth
investigating whether opinion conflict awareness is a stronger predictor of academic opinion change and how
argument support exactly interacts with such awareness.
          Given   the open   and   social character    of SNS   and the   possibility to acquire   new,   unpredictable
knowledge and skills, such as openness to opinion change, assessment of learning in SNS needs to be redefined.
Traditional learning tests based on factual knowledge or problem solving skills do not capture the power of SNS
and remaining faithful to them can limit the effectiveness and restrict the potential of SNS as learning tools.

References
Asterhan, C.S.C. & Schwarz, B.B. (2007). The effects of monological and dialogical argumentation on concept
          learning in evolutionary theory. Journal of Educational Psychology 99(3), 626­639.
Baker, M. & Lund, K. (1997). Promoting reflective interactions in a CSCL environment. Journal of Computer
          Assisted Learning 13, 175­193.
Bodemer,   D.  (2011).  Tacit  guidance   for collaborative  multimedia    learning.  Computers   in  Human   Behavior,
          27(3), 1079­1086.
Dabner, N. (2011). "Breaking Ground" in the use of social media: A case study of a university earthquake
          response to inform educational design with Facebook. The Internet and Higher Education, 15(1), 69­
          78.
Darnon, C., Muller, D., Schrager, S.M., Pannuzzo, N., & Butera, F. (2006). Mastery and performance goals
          predict epistemic and relational conflict regulation. Journal of Educational Psychology, 98(4), 766­
          776.
Dillenbourg, P. (2002). Over-scripting CSCL: The risks of blending collaborative learning with instructional
          design. In P.A. Kirschner (Ed.), Three worlds of CSCL: Can we support CSCL? (pp. 61­91). Heerlen:
          Open Universiteit Nederland.
Kanuka, H. & Anderson, T. (1998). Online Social Interchange, Discord, and Knowledge Construction. Journal
          of Distance Education/Revue de l'enseignement à distance,13(1), 1­19.
Laru, J., Näykki, P., & Järvelä, S. (2011). Supporting small-group learning using multiple Web 2.0 tools: A case
          study in the higher education context. The Internet and Higher Education, 15(1), 29­38.
Loll, F., Pinkwart,   N., Scheuer,  O.,   & McLaren,      B.M.  (2012). How   Tough   Should   It Be? Simplifying    the
          Development     of Argumentation    Systems     using a Configurable  Platform. In   N.     Pinkwart, &  B.M.
          McLaren    (Eds.), Educational    Technologies    for Teaching   Argumentation      Skills, Bentham   Science
          Publishers, 169-197.
McLoughin, C. & Lee, M.J.W. (2010). Personalised and self regulated learning in the Web 2.0 era: International
          exemplar of innovative pedagogy using social software. Australian Journal of Educational Technology,
          26(1), 28­43.
Roblyer, M.D., McDaniel, M., Webb, M., Herman, J., & Witty, J.V. (2010). Findings on Facebook in higher
          education: A comparison of college faculty and student uses and perceptions of social networking sites.
          The Internet and Higher Education, 13(3), 134­140.
Scheuer, O., Loll, F., Pinkwart, N., & McLaren, B.M. (2010). Computer-supported argumentation: A review of
          the state of the art. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 5(1), 43­
          102.
Tsovaltzi, D.,  Weinberger,    A.,  Scheuer,    O., Dragon,  T.,  & McLaren,    B.    (2012). Argument    Diagrams    in
          Facebook:   Facilitating  the   Formation    of  Scientifically Sound  Opinions.    In  A.    Ravenscroft,  S.
          Lindstaedt, C. Delgado Kloos, & D. Hernandéz-Leo (Eds.), 21st Century Learning for 21st Century
          Skills, Proceedings of EC-TEL 2012, LNCS 7563 (p. 540). Berlin: Springer.
Weinberger,    A.  &  Fischer, F.   (2006).   A framework    to  analyse  argumentative   knowledge     construction  in
          computer-supported collaborative learning. Computers & Education, 46, 71-95.
Weinberger,    A., Stegmann,    K., &   Fischer,    F. (2010).  Learning  to argue   online:  Scripted  groups   surpass
          individuals (unscripted groups do not). Computers in Human Behavior, 26(4), 506­515.
Weinberger, A. (2011). Principles of transactive computer-supported collaboration scripts. Nordic Journal of
          Digital Literacy, 6(3), 189­202.

© ISLS                                                                                                               180
