CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                            Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

Variation in Other-Regulation and the Implications for Competence
                                                Negotiation
      Karlyn R. Adams-Wiggins, Toni Kempler Rogat, Rutgers University, Graduate School of Education,
                                10 Seminary Place, New Brunswick, NJ 08901-1183
                Email: karlyn.adams.wiggins@rutgers.edu, toni.kempler.rogat@gse.rutgers.edu

         Abstract:   To  succeed,   groups need   skills to jointly regulate  their  shared   task work.   The
         current study examines variation in other-regulation, or efforts by one student to regulate their
         group's  work.    We   consider  the relationship  of directive  and  facilitative forms     of  other-
         regulation with efforts to negotiate competence, given that directive other-regulators may raise
         doubts   about relative ability. Three groups   of  four  7th grade students  were    observed   while
         working on two collaborative activities during an inquiry-based science unit.         Results suggest
         the nature   and  quality  of facilitative and  directive  other-regulation   varies,  with   directive
         regulators focused on controlling the task product in ways that excluded others' attempts to
         contribute.    In response,   teammates    worked  to renegotiate   their positions   of  competence
         within the group to ensure their ideas were considered for integration.       The focus on relative
         competence promoted by directive other-regulation may diminish a focus on group learning,
         given the social nature of joint activity.

Successful  teamwork    is increasingly   necessary  for learning   in  and  beyond    school  (Strijbos,  Kirschner  &
Martens, 2004). To succeed, groups need skills for jointly coordinating and regulating work on a shared task
product.  Recent research has expanded prior emphases on individual self-regulated learning to consider the
contextualized  nature  of  students'  experiences  during  group   work,   with the   ultimate  aim   of understanding
group's regulation of behavior, learning, and understanding during shared activity (Volet, Vauras & Salonen,
2009). Social regulation research has focused on who is regulating within the group indicating a range from
other-regulation or coregulation, in which one student temporarily predominates the group's interactions, to
socially shared regulation, whereby multiple group members jointly regulate group activity (Vauras, Iiskala,
Kajamies, Kinnunen, & Lehtinen, 2003). While other-regulation is typically conceptualized as a group member
temporarily  guiding  others'   understanding  (Hadwin     &   Oshige,  2011),   there is  some   evidence   that other-
regulation may be stable once a group leader is established (Li, et al., 2007) and more directive in conducting
the regulatory processes for the group (Rogat & Linnenbrink-Garcia, 2011). Rogat and Linnenbrink-Garcia's
(2011) results characterized directive other-regulation as one group member's efforts at determining the next
step of the task, detailing exactly what group members should do, and maintaining control of monitoring and
task contributions. These findings indicate that there may be a broader spectrum of other-regulatory behaviors
that go beyond facilitation to include more directive forms. Beyond more clearly understanding the nature of
other-regulation in collaborative groups, it is also critical to understand the implications for group process.
Research indicates some evidence that, unlike prior conceptualization of other-regulation, directive forms can
provoke  conflict  in response   to  group  members'     regulation being   ignored    and having    limited means   for
contributing to the task (Rogat & Linnenbrink-Garcia, 2011). Those subjected to other-regulation may come to
experience  their participation  as peripheral  and  in  conflict with  the  other-regulator,  particularly  when   their
regulatory and content contributions are not integrated. This lies in contrast to what we expect groups engaging
in a guiding, or facilitative, form of other-regulation to experience: disagreement instead could promote co-
construction of meaning and task improvement (Darnon, et al., 2006).
         The current study has two goals. First, we examine other-regulation within collaborative groups to
more  richly understand     the regulatory  processes    employed   by   directive and    facilitative other -regulators.
Towards this end, we designate each group's other-regulator by examining frequency and types of regulatory
strategies employed by all members of the group, using distinctions made in prior research, such as regulation of
content understanding, use of disciplinary norms, task process, group process, and behavior (e.g. Hogan, Nastasi
& Pressley, 1998; Rogat & Linnenbrink-Garcia, 2011; Salonen, Vauras & Efklides, 2005). We also qualitatively
examine  these  social  regulatory  processes  to   more  richly  characterize   the nature   of  the  employed   other -
regulation. Understanding variation in other-regulation is critical since, with directive forms, regulation of the
group may    be low   quality and   limit equitable  involvement    in ways  that  convey   information    about  group
members' competence.
         The second goal of the research is to investigate the relationship between variation in other-regulation
and group process. Specifically, we explore how other-regulation impacts efforts by group members to negotiate
their own and others' positions of competence. In the context of directive other-regulation, group members may
experience constrained opportunities to participate, and thus have fewer opportunities to engage as competent
contributors. Group members being repeatedly ignored and having their contributions treated as irrelevant when

© ISLS                                                                                                               18
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                            Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

in conflict with the directive other-regulator's ideas may introduce doubts about relative competence (Darnon, et
al., 2006). In response to relative ability being made salient and questioning the competency of one's own
contributions, group    members    may  engage    in competence    negotiation.   In   this work,  we  conceptualize
competence   negotiation    by drawing  on  the  literature on social  comparison   and  systems   of  competence    to
investigate how     individual students work   to  reposition  themselves    and their peers   within  the system    of
competence (Altermatt, et al., 2002; Darnon, et al., 2006; Gresalfi et al., 2009). Facilitative other-regulators may
correspondingly work to ensure everyone ideas are solicited, fostering inclusion and respect for everyone's
contributions, thus reducing the need to negotiate relative competence. Toward this end, we examine how
individuals within groups work to ensure that their ideas are not ignored and are considered for integration. We
expect group members with directive other-regulators to assert their own competence by self-advocating or self-
presenting. We    also  explore   whether  there are moves   to  reposition  others as more    or less competent    by
promoting or criticizing other's contributions (i.e., other-positive or other-negative). Fundamentally, it is critical
to consider implications of other-regulation since social comparison can have negative consequences for group
functioning. If directive other-regulation promotes a focus on relative competence it may ultimately discourage
a shared focus on learning from the task (Ames, 1992) and disengagement (Nolen, 2007), with implications for
diminished conceptual understanding during collaborative tasks given the social nature of joint activity (Barron,
2000).

Method
Three 4-person groups of 7th grade students were observed during two inquiry-based science tasks focused on
cell organelles  and    the development    of  reasoning skills.   Groups    were   purposefully  selected  to   afford
exploration of variation in other-regulation. We selected groups that appeared to vary in the degree of balance of
participation among group members, without including extreme cases (Patton, 1990).             Two observations per
group were selected that lasted at least five minutes, had minimal off-task behavior, and involved a collaborative
task (excluding pair work and teacher-led tasks).
         Elaborated running records were prepared from video-taped observations to contain information about
body language and gestures.     Next, we coded the records for social regulation. Sub-codes then were applied to
differentiate regulatory types (see Table 1), and each instance was designated as taken up, ignored, or rejected
with  or without    rationale (Barron,  2000).   Frequencies   and percentages   were  calculated  for  participation,
regulatory moves, and responses to regulation. Other-regulators were identified by their frequent regulatory
contributions  relative to  their group members    as well  as  their broad  use of  types  of social  regulation  (i.e.
regulated more areas than most group members). Subsequent qualitative analysis of the regulation employed by
these other-regulators informed our designations of the type of other-regulation as facilitative or directive. We
also coded for attempts by individuals to negotiate their position of competence or that of others (see Table 1).
Individuals within the group can attempt to convey that they are capable contributors via self-presentation (i.e.,
self-positive) or self-advocating (see Barron, 2000). Competence negotiation can also be targeted toward one's
group members in efforts to promote and advocate for other's contributions (i.e., other-advocate and other-
positive) or by diminishing the competence of one's teammate (i.e., other-negative). Other types of competence-
relevant language    which    may  contribute to negotiation   include self-deprecation   (self-negative)  and   group-
targeted statements (group-positive, group-negative). Further, groups who focus on relative ability may shift
between  discussing   ability  within  the group  to discussing  between-group    ability   comparisons   (i.e., group-
positive and group-negative) (Kempler & Linnenbrink, 2004). Both explicit (e.g., I am smart) and implicit (e.g.
refusing or soliciting help from a particular group member) evaluative statements were considered evidence of
competence negotiation given findings that older children typically rely on subtle forms of social comparison
(Altermatt  et al., 2002).  After  coding  the observations,   reliability was established  and   disagreements   were
resolved to yield final codes.

Table 1: Description of Codes

 Codes                      Description
 Regulation Types
     Content                Regulatory moves focus on the group's understanding or use of content
     Disciplinary           Focus on ensuring group's adherence to norms of disciplinary practice
     Task                   Regulation specific to task components, directions, procedure, and enacting task
     Group Process          Focus on coordinating group interactions and turn order
     Behavioral             Specific to re-engaging off-task group members and sustaining on-task behavior
 Competence
 Positioning
     Self-positive          Positive self-targeted statements that aren't inclusive of group (e.g. "I'm right")
     Self-negative          Self-deprecating comments that aren't inclusive of group (e.g. "I'm so stupid")

© ISLS                                                                                                              19
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                         Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

    Other-positive         Positive comments   regarding  a  group  member's    capabilities (e.g. "That's a  great
                           idea")
    Other-negative         Negative deprecating  comments targeting a  group member (e.g.    "You're wrong")
    Group-positive         Positive statements about own group's competence (e.g. "We're good at this")
    Group-negative         Negative statements about own group's capabilities (e.g. "We are behind")
    Self-advocate          Pushing for one's own perspective to be heard by the group by repeating claims or re-
                           asserting claims not previously taken up
    Other-advocate         Promoting contributions of a groupmate (e.g. intervening when someone is excluded
                           or ignored, asking to return to a previously dismissed idea)

Results
We began by exploring differences in other-regulation among the groups by examining whether the amount of
talk contributed by students to discussion was equitable using percentage of total turns taken by each group
member (Hogan, et al., 1999). Results confirmed the variation in other-regulation in line with our purposeful
sampling of groups (see method and Table 2). In Group 1, all four students participated relatively equally during
group discussion, while Groups 2 and 3 showed more imbalanced contributions among group members with
both groups having a single member who participated more frequently than others. Group 2 was differentiated
by having one group   member   who    evidenced  very limited  participation, while Group    3's remaining   group
members showed more equal participation. To identify the other-regulators, we also examined frequencies of
participation, total regulation and counts of regulation types employed by members of the group (see Table 2).
Below we characterize the nature of each group's other-regulation given these frequency data and a qualitative
analysis of the how the other-regulator engaged in regulatory processes for the group.

Table 2: Frequencies of regulation types by individuals within groups and participation

                                                                                                           Participa
                      Content       Disciplinary    Task        GroupProcessBehavioral          TotalRegulation-tion - %of total
                                                                                                             turns
                    No.     %       No.     %     No.     %    No.    %       No.    %       No.    %          %
          Allison     1      9       8      36     5      22   20     42      2     14       36     31       28.3
 Group1   BobCindyDonna244  183636   1310   5      1      4     9     19      2     14       15     13143137150017144514611225107150422420.527.1
          Totals     11     --      22      --     23     --   48     --      14     --      118    --
          Amy         4     18       2      29     22     46    4     31      3     38       35     36       27.9
 Group2   BillyCarlaDavid0   0941941 023    0      1      2     1     8       0      0       2        229122553956333344313273230028291.942.327.9
          Totals     22     --       7      --     48     --   13     --      8      --      98     --
          Adam        8     24       2     100     4      29    0     0       0      0       14     25         23
 Group3   BridgetCarolDylan0111503344000    0      1      7     0     0       0075022900214571001     2020350223913.141.822.1
          Totals     34     --       2      --     14     --    7     --      0      --      57     --
Note: This table presents the frequencies and percentages of social regulation types that occurred during the
three groups' discussions. Percentages assist group comparisons since observation length and on-task
engagement varied between groups. In addition, other-regulators for each group are designated using bold font.
Finally, total number of turns for each group was - Group 1: 258 turns; Group 2: 215 turns; Group 3:122 turns.

Variation in Other-Regulation
Donna  was identified   as Group    1's other-regulator. She  engaged  more    frequently  and   broadly  than her
groupmates in all forms of social regulation, with the exception of content regulation in which her frequencies
were typical for her group. Donna's other-regulation can be characterized as facilitative: she regularly posed
task regulation questions to evoke widespread participation (e.g. "This evidence, okay well how does it relate to
the movement and energy models?"), brought the group back to task (e.g. asking "What'd you guys write this
as?" during off-task behavior), and regulated group process in ways that prevented exclusion of Bob's minority
perspective on Task 1 (e.g. "Now we're gonna add `How would you rate this, Bob?'"). Donna also kept the
group accountable to the class' jointly created disciplinary criteria by referencing the norms during discussion

© ISLS                                                                                                         20
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                              Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

(e.g. "The most important thing of good evidence is if it's relevant. If it's irrelevant, it's not good."). Allison
also made   regulatory   moves    frequently  in  Group     1,  but she  most    heavily regulated   group   process  and
disciplinary practice, with her group process regulation primarily focused on turn order. Bob and Cindy both
regulated  less  often overall, but  also  tended to   regulate  group   process.  Overall, Donna's    facilitative other-
regulation generally prompted all group members to participate and thus fostered equal access to knowledge
construction, widespread inclusion and integration of ideas.
          Group   2's  participation was   skewed    and    involved   directive  other-regulation  by  Carla.    Carla's
regulation was focused on task and content, with many moves involving directive statements that offered little
room for response from groupmates (e.g. "Get a calculator"). Further, Carla's directive regulation was low
quality, with few rationales and a focus on simply besting others. David and Carla battled for control over
whose    regulation and  positions  would   be  taken  up    in the group.  In  one  example    where  the  task required
discussing evidence quality, Carla argued for Evidence F and David for Evidence C. David and Carla battled
over which evidence was best in extended and heated fifteen turn exchange. Carla said "I don't like it. F. F!"
and David yelled back "C!" Further, David routinely made Carla the target of his regulation, responding to her
directive approach (e.g. "Add it up!"). Of the remaining group members, Billy largely did not contribute to the
group and his views were not solicited. Amy mostly made moves to regulate the task, such as checking what
steps the group would take, but was largely ignored. Amy used disciplinary regulation to intervene during Carla
and David's arguments, but she was ignored every time. Thus, Group 2's directive other-regulation was low
quality  given  limited elaboration,   highly critical monitoring,    as  well  as  limited opportunities   for all group
members to contribute.
          Group   3's  other-regulation  can  be characterized     as directive, although   the participation   was  more
balanced  than   Group  2's. While   Dylan    regulated   at a  similar  frequency  to Carol,   it was  Carol   who  used
regulation to ensure that her response was incorporated in the final product and whose ideas were not ignored.
Characteristic of Carol's other-regulation, she engaged in some high quality content and task regulation, with
her  regulation  including  rationales  as feedback.   However,     these  instances of  high   quality regulation   often
involved a single partner with whom she chose to engage, while excluding others. For example, while arguing
with Dylan about how to interpret the evidence during Task 1 (i.e., content and disciplinary regulation), Carol
did not make efforts to include Bridget or Adam using group process regulation.           Also, Adam's many attempts
to regulate were    ignored  despite the   high  quality  of his   regulation during Task   1.  In  one example,    Adam
provided disciplinary monitoring by indicating that the group was relying on inference, rather than focusing on
the evidence. Overall, Group 3's pattern suggested that Carol dominated the group's regulation in ways that
primarily involved ignoring group members' regulatory contributions: her directive other-regulation involved
excluding ideas that contradicted hers and refusing to incorporate monitoring offered by groupmates.
          In summary, our results point to two forms of other-regulation which can be differentiated in nature
and quality. For Group 1, facilitative other-regulation involved inclusion of everyone's contributions through the
regulation  of  group  process,  behavior,   and  task   in  ways   that afforded   co-construction  of knowledge     and
coordinated work    on the shared product.   In contrast, the other-regulation   in Group   2 and 3 can be characterized
as directive. Group 2 exhibited directive regulation leading to reduced access to participation opportunities and
informational feedback, with regulation that could be characterized as harsh (i.e., battling, ignoring).        Group 3's
other-regulation involved a directive other-regulator working to control the group's final product. While at times
her content and task regulation provided feedback, she simultaneously failed to be inclusive of other group
member's contributions.

Competence Negotiation
In  this section  we   explore  whether   differences  in   other-regulation  co-occurred   with   attempts  to  negotiate
competence. More specifically, given Darnon and colleagues' (2006) findings that conflict can promote a focus
on relative competence, directive forms of other-regulation may lead group members to experience threats to
their competence. In response, students may resort to promoting their competence via self-presentation or self-
advocating, and in some cases, by putting down teammates.
          We turn now to an analysis of competence positioning moves in these groups. Competence positioning
differed between groups in its frequency and function (Table 3). While Group 1 and Group 3 had a similar tally
of positioning, Group 2 engaged in three times as many competence positioning moves relative to the other
groups.   Further   qualitative analysis   suggested   that  this   was  representative  of  high   salience  of  relative
competence   in   the  group's  interactions.  We  engaged      in  qualitative analysis to  consider   how   negotiating
competence functioned within each group. In the following sections, we first discuss how messages regarding
relative ability were made salient via competence messages within the group context in ways that provided
background for negotiating competence, followed by discussing individuals' efforts made to present themselves
as competent within the group.

© ISLS                                                                                                                21
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                        Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

Table 3: Frequency of Competence Positioning Moves by Group

   Competence Positioning Moves          Group 1             Group 2          Group 3
 Self-positive                                 0                 11                 5
 Self-negative                                 0                 1                  0
 Other-positive                                2                 0                  1
 Other-negative                                1                 25                 9
 Group-positive                                0                 0                  0
 Group-negative                                0                 2                  0
 Self-advocate                              18                   40                 13
 Other-advocate                                2                 1                  0
 Framing Task Competence                       1                 0                  0
 Totals                                     24                   80                 27

Group-level Efforts to Negotiate Competence
Group 1 can be differentiated by competence positioning moves that were positive and affirmed the competence
of all group members. Four of their moves evidenced bolstering the competence of fellow group members rather
than oneself (i.e., 2 other-positive, 2 other-advocate). Specifically, the facilitator, Donna, helped to ensure that
everyone's views were valued during group discussion. For instance, Donna other-advocated for Bob to ensure
his perspective was heard and prevent his view from being prematurely rejected. Here, Donna requested that
Cindy stop interrupting Bob because the group would not know his contribution unless he had the opportunity to
voice it. Also, on two separate occasions Bob and Donna acknowledged each other's correct contributions        (i.e.,
other-positive) after having voiced opposing views. For example, Donna chuckled while voicing agreement with
Bob's statement that their prior argument justified to the conclusion that his claim was plausible. Next, Allison
offered the sole other-negative comment to Bob in  jest: "No, you're wrong this time. You said 3."    Despite the
underlying poke at Bob's competence, this comment can be interpreted in the context of friendly competition as
was indicated by Allison's follow-up statement to Donna recognizing the validity of Bob's contribution: "Look,
him 1 [point], us 1. We're tied." Bob followed this exchange with an other-positive comment, "Because even
though you guys are right it doesn't relate to the model, it's still good evidence." In sum, Donna's other-
regulation ensured that everyone's views were treated as competent and valued. This seemed to foster positive
valuing of ideas, complimenting contributions, and even other-advocating for the inclusion and respect of the
minority perspective within the group.
          We observed negotiation that involved dismissiveness and criticism of group members' contributions
which devalued members' competence in the two groups with directive other-regulators. Group 2's positioning
involved a focus on mistakes paired with mostly explicit relative competence messages. There were 25 instances
of other-negative comments; some of the most striking included Carla singling out David with salient references
to relative competence in his class standing saying "You're the only one in this class who likes C" and repeating
"Don't ever grow up to be a scientist."  Even when engaged in a hypermedia task that included a team game,
Carla and David repeatedly pointed out each other's errors. For example, Carla asked "How are you in honors
literacy?" when David was slow to read from the screen. David repeatedly pointed out to the group that Carla
was to blame for the computer's malfunction (e.g. "You broke it! You broke it!"; "Carla broke the computer!").
These criticisms are representative of Carla and David's interactions with each other: the two regularly putdown
and criticized one another's competence, with some criticisms extending beyond the immediate group context to
each other's   more   global competence  (e.g. literacy, use of  technology,  career   choices).  Use of   negative
competence messages allowed David and Carla to restrict access to opportunities for others to be competent
contributors.  Notably, the highly salient relative ability comments escalated among other group members.     Amy
made two group-negative statements that served to compare their group with the other groups (e.g. "Hurry up, I
think we're the only group still doing this"; group-negative). The salience of competence produced putdowns of
groupmates    and even  between-group   social   comparison. In   sum,  Group  2    stood  out as being    a highly
competitive context rife with competence threats: there were high stakes for perceived incompetence as group
members    were   very  publicly and   harshly recognized    for incorrectness in     ways that   diminished   their
contributions' value in the group.
          Group   3's directive other-regulation was similarly   linked  to putdowns     and   restricted access to
contribution opportunities, but less frequently than observed for Group 2. Further, Carol used implicit rather
than explicit messages to convey competence. Carol both ignored and dismissed group members' ideas. She
tended to ignore group members with whom she was not directly working; both her partner Bridget and Adam
were ignored when Carol was busy trying to delegitimize Dylan's argument. Relative to the group context,
Carol also criticized group members' views that did not agree with or validate her own (i.e., other-negative).
Several moves were made in reaction to Carol's efforts at thwarting their competence. Often, Dylan responded
to Carol  with  other-negative  comments that  saliently focused    on her ability. Dylan  stated "You're    stupid!

© ISLS                                                                                                           22
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                            Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

You're so stupid!"     It is critical to also highlight that the group responded counterproductively to Adam's
attempts  at recognizing    each   group   member's   valuable   contributions   through   other-positive   competence
positioning. In particular, when Adam recognized both Dylan and Carol's views as having merit ("I know I
know, you're both right"), Carol simply resorted to self-presenting her own ideas (i.e. repeating "I think I'm
right, guys", while ignoring Adam's positive feedback).      In summary, competence positioning was indicative of
both   frustration with   Carol's  directive,  gatekeeping   style of  other-regulation    and   devaluing   of others'
contributions. Group 3 had an overarching negative tone with attempts to broaden access to the competent
contributor  role; unlike  Group   2, the  other-regulator's  competence     messages  were   subtle via  ignoring  and
exclusion. However, her less direct criticism still provoked significant resistance and repositioning efforts that
included explicit references to ability, which evidenced the group's frustration with limited access to contribute.
          Overall, competence messages were present in all groups, but messages varied in salience as well as
focus. Competence      positioning efforts dominated    the  interactions in Group  2. Importantly,   the   competence
messages served more exclusionary functions in Groups 2 and 3, whereas Group 1's messages facilitated the
integration  of  all members'    perspectives.   Group   2's competence    messages    made    individual  competence
evaluation salient because of the constant invocation of a competence hierarchy in service of David and Carla's
own attempts to use each other's presumed incompetence to justify exclusion from contributing to the group.
Finally,  negotiation  of  competence  in  Group    3 was   driven by  Dylan    and Adam's     attempts  to  access the
competent contributor role in the face of Carol's condescending approach to their contributions. Groups 2 and 3
show that directive other-regulation seems to yield competence threats that promote harmful group interactions.

Individual Level: Positioning Oneself as Competent
We identified self-advocating as the most frequent form of competence positioning for all groups, with students
repeating their own positions seemingly to ensure they were heard and their points might be taken up by the
group (Barron, 2000). Barron (2000) found that repetitions in a less academically successful group were efforts
to be heard and were exclusively self-referential, with much time spent pushing for one's own view. A more
successful group had more varied uses of repetitions, one of which was repeating a view while discussing
whether it was right. Consistent with Barron's findings, the function of self-advocating varied across groups.
Members of Group 1 self-advocated clarifying claims misunderstood by groupmates.            For example, Bob said "I
want to argue that it could be a two and not a three [quality rating of the evidence]" to reintroduce a comment
which had been interrupted. Later, he re-advocated his contribution: "I never said it was a 2" to highlight the
group's misunderstanding of his claim. Group 1 can also be differentiated by their responsiveness to self-
advocating. For instance, Group 1 actively listened to Bob's repeated claims, and made efforts to both interpret
and provide feedback to his ideas. Finally, it is notable that no self-positive or self-negative statements were
observed, suggesting a de-emphasized focus on proving one's individual competence to groupmates.
          In Group 2, self-advocating involved repeating claims without additional elaboration or justification.
For example, Carla and David continued repeating their claims across 10 turns, with Carla advocating that
Explanation F was highest in quality (e.g., "I don't like it. F. F!"), followed by David repeating that he preferred
Evidence C ("It's C!"). Carla gave some elaboration for why she preferred Evidence F, but even when some
rationale was    provided, repeated   claims   received minimal    group  responsiveness   (e.g. David:   "No   it does
NOT!"). Group 2 also had 8 instances of self-positive. Self-presentation comments involved demonstrating
superiority  of  one's competence   (e.g.  "Ha,  I told you"; "I bet  you  it's better"). Also,  Group   2's individual
positioning was used to thwart opposing and competing views that may have threatened one's own competent
contribution. Moreover, self-presentation set a competitive tone to the group's interactions that made relative
ability salient.
          In Group 3, Dylan self-advocated similarly to Bob from Group 1 by clarifying his claims in attempts to
have his ideas included in the group task. Similarly, Adam self-advocated 6 times, with attempts to clarify his
positions (e.g. adding emphasis in saying, "It says he received a 10 dollar bill before closing" and "I'm talking
about Sam!") and once self-advocated for task regulation (e.g. "We have to discuss the problems"). However,
Carol did not work to understand or integrate their points, as we had observed for Group 1. Instead, Carol
ignored each of Adam's attempts and questioned the legitimacy of Dylan's claims. For instance, she diminished
Dylan's   contribution  saying, "I don't   think that matters, but..." Additionally,   in  her  own  attempts   to self-
advocate, Carol directly attacked Dylan's claims, while boosting her own by saying, "Okay, so...if he paid 15
dollars...Hello?! Are you listening? If he paid him 15 dollars, there's no such thing as a 15 dollar bill." There
were also 5 instances of self-positive, with four instances of Carol saying she was right and one instance of
Dylan saying his own reasoning was correct in the middle of an explanation. Taken together, Dylan and Adam's
individual positioning seemed to function as a means to contest a directive other-regulator's monopolization of
task access. Carol coupled self-advocating with self-presentation in ways that seemed to aim at maintaining her
position  as most    competent    contributor.  While   the  self-presentation  was  not   as  harsh  or  as direct  as
demonstrated in Group 2, Carol's advocacy for being right and for her own ideas communicated more subtly
who was competent in the group.

© ISLS                                                                                                              23
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                                 Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

Discussion
Overall,  our   results indicate that     other-regulation  can   take varying  forms    ranging   from facilitative to  more
directive   forms.    In  our  results,   we  further    described  degrees    of  directive  other-regulation,    with  some
demonstrating explicitly controlling qualities (Group 2) and others employing more subtle methods of control
(Group 3)    (also see Rogat & Linnenbrink-Garcia, 2011). This finding extends previous research which has
primarily characterized other-regulation as supportive of understanding (Hadwin & Oshige, 2011; Li, et al.,
2007; Vauras, et al., 2003).     This distinction in other-regulation highlights qualitative differences in employed
social regulation.   First, in terms of the nature of the regulation, facilitative regulators focused on guiding group
process, content understanding, and task contributions, while directive other-regulators focused on controlling
and managing the task product as well as who ultimately made contributions to the work.                   Second, forms of
other-regulation   varied  in  quality.   Facilitators   more    often engaged    in high  quality  regulation,   given  their
emphasis    on  ensuring   equitable   participation    and encouraging     shared   understanding,  while   directive  other-
regulation was lower quality, given a focus on excluding participation and controlling the ideas integrated in the
final product. Further, the harsh criticism in one group's directive other-regulation led to even lower quality
regulation compared to a group with less volatile interactions.
          This observed   variation    in other-regulation has implications for    group process.   In an extension of work
that considered directive regulation's detrimental influence on group's socioemotional interactions (Rogat &
Linnenbrink-Garcia, 2011), we observed negative impact on another group process, competence negotiation.
Other regulators played a central role in defining competence for the group and thereby shaped negotiation, as
group members engaged       in competence negotiation       in response to the tone set   by other-regulation.   Facilitators'
solicitation of others' perspectives, advocation for others, and treatment of everyone's views as valuable for the
overall solution helped focus the group on achieving shared understanding and democratized access to the role
of competent contributor. This encouraged all group members to take up opportunities to contribute by making
claims as    well as  raising  questions.     In   this context,  group  members     self-advocated   in  a  productive  way
resembling   academically     successful    groups    in past   research  (Barron,   2000).   In   contrast, directive  other-
regulators   monopolized    opportunities     for   making     competent    contributions  through    implicit  and  explicit
competence    messages    that produced     a  hierarchy    of competence   (Altermatt,   et  al., 2002): they  ignored   and
dismissed views, treating conflicting points as in competition with their own. These competence moves led to
discussions of competence by groupmates, as well as to hostility and putdowns in reaction to directive other-
regulation. Here, it is critical to highlight that while the two directive other-regulators varied in their emphasis
on explicit (Group 2) versus implicit competence messages (i.e., Group 3's dismissive talk, ignoring), both
seemed   to  have    detrimental effects.   Competence      norms   negotiated   in  the group   had  implications   for how
individuals positioned themselves to contribute on the group task.
          What    explains  the  emergence       of directive     other-regulation   and  the accompanying       low   quality
regulation?     It is important to highlight that these groups were observed during initial weeks of an intervention
focused on collaborative reasoning. During early weeks, individual students may have still operated under a
conceptualization of academic tasks as individual work and student's motivational orientations may have been
focused on competition and demonstrating ability, marked by a performance goal orientation. This has several
implications including that (1) groups may have still been in the process of resolving the many motivational and
emotional    regulation   challenges   required  when    coordinating    joint work  (Järvelä  &   Järvenoja,  2011;    Rogat,
Linnenbrink-Garcia & DiDonato, 2013); and (2) groups may have represented a distinct sub-context within the
classroom (Pintrich, Conley & Kempler, 2003), reflecting a second system of competence for which students
need to negotiate their position (Gresalfi, et al., 2009). In particular, even with competence systems at the whole
class level involving disciplinary norms focused on equitable access to competence via criteria, students may
attempt to assert dominance within the small group. As our findings demonstrated, a goal of besting others
within the group and maintaining one's position of dominance can be antithetical to the goals of collaboration
(Levy, Kaplan, & Patrick, 2004; Rogat, et al., 2013).
          In terms   of   practical implications,   our   results  indicate that  social  regulatory  processes    and  group
processes are mutually sustaining in that it is the interplay among high quality facilitative other-regulation and
support for everyone making competent task contributions that promotes student learning during small group
activities. This  suggests  that    it is critical to   address   high quality  group  interactions  as  well  as  regulatory
processes   comprehensively    to   support   collaboration.    Taken   together,  these findings   indicate  that individual
competence can look different in varying settings, and we need to conceptualize collaborative groups as activity
systems   nested  within   the classroom    (Gresalfi,   et al.,  2009). Future   research  should   investigate  how   other-
regulation   is initially negotiated    within the  group.     In addition, we  need   to consider   the  role of  individual
differences,    such as   motivational    orientation   and  student's   perceptions  of  group    work   in  explaining  the
emergence of other-regulation.         Moreover, more attention should be given to the development and change in
other-regulation over time, and what contextual factors and individual differences explain group members who
continue to persist in providing high quality monitoring and in negotiating competence in the face of harsh
feedback and sustained efforts to exclude contributions.

© ISLS                                                                                                                    24
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                       Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

References
Altermatt, E. R., Pomerantz, E. M., Ruble, D. N., Frey, K. S., & Greulich, F. K. (2002). Predicting changes in
          children's self-perceptions of academic competence: A naturalistic examination of evaluative discourse
          among classmates. Developmental Psychology, 38, 903-917.
Ames, C. (1992). Classrooms: Goals, structures, and student motivation. Journal of Educational Psychology, 84,
          261-271.
Barron, B. (2000).    Achieving coordination in collaborative problem-solving groups. Journal of the Learning
          Sciences, 9, 403-436.
Darnon, C., Muller, D., Schrager, S. M., Pannuzzo, N., & Butera, F. (2006). Mastery and performance goals
predict
          epistemic and relational conflict regulation. Journal of Educational Psychology, 98, 766­776.
Gresalfi, M.S. (2009). Taking up opportunities to learn: Constructing dispositions in mathematics
          classrooms.  Journal of the Learning Sciences, 18, 327-369.
Hadwin, A., & Oshige, M. (2011). Self-regulation, coregulation, and socially shared regulation: Exploring
          perspectives of social in self-regulated learning theory. Teachers College Record, 113, 240­264.
Hogan, K., Nastasi, B., & Pressley, M. (1999). Discourse patterns and collaborative scientific reasoning in peer
and
          teacher-guided discussions. Cognition and Instruction, 17, 379-432.
Järvelä, S. & Järvenoja, H. (2011). Socially constructed self-regulated learning and motivation regulation in
          collaborative learning groups. Teachers College Record, 113, 350­374.
Kempler, T.M. & Linnenbrink, E.A.       (2004, April).  Re-examining the influence of competition structures in
          group contexts: Implications for social and cognitive interactions in small groups. Paper presented at
          the Annual Convention of the American Educational Research Association, San Diego.
Levy, I., Kaplan, A., & Patrick, H. (2004). Early adolescents' achievement goals, social status, and attitudes
          towards cooperation with peers.  Social Psychology of Education, 7, 127-159.
Li, Y., Anderson, R. C., Nguyen-Jahiel, K., Dong, T., Archodidou, A., Kim, I.H., Kuo, L.J, Clark, A.M., Wu,
          X., Jadallah, M., & Miller, B. (2007). Emergent leadership in children's discussion groups. Cognition
          and Instruction, 25, 75-111.
Nolen, S.B. (2007). Young children's motivation to read and write: Development in social contexts. Cognition
          and Instruction, 25, 219-270.
Pintrich, P.R., Conley, A.M. & Kempler, T.M. (2003). Current issues in achievement goal theory and research.
          International Journal of Educational Research, 39, 319­337.
Rogat, T. K. & Linnenbrink-Garcia, L. (2011). Socially shared regulation in collaborative groups: An analysis
          of the interplay between quality of social regulation and group processes. Cognition and Instruction,
          29, 375-415.
Rogat, T.K., Linnenbrink-Garcia, L. & DiDonato, N. (2013). Motivation in collaborative groups. In Hmelo-
          Silver, C., Chinn,  C., Chan, C. & O'Donnell,   A.  (Eds.), International Handbook of Collaborative
          Learning. (pp.250-267). New York: Taylor & Francis.
Salonen, P., Vauras, M., & Efklides, A. (2005). Social interaction--What can it tell us about metacognition and
          coregulation in learning? European Psychologist, 10, 199­208.
Strijbos, J. W.,   Kirschner, P.  A.,  & Martens, R.   L. (Eds.). (2004).  What  we know   about   CSCL:      And
implementing it
          in higher education. Boston, MA: Kluwer.
Vauras, M., Iiskala, T., Kajamies, A., Kinnunen, R., & Lehtinen, E. (2003). Shared-regulation and motivation of
          collaborating peers: A case analysis. Psychologia, 46, 19-37.
Volet, S., Vauras, M., & Salonen, P. (2009). Self- and social regulation in learning contexts: An integrative
          perspective. Educational Psychologist, 44, 215­226.

© ISLS                                                                                                         25
