CSCL 2013 Proceedings               Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

       Leveling the Playing Field: Making Multi-level Evolutionary
       Processes Accessible through Participatory Simulations
    Aditi Wagh, Uri Wilensky, Northwestern University, 2120 North Campus Drive, Evanston, IL 60208
                       Email: aditiwagh@u.northwestern.edu, uri@northwestern.edu

       Abstract: Recent research in Learning Sciences has drawn attention to the affordances of
       enabling students to learn about scientific phenomena through a complex systems lens. In
       this study, we adopt a complex systems perspective in helping students learn about a multi-
       level phenomenon, artificial selection, by using an agent-based participatory simulation ­
       Bird Breeder. Our goal is to investigate how design revisions to the activity in the form of
       1.) Explicit representations of students' shared experiences, 2.) Access to an underlying
       third level of alleles, and  3.) Transparent  rules of interaction  facilitated abstraction    of
       population-level trends in terms of change over time. We draw on data from two iterations
       of an agent-based modeling curriculum for evolution as part of a design-based research
       study in three tenth grade biology classes in the mid-west. The findings hold implications
       for the design  of participatory  simulations in general, and   ways to support   meaningful
       learning about complex multi-level phenomena in particular.

Literature Review
The study of complex systems is quickly becoming a new strand of literacy (e.g., Ben-Zvi Assaraf & Orion,
2005; Jacobson & Wilensky, 2006) because it offers new explanatory frameworks and methodologies that are
increasingly being adopted in scientific and professional environments. We consider a complex system to be an
emergent system in which population-level trends emerge from individual-level mechanisms.
       Biology is replete with instances of complex systems in which phenomena can best be understood by
grappling with relationships between levels in the system. Evolution, which is central to the study of biological
sciences, is one such complex emergent phenomenon that involves change at multiple levels of the population
such as the level of alleles, organisms and species. While most work on student learning about evolutionary
processes focuses on an understanding of connections between two levels, we try to support student reasoning
about a third underlying level, the level of alleles or genes of individuals in the population.
       We do this work using agent-based models (ABM). In an ABM, individuals in a system are assigned
rules for interaction with other individuals or the environment. The execution of these rules, over time, results in
distinct, often surprising, trends at the aggregate level. This delineation renders ABMs as an epistemological
match for learning about  evolution for  a couple of reasons.  First, they provide accessible       entry points for
learners who have cognitive resources at the agent-level (e.g., Papert, 1980) that can be leveraged to build
conceptual links between agent-level behaviors and aggregate-level trends (e.g., Wilensky & Reisman, 2006).
Second, ABMs alleviate a difficulty associated with learning about evolution in particular, and complex systems
in general called slippage between levels (Wilensky & Resnick, 1999d).
       Most of the work using ABMs to learn about evolution has involved students exploring models of
evolutionary processes as an observer of the system (e.g., Wilensky & Centola, 2007; Wagh & Wilensky,
2012a). In this paper, we examine the use of ABMs in which students are participants in the system. This is
done using a particular form of a computer-supported collaborative learning environment called a participatory
simulation. The experience of engaging in a participatory simulation can be characterized by Ackermann's
(1996) metaphor of "diving-in" and "stepping-out" to develop a deep understanding of a system (Colella, 2000).
"Diving in" entails taking the perspective of an agent in the system, by enacting the role of the agent from
within the system, while "stepping-out" entails projecting and objectifying one's personal experience in order to
deeply understand it (Ackermann, 1996). Going back and forth between diving into the system, and stepping
out, enables learners to increasingly appropriate the relationship between emergent aggregate-level change in
the system and the agent-level mechanisms that drive the change (Wilensky & Stroup, 1999a).
       In this paper, we describe how students synthesize population-level trends in stepping out of a part-sim,
Bird Breeders, which is part of a curriculum on evolution (Novak & Wilensky, 2010). Specifically, we examine
how design revisions to the activity supported abstracting population-level outcomes of the part-sim. Prior work
has described how diving into this part-sim enabled students to spontaneously adopt, and later project and
objectify the mechanisms underlying the system (Wagh & Wilensky, 2012).

Bird Breeders Participatory Simulation
The Bird Breeders activity was developed in the HubNet module (Wilensky & Stroup, 1999a) of NetLogo
(Wilensky, 1999b). Working in groups of four, each student assumes the role of a bird breeder and is randomly
assigned three or four birds at the start of the simulation. These birds differ from each other with respect to four

© ISLS                                                                                                         181
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                  Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

traits: the color of their crest, tail, breast and wings. The group's goal is to breed birds that are homozygous
recessive for the four traits.

Methods
This study was conducted in the context of a two-week long implementation of an evolution curriculum as part
of a design-based research study (e.g., Brown, 1992; Collins, 1990). In this paper, we report on data from two
iterations of implementations each conducted in three tenth grade biology classes in a mid-western town in the
United States. The same teacher led this implementation in both iterations.
         Here,  we specifically   report  on data   from  the Bird  Breeders  participatory simulation of artificial
selection. In both years, the students spent one class period working on the Bird Breeders model. Note that in
this paper, we  focus  on what     students  explicitly reported to have  understood  about   the mechanisms  and
outcomes of selective breeding. In general, when characterizing student responses in both years, a dimension
that was important to us was a description of outcomes in terms of populations changing over time. This is
because as the first activity in a curriculum on evolution, we wanted it to foster an understanding of artificial
selection as changing populations over time, so that this understanding could be leveraged through the rest of
the curriculum.

Findings from Year 1
In the first year, we analyzed 18 student responses to examine student descriptions of what they had learned
about outcomes of selective breeding. Though student responses varied, ten out of eighteen student responses
involved static descriptions of specific birds in the part-sim (e.g., "red wings, blue feathers, grey belly") or a
seemingly random response such as "3 results would be color of the fur, the ear shape, and the length of the
hair". Though these responses were not "incorrect", we hypothesized that a lack of attention to how a population
changes over time would make it difficult for these students to leverage their experience of having engaged in
this activity to understand other evolutionary processes later in the curriculum.
         Only eight out of eighteen student responses focused on a change in the bird population over time. This
led us to revisit the design of the activity to reconsider some of our design decisions. We had two goals: 1.) To
support more students in being able to describe the outcomes of selective breeding in terms of populations
changing over time, and 2.) To encourage students to notice an underlying third level, that of alleles and genes,
and examine how it was changing over time as well.

Design Revisions based on Findings from Year 1
In re-considering our design decisions, we wanted to foreground how the population had changed over time,
both at the level of individual phenotypes, and the underlying gene pool. These dual goals led to three main
design revisions, each of which will be described in detail here:
     1.  Explicit aggregate-level representations of students' shared experiences
         In looking back at the design of the activity, we noticed two sources of difficulty: one, the data students
collected in the activity did not help draw their attention to how the population had changed over time. For
instance, groups collected data on the number of birds they had to release into the wild, and the number of eggs
the  group  had laid. The      underlying rationale for  collecting this data was  to facilitate  a comparison of
effectiveness of different strategies that groups had adopted to breed the goal birds. However, the iteration in
Year 1 made it clear to us that though this goal of comparing strategies was important, it was more important to
draw students' attention to changing trends in the population. Perhaps more problematically, the original Bird
breeders' model did not include plot/s to track the changing population. In the absence of an aggregate-level
representation to record change in population, the students did not have a reference point to step out and reflect
on the outcome of their shared experiences and reason about population-level trends.
         To address these issues, we decided to include plots of changing frequencies of variations (phenotypes)
and alleles in the population. In addition, at the end of the activity, students were asked to record the plots,
instead of number of birds and eggs. The goal was to draw their attention to how the population had changed
over time.
     2.  Giving access to an underlying third level of alleles
         One group's use of the "prohibited" View-genotype feature led us to think more carefully about the
affordances of this feature. In the original version of this model, turning on the View-genotype switch made the
genotype information of all birds available at once, and left it available until the feature was turned off. This
unlimited access to the genotypes of all birds made the task less challenging.
         We decided that a design fix would include a feature that enabled students to access the genotype of
birds a fixed number of times. This led to the development of a new feature called "DNA Sequencer". With this
feature, each player could pick a certain bird to sequence its DNA, and get access to the genotype of that bird
for the rest of the simulation. However, each student could do this for only a fixed number of birds, determined

© ISLS                                                                                                       182
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                    Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

by a slider in the simulation. Providing groups with limited access to genotypes through the DNA sequencer
ensured that the challenging nature of the task was not compromised.
   3.    Transparent rules of interaction
         Our class observations from Year 1 suggested that some groups had difficulty learning the rules for
participating in the simulation. This lack of clarity often frustrated students who unintentionally released prized
birds or repeatedly attempted breeding birds without success. It is perhaps because of this lack of transparency
of rules that all groups did not succeed in breeding goal birds in Year 1.
         In order    to rectify  this issue, we decided  to add visual      cues to  the simulation to make   rules for
interaction transparent. First, a bird's readiness to breed is indicated by a heart that appears next to the bird. A
little arrow next to the bird denotes that it needs to be taken back to its cage before it can be used for breeding
again. Finally, the area in which birds can be released into the wild is represented by green grass. These visual
cues were intended to make participation in the simulation smooth and effortless, so that groups could focus on
the activity itself.
   4.    Breeding more goal birds
         As previously described, this activity is atypical of participatory simulations because of its small scale.
Though classic part-sims include the entire class, the Bird Breeders model included groups of four students.
This small-scale might have made it difficult for students to notice population-level trends when breeding only
three homozygous recessive goal birds. Hence, we revised the activity so the goal for each group would be to
breed three pairs of goal birds, rather than three birds to make the trend more noticeable.

Findings from Year 2
         In Year 2, we implemented the revised version of the Bird Breeders part-sim. Here we report data from
11 responses of 22 students working in pairs.
         In the class discussion, the students decided to divide up their responses about outcomes into three
categories: "Big     differences between  individuals at the beginning      and  the end", "Changes    gene pool",  and
"Offspring with desirable traits". In developing our own categories to sort student responses, we realized that
our categories very closely aligned with the ones that the students had developed. Hence, we decided to use
student-generated categories to describe the findings.
   1.    Big differences between individuals at the beginning and the end
         Responses in this category described how the population of birds at the start of the simulation looked
different from birds at the end of the simulation. For instance, one response in this category read "Depending on
how similar the parents are, the offspring could var[y] quite a bit, the final generation had introduced new
variations of traits relative to the first generations or their ancestors".
         This pair described an outcome in two ways: one, the similarity in traits of the parents influences what
the offspring will look like, and two, the final generation manifested different variations and looked different
overall from its ancestors.
   2.    Changes gene pool
         Responses categorized here referred to change in the gene pool over time. For example, one pair wrote,
"When you partake in selective breeding, you are altering the gene pool. The frequency of traits change. Less
popular traits become more common if they're desirable".
         This pair reasoned that engaging in selective breeding involves changing the gene pool of a
population in terms of frequency of traits. Even infrequent traits can become more common if they're
desired.
   3.    Offspring with desired traits
         The responses in this category indicated an understanding that through selective breeding, some traits
would  be   removed     from the  population,  while others  would be  retained.     By  way  of example,   one of  the
responses read "Outcomes of selective breeding are that the "bad" traits are gone and the "good" traits are still
remaining. You could see this when we breed the bird."
         These findings suggest that overall, in Year 2, student descriptions of outcomes of selective breeding
included an emphasis on populations changing over time, and also represented multiple levels of the population.
Moreover, we did not see any instances of descriptions from categories 1 and 2 from Year 1.

Discussion & Implications
At the start of this paper, we framed the experience of a participatory simulation in terms of "diving in" and
"stepping out" to develop a deep understanding (Ackermann, 1996). The data we have described in this paper
facilitates a closer examination of students stepping out from the participatory simulation in pairs to reflect on
what they learned. The findings of this study suggest that our three design principles supported productive
reflections on stepping out: 1.) Providing explicit representations of students' shared experiences, 2.)     Providing
access to an underlying third level of alleles, and 3.) Supporting transparent rules of interaction.

© ISLS                                                                                                             183
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                  Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

Conclusion
In this study, we investigated how specific design decisions for a part-sim designed to support learning about
selective breeding in small groups, influenced learning at the level of the individual, and the level of pairs
within each  group.  Prior   work has   found that this particular part-sim  did   support    group  learning  about
mechanisms   of  artificial selection as students were  engaged    in the activity (Wagh      &   Wilensky, 2012b).
However, this work also found that at the individual level, students had trouble abstracting trends from the
activity. This led to redesigning the group experience by in three ways: providing each group with concrete
records of their shared experiences in the activity in the form of plots, providing each group with access to more
information such  as information   about  genotypes, and  finally, making   rules  transparent    to ease  the group
experience of using the part-sim. In reporting data from the second iteration, we analyzed learning at two levels:
first, briefly at the level of the entire class by looking at the three big categories of outcomes that they abstracted
from their experience, and second, at the level of pairs from each group. In future work, we would like to
analyze data from whole-class discussions to closely investigate sense-making at the level of the entire class.

References
Ackermann, E. (1996). Perspective-Taking and Object Construction. In Y. Kafai & M. Resnick (Eds.),
        Constructionism in Practice: Designing, Thinking, and Learning in a Digital World (Vol. Part 1, Chp.
        2, pp. 25­37). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Brown,  A.  (1992).  Design    experiments: Theoretical  and methodological    challenges      in creating  complex
        interventions in classroom settings. The Journal of Learning Sciences, 2(2), 141-178.
Ben-Zvi Assaraf, O.,&Orion, N. (2005). Development of systems thinking skills in the context of earth
        system education. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 42, 518­560.
Colella, V. (2000). Participatory Simulations: Building Collaborative Understanding Through Immersive
        Dynamic Modeling. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 9(4), 471­500.
        doi:10.1207/S15327809JLS0904_4
Collins, A. (1990). Toward a Design Science of Education. Technical Report No. 1. Retrieved from
        http://www.eric.ed.gov/ERICWebPortal/contentdelivery/servlet/ERICServlet?accno=ED326179
Jacobson, M., & Wilensky, U. (2006). Complex systems in education: Scientific and educational importance
        and implications for the learning sciences. The Journal of Learning Sciences, 15(1), 11­34.
Novak, M. and Wilensky, U. (2011). NetLogo Bird Breeder HubNet model.
        http://ccl.northwestern.edu/netlogo/models/BirdBreeder. Center for Connected Learning and
        Computer-Based Modeling, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL.
Papert, S. (1980). Mindstorms: Children, computers, and powerful ideas. New York: Basic Books.
Resnick, M., & Wilensky, U. (1998). Diving into complexity: Developing probabilistic decentralized thinking
        through role-playing activities. Journal of Learning Sciences, 7(2), 153­172.
Wagh, A. & Wilensky, U. (2012a). Mechanistic Explanations of evolutionary change facilitated by agent-based
        models. Paper presented at AERA, Vancouver, April 13-17.
Wagh. A. & Wilenky, U. (2012b). Breeding birds to learn about artificial selection: Two birds with one stone?
        Proceedings of ICLS, Sydney, Australia, July 2-6.
Wilensky, U. & Stroup, W. (1999a). HubNet. Evanston, IL. Center for Connected Learning and Computer-
        Based Modeling, Northwestern University.
Wilensky, Uri, & Stroup, W. (1999c). Learning through participatory simulations: network-based design for
        systems learning in classrooms. Proceedings of the 1999 conference on Computer support for
        collaborative learning, CSCL '99. International Society of the Learning Sciences.
Wilensky, U., & Stroup, W. (2002). Participatory Simulations: Envisioning the networked classroom as a way
        to support systems learning for all. Presented at the Annual meeting of the American Research
        Education Association, New Orleans, L.A.
Wilensky, U., & Reisman, K. (2006). Thinking like a wolf, a sheep, or a firefly: Learning biology through
        constructing and testing computational theories- An embodied modeling approach. Cognition and
        Instruction, 24(2), 171­209.
Wilensky, U., & Centola, D. (2007). Simulated Evolution: Facilitating Students' Understanding of the Multiple
        Levels of Fitness through Multi-Agent Modeling. Proceedings of the Fourth International Conference
        on Complex Systems. Nashua, NH.
Wilensky, U., & Novak, M. (2010). Understanding evolution as an emergent process: learning with agent-based
        models of evolutionary dynamics. In R.S. Taylor & M. Ferrari (Eds.), Epistemology and Science
        Education: Understanding the Evolution vs. Intelligent Design Controversy. New York: Routledge.

Acknowledgments
We would    like to acknowledge    Michael  Novak   for brainstorming   design revisions      and  Corey  Brady  for
stimulating discussions about the role of participatory simulations in facilitating learning.

© ISLS                                                                                                          184
