CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                           Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

       Inhibiting Undesirable Effects of Mutual Trust in Net-Based
                                        Collaborative Groups
                             Tanja Engelmann, Richard Kolodziej, & Michail Kozlov,
            Knowledge Media Research Center, Schleichstrasse 6, D-72076 Tuebingen, Germany,
           Email: t.engelmann@iwm-kmrc.de, r.kolodziej@iwm-kmrc.de, m.kozlov@iwm-kmrc.de

          Abstract: Experimental studies have demonstrated the effectiveness of the knowledge and
          information  awareness   approach  by   Engelmann      and colleagues   for improving    computer-
          supported collaborative problem-solving. This approach informs group members about their
          collaborators' knowledge structures and underlying information visualized by digital concept
          maps. In our study, we investigated whether this approach may reduce undesirable effects of
          mutual trust. Trust is an important influencing factor with regard to behavior and performance
          of groups. High mutual trust can have a negative impact on group effectiveness because it
          reduces mutual control and, as a result, the detection of the others' mistakes. In an empirical
          study, 20 triads collaborating with the knowledge and information awareness approach were
          compared with 20 triads collaborating without this approach. The members of a triad were
          spatially-distributed and collaborated computer-supported. The results demonstrated that the
          availability of  the knowledge   and information     awareness   approach   overrides the negative
          impact of too much mutual trust.

1. Challenges of our Information Age
The  need  for collaboration,   especially for   experts in  different fields  of knowledge,    is ever rising in our
information age, and certainly the distribution of experts around the world is not a real problem these days:
These experts do not have to share the same physical space to work together on common tasks; instead, for this
purpose, they can use current computer technologies such as video chatting or collaborative writing tools.
          There are many advantages of computer-supported collaboration, for example, the mentioned spatial
flexibility (Engelmann, Dehler, Bodemer, & Buder, 2009). However, this is not easy to achieve in an effective
way: There are many reasons why interaction problems, especially regarding communication and coordination,
often occur in a computer-mediated environment (Janssen, Erkens, Kanselaar, & Jaspers, 2007): One problem is
the reduced  contextual    information, that is, missing    information (e.g.  non-verbal signals)   which would   be
available in a face-to-face setting (Kiesler, Siegel, & McGuire, 1984). Another difficulty for virtual groups is
that the members often do not know each other before they have to collaborate on a common task, and therefore,
they do not know what their collaborators know. However, different lines of research have demonstrated the
importance of knowing what the collaborators know (cf. Engelmann & Hesse, 2010): Research on Audience
Design (e.g., Dehler-Zufferey, Bodemer, Buder, & Hesse, 2011) gives evidence that individuals adapt their texts
depending upon the addressee. According to the Knowledge Imputing approach (Nickerson, 1999) effective
communication   requires    a  sufficient  amount  of    correct knowledge     about  the communication      partner's
knowledge. If one overestimates the partner's knowledge, the partner might not even be able to understand
statements (Nickerson, 1999). Studies on the Theory of Transactive Memory System (Wegner, 1986) confirm
that the groups whose members know who is an expert on which topics achieve more in group tasks (e.g. Liang,
Moreland, & Argote, 1995).
          However, prior    research has   shown  that   it is not easy    to acquire correct   knowledge  about  the
collaboration partner's knowledge (cf. Engelmann & Hesse, 2010): This knowledge was derived from both
behavioral and categorical information as well as from the interaction with the collaboration partners. During
this process, a lot of perception or evaluation mistakes can slip in (cf. Krauss & Fussell, 1991; Nickerson, 1999).
In addition, according to the theory of transactive memory system (Wegner, 1986), sufficient common time is
required to acquire this knowledge. Furthermore, there are situations in which the possibilities of acquiring
knowledge about the partners' knowledge are strongly restricted (Engelmann & Hesse, 2010), for example, in a
computer-supported collaborative setting with spatially distributed group members, who must deal with reduced
contextual information (Kiesler et al., 1984).

2. The Approach for Fostering Knowledge and Information Awareness
In order to find a solution for the need for and the problem of acquiring knowledge about the collaboration
partners` knowledge     in computer-supported    collaborative   settings, Engelmann   (née   Keller) and  colleagues
developed an implicit approach, called the Approach for Fostering Knowledge and Information Awareness
(Keller, Tergan, & Coffey, 2006). They defined knowledge and information awareness as being informed about
the collaborators' knowledge structures and information underlying these structures (e.g. Engelmann & Hesse,
2011). The approach for fostering knowledge and information awareness provides the spatially distributed

© ISLS                                                                                                            184
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                                 Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

group members with their collaborators' knowledge structures and their collaborators' information underlying
these structures, both visualized by means of digital concept maps.
         Concept    maps  are    a    well-established    kind   of knowledge      visualization   representing  conceptual
knowledge by means of hierarchically ordered concepts (in form of labeled nodes) and relations between the
concepts (in form of labeled links) (Novak & Gowin, 1984). Digital concept mapping technologies moreover
allow for adding nodes with links for accessing further information (e.g. Alpert, 2005). Concept maps are,
therefore, well suited for fostering knowledge and information awareness.
         Several experimental studies have confirmed that not only knowledge and information awareness can
be quickly acquired by being provided with the collaborators' digital concept maps, but also that this approach
improves   collaboration  and    collaborative     problem-solving      of  spatially  distributed  group   members     (e.g.
Engelmann,     Tergan, &  Hesse,      2010;  Engelmann     &     Hesse,  2010).  Collaborative     problem-solving   fosters
learning (e.g. Hausmann, Chi, & Roy, 2004). In addition, the experimental results have shown that this approach
may also assist in overcoming important collaboration barriers: The study by Engelmann and Hesse (2011)
provides evidence that the knowledge and information awareness approach fosters sharing, discussing, and
cognitive processing of unshared information. In the study by Schreiber and Engelmann (2010), it was shown
that this approach furthers the development of a transactive memory system. In the study by Engelmann and
Kolodziej (2012), it was demonstrated that also in unstructured group situations self-created concept maps for
fostering knowledge and information awareness may reduce the needed collaborative problem solving time and,
therefore, the   coordination effort   within  the  group.    In the  current  paper,    we will   focus on investigating  a
collaboration barrier having to do with the concept of mutual trust.

3. The Impact of Mutual Trust on Behavior and Performance of Groups
Trust is an important influencing factor with regard to behavior and performance of groups (Salas, Sims &
Burke, 2005). Changes in the situation can have an impact on the role of trust in groups (e.g. Kramer, 1999). For
example,   the role of trust  is dependent    on   the degree    of  structure  in the   situation (Dirks  & Ferrin,    2001;
Jarvenpaa, Shaw, & Staples, 2004): In situations with a low degree of structure, trust has a direct effect on group
variables. In  such  situations,   it is difficult  to interpret    the others' behavior.    Therefore,   their behavior   is
interpreted depending on the amount of trust that the group members have in each other. In situations with a
moderate degree of structure, trust is a moderating factor. Factors for interpreting the others' behavior are given;
however,   trust influences   how     these factors are   interpreted.   In   situations with high   structure, the  others'
behavior can be directly evaluated. Trust is not used to interpret the others' behavior and, therefore, does not
have any impact on group measurements.
         In situations in which trust has an effect on group variables, the following relations are to be expected:
In numerous publications (e.g. Jarvenpaa, Knoll, & Leidner, 1998), it is argued that mutual trust is an important
influencing  factor  for group     effectiveness.   This   was    also  confirmed     by  several  empirical    studies (e.g.
Kanawattanachai & Yoo, 2002). Further empirical studies, for instance by Aubert and Kelsey (2003) as well as
Jarvenpaa et al. (2004), have shown that trust has an effect on group efficiency, but not on group effectiveness.
         These   contradictory   results    could  possibly    be   explained  by   another   influencing   factor, namely,
correctness of individual performances: If group members with high mutual trust work without mistakes, this
should result ­ according to Aubert and Kelsey (2003) as well as Jarvenpaa et al. (2004) ­ in a faster and,
therefore, more efficient collaboration, since it is to be expected that high mutual trust reduces mutual control.
When free from errors, high mutual trust should not have an impact on group effectiveness. However, if group
members with high mutual trust make mistakes, these mistakes might not be discovered due to the reduced
mutual control   caused  by   having   high   mutual   trust.  This  should   lead  to   reduced  group  effectiveness  (cf.,
Jarvenpaa et al., 2004; Dirks & Ferrin, 2001). Due to the fact that efficiency is defined as effectiveness per time,
the time   saved while  performing     the  task has   to be  very  high   in order to   obtain  good efficiency  with   low
effectiveness. Therefore, it is expected that low effectiveness will lead to poor efficiency.
         Contrarily, low mutual trust should increase mutual control and, therefore, the needed time; that is, it
should reduce group efficiency. However, there is a good chance that the mistakes of the collaboration partners
will be discovered. As a consequence, higher group effectiveness can be expected.
         Due to the fact that, compared to face-to-face collaboration, computer-supported collaboration is often
accompanied by various difficulties (e.g., Janssen, Erkens, Kanselaar & Jaspers, 2007), it is most likely that the
group members will make mistakes. For example, while creating their own concept maps visualizing their own
knowledge structures, group members could "forget" to include parts of their knowledge or visualize some
elements wrongly. As these knowledge representations were used as a starting point for net-based collaboration,
these mistakes could decrease group performance. The following argumentation refers only to collaborations in
which mistakes appeared.
         Aubert and Kelsey (2003) have shown that trust is lower in computer-supported collaborative groups
compared to face-to-face groups. Thus, virtual group members have a higher need for mutual control. However,
because of the computer-support mutual control ability is limited. In such situations, mutual control is very

© ISLS                                                                                                                   185
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                       Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

effortful. However, as in the study presented in this paper, there are possibilities that allow for mutual control in
such virtual groups.

4. Experimental Study
The goal    of the study was   to investigate the impact of mutual trust   depending on         the availability of the
knowledge   and    information awareness   approach  on  group effectiveness  and  group        efficiency of    solving
problems in virtual groups.

4.1 Hypotheses
Without being provided with the knowledge and information awareness approach (control condition), as already
mentioned, it is to be expected that trust will affect group effectiveness: A variance regarding the amount of
trust also appears in virtual groups despite lower mutual trust in virtual groups compared to face-to-face groups
(Aubert & Kelsey, 2003). If mutual trust is high, it is to be expected that there is low mutual control, and
therefore, mistakes will not be detected. In reference to our study, the group members would not check whether
the contributions of the others are correct. This should decrease group effectiveness and ­ because of its relation
to effectiveness (see above) ­ efficiency. However, even if mutual control is effortful in computer-supported
settings, low trust should lead to mutual control, for example, by asking their collaborators if they are sure that
their contributions are correct. This should reduce efficiency, while effectiveness should increase a bit. (Due to
the mutual control difficulties, it is to be expected that not all mistakes will be detected.).
       In addition, it is to be expected that by direct access to the collaborators' knowledge and information,
the availability of the knowledge and information awareness approach (experimental condition) will facilitate
mutual control. The ability for easy mutual control can therefore be given also in virtual groups. In prior studies
(e.g. Engelmann & Hesse, 2010), it has been confirmed that the knowledge and information awareness approach
is used if it is available. Therefore, there should not be an impact of mutual trust on mutual control; that is, there
should be mutual control independent of the amount of mutual trust. Consequently, it is expected that the
amount of mutual trust will not have an impact on group effectiveness and group efficiency. Due to the fact that
first, the collaborators' contributions are checked and, therefore, their mistakes will be detected, and second,
because the process costs of mutual control are low, an effective and efficient group performance is expected,
compared to groups that collaborate without the knowledge and information awareness approach.
       To sum up, we hypothesize the following effects under the assumption of the existence of individual
mistakes included in the individual concept maps:
       Hypothesis 1: Regarding group effectiveness as criterion, we expect a significant interaction between
mutual trust and condition. In more detail, we expect that in the experimental condition, trust will not have an
impact on group effectiveness, whereas in the control condition, high trust will reduce effectiveness because of
less mutual control and, therefore, less mutual correcting of mistakes.
       Hypothesis 2: Regarding group efficiency as the criterion, we only expect a main effect for condition in
favor of the experimental condition; that is, the experimental condition will be more efficient compared to the
control condition. We expect neither a main effect for trust nor an interaction of trust and condition on group
efficiency.

4.2 Method
In the experimental study, an experimental condition consisting of 20 triads being provided with the knowledge
and information awareness approach was compared to a control condition consisting of 20 triads collaborating
without this approach.

4.2.1 Participants
Participants of the study were 120 students (84 female, 36 male) of a German university from different fields of
study with an average age of 23.74 years (SD = 3.47). They volunteered to participate for payment. The
participants, collaborating in groups of three, were randomly assigned to a control or an experimental condition.
       The     composition  of the  groups regarding gender  were  equal   between the conditions;       that is,  both
conditions had the same number of groups with no, one, two, or three women. The members of a group either
did not know each other or hardly knew each other: There was no significant difference between the conditions
regarding the degree of acquaintance among the members in a group (F < 1).

4.2.2 Setting and Materials
The members of a triad were spatially distributed and collaborated computer-supported. They communicated by
using Skype (only audio). The experimental environment consisted of several shared and unshared working
windows of CmapTools, a digital concept mapping software developed by the Florida Institute for Human and
Machine Cognition (USA). The study was held in German. Therefore, for this paper, all contents have been
translated into English.

© ISLS                                                                                                              186
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                         Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

       The     domain was    concerned with rescuing   a   fictitious type of  spruce forest  and  consisted   of 13
concepts, 30 relations between the concepts and 13 pieces of background information (in parts divisible into
sub-elements),  each  linked to a concept.  These   elements   were   evenly  distributed among    the three   group
members in a way that each member had the same amount of shared and unshared concepts, relations, and
background information   aspects.  The  shared  elements   were  shared    with  either  one  collaborator  or both
collaborators.
       Online questionnaires and instructions: An online questionnaire for assessing several control measure
items (e.g. experience in working with computers and in groups) and for measuring the amount of initial mutual
trust was included. For measuring mutual trust, several items taken from Amelang, Gold, and Külbel (1984),
from Jarvenpaa,  Knoll and   Leidner   (1998), as well  as from  Jarvenpaa    et al. (2004),  were used   that were
translated into German and partly adapted to our experimental setting. The 15 control measure items and the 13
items for assessing mutual trust were designed as multiple-choice items with five-point rating scales, ranging
from complete agreement to no agreement. Examples of these items are: "I can create visualizations by means
of a computer" (control measure item) and "In contact with strangers, it is better to be careful until they have
provided evidence that one can trust them."
       An online knowledge test was used to measure the knowledge of group members regarding their own
and their collaborators' knowledge on particular relations and concepts. It consisted of 24 multiple-choice test
items. These items were classified with regard to who possessed the requested knowledge, resulting in four
types of items: (1) items asking for one's own unshared elements, that is, items measuring knowledge that one
had alone in his/her individual map, (2) items asking for the collaborators' unshared elements, that is, items
measuring knowledge that only one of the collaborators had, (3) items asking for shared elements that one
shared with one of the collaborators, that is, items measuring knowledge that one had together with one of the
collaborators, and (4) items asking for shared elements of the collaborators, that is, items measuring knowledge
that only the two other collaborators had. For each item the participants stated whether they were certain that
they had answered it correctly (rating scale with three possible answers: low, middle, and high certainty). In
order to assess the knowledge and information awareness referring only to the collaborators' knowledge and
information only the categories 2 and 4 are relevant.
       A second online questionnaire was used to evaluate the study, that is, to assess among other things
aspects of collaboration and mutual control as well as to subjectively rate the quality of the group performance.
In addition, in the experimental condition, only the usefulness of the knowledge and information awareness
approach was assessed. Again the items were designed as rating scales with answer categories ranging from one
point for no agreement and five points for complete agreement. The questionnaire contained 50 items in the
control condition and ­ due to the additional items ­ 56 items in the experimental condition.
       The group members were provided with paper-based instructions on how to use CmapTools and with
paper-based instructions to explain all the phases of the study and the tasks to be completed by the group
members.

4.2.3 Procedure
After informing the participants about the set-up of the study and obtaining their signed letter of agreement to
take part in the study, the three members of a group were sent to separate rooms each equipped with a desk and
a computer. They began the study by individually filling out the online questionnaire for assessing several
control measure items and their initial mutual trust. After that each group member practiced using CmapTools.
In the subsequent phase, the group members were informed that they should imagine that they were three
experts who would have to mutually rescue a spruce forest. They were told that in order to rescue this forest
they would have to solve two problems, namely, which pesticide and which fertilizer they would use. The
fertilizer problem could only be solved correctly if the pesticide problem was solved correctly. The groups were
told that there was only one solution for each problem. They were told further that they should imagine that in
the past they had taken some notes regarding these problem domains and that ­based on these notes ­ they had
to create their own digital concept map visualizing their own knowledge and information. They had 20 minutes
to create their individual concept map. This was enough time for each group member to finish the individual
map. The log files of creating the individual maps (by CmapTools) were recorded. After that the members of the
experimental groups were additionally provided with their collaborators' individual concept maps for 5 minutes.
In order to control the time in the individual phase, the members of the control groups had 5 more minutes for
viewing their own individual map.
       Then the collaborative problem solving phase started which lasted 35 minutes. In this phase, the groups
had to solve the two problems for rescuing the forest. In order to accomplish this, they had to compile their
individual conceptual knowledge by creating a digital group concept map together in a shared working window.
The  background  information  aspects  were irrelevant  to the problem,    but this  was  not known    to the  group
members. The    group members    could speak   with   each other by    using Skype.   Besides the  shared  working
window, each member of the control condition had access to their own individual concept map that they had

© ISLS                                                                                                         187
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                          Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

created in the individual phase (see Figure 1, on the left). The members of the experimental condition were
additionally  provided  with  their  collaborators'  individual   concept  maps    visualizing  their  collaborators'
conceptual knowledge and background information (see Figure 1, on the right).
         In this collaborative phase, log files of creating the group maps (by CmapTools), as well as video and
audio files (by Camtasia), were recorded.

               Figure 1. Collaborative phase (left: control condition; right: experimental condition).

4.3 Measures
To answer the hypotheses, besides the two conditions, the following measures were used as predictor measures:
         A factor analysis with Varimax rotation with the 13 trust items included in the questionnaire on control
measurements resulted in two interpretable factors (cf. Bortz, 1999), namely, "general skepticism regarding
others" (in the following this will be called initial skepticism) and "trust in others due to experience" (in the
following this will called initial trust). As expected, there were no significant differences between the conditions
regarding these factors (for initial skepticism: F < 1; for initial trust: MC = 0.16; ME =-0.16; F(1, 38) = 1.06,
MSE = 1.00, p = .31).
         Regarding  the  quality  of  the problem   solutions    of the  groups as   criterion measures    for  group
effectiveness, we  differentiated between     two dependent   measures,    namely, solving   the pesticide  problem
correctly and solving the fertilizer problem correctly. If a group solved the pesticide problem correctly, one
point was given; if the wrong pesticide was chosen, no points were given. Analogous to this, if a group solved
the fertilizer problem correctly, one point was assigned; if the wrong fertilizer was chosen, no points could be
attained. The interrater agreement for both measures was Cohens'  = 1 indicating a perfect match (Cohen,
1960).
         Regarding  group  efficiency,    the following  measures    were   differentiated: Because   in   this study
effectiveness  was determined   as  a dichotomy     variable (solved   vs. not  solved), to  determined    efficiency
measures, only  those  triads were   included  that solved   the pesticide problem   and/or  the fertilizer problem
correctly. Two measures were differentiated: The variable "efficiency of choosing the correct pesticide solution"
refers to the collaboration time needed to decide on the correct pesticide solution. The variable "efficiency of
choosing the correct fertilizer solution" refers to the collaboration time needed to decide on the correct fertilizer
solution. The interrater agreement was ICC = .96 for efficiency of deciding on the correct pesticide solution and
ICC = .96 for efficiency of deciding on the correct fertilizer solution (two-way mixed single measures, cf.
Shrout & Fleiss, 1979).

5. Results
The experimental condition in which the group members were provided with the knowledge and information
awareness approach was compared with the control condition in which the group members collaborated without
this approach. All analyses presented here are based on the group level, because of both the dependent variables
were variables on the group level and the individuals in a group are not independent of each other. This means
that also the trust variables were calculated as group means in order to use them on the group level.
         The inclusion of a covariate was not necessary because we did not find significant differences between
the conditions regarding the control measures. As a manipulation check, it was analyzed whether our knowledge
and information    awareness  approach    fostered  the acquisition   of knowledge   and    information   awareness:
Accordant with the results of prior studies (e.g. Engelmann et al., 2010), the knowledge test resulted in a
significant higher knowledge and information awareness value for the experimental condition compared to the
control condition (MC = 18.77 ME = 22.87; F(1, 38) = 7.41; MSE = 22.66; p = .01; p²= .16). This value was
calculated as the sum of item categories 2 and 4 each weighted by the correctness certainty (see Section 4.2.2).
Due to the fact that we were interested in interaction effects between condition and variables of trust, moderator
analyses were   conducted following    Aiken   and  West   (1991).   The   necessary requirements     for conducting
regression analyses were tested each time: All analyses met the global test statistic (cf. Peña & Slate, 2006).

© ISLS                                                                                                           188
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                           Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

5.1 Group Effectiveness as Criterion Variable
The regression analyses with effectiveness measures as the criterion variable as well as condition, initial trust,
and their interaction as predictor variables led to the following results:
          The regression analysis with the solution of the pesticide problem as the criterion variable revealed no
significant conditional effect for initial trust (b = .04, SE = .09;  = .09, p = .62) or for belonging to a particular
condition (b = -.02, SE = .07;  = -.04, p = .78), adjusted R² = -.018, F(2, 37) = 0.66, p = .52. However, as
predicted, a significant interaction between condition and initial trust appeared (b = .25, SE = .09; = .50,
p < .01), adjusted R² change = .153, F change (3, 36) = 3.35, p = .03: Simple slope analyses indicated, as
assumed, that higher initial trust significantly impaired the solution of the pesticide problem of the control
condition (b = -.21, SE = .08;  = -.42, p = .02). In the experimental condition trust had, as expected, no
significant effect on the solution of the pesticide problem (b = .29, SE = .15;  = .60, p = .06), but in contrast to
our hypothesis, a marginal effect indicating that high trust marginally increased the group effectiveness.
          Regarding the measure "solution of the fertilizer problem" as criterion variables, no significant effects
resulted. In addition, the regression analyses with effectiveness measures as the criterion variable, as well as
condition, initial skepticism, and their interaction as predictor variables, did not result in significant interactions.
Therefore, these results are not reported.

5.2 Group Efficiency as Criterion Variable
The regression analyses with efficiency measures as the criterion variable, as well as condition, initial trust, and
their interaction as predictor variables, led to the following results:
          Accordant with our hypothesis, the regression analysis with efficiency of choosing the correct pesticide
solution  as the  criterion variable revealed  a significant main    effect for belonging   to a   particular condition
(b = .-193.78, SE = 93.74;  = -.40, p = .05): The experimental groups needed less time for finding the correct
pesticide solution   compared  to the  control groups   (MC  = 19:56,   SDC  =  7:21,  ME  =  13:15,   SDE=   7:55). As
expected, we did not find a significant main effect for initial trust (b = -.127.96, SE = 117.38;  = -.23, p = .29),
adjusted R² = .16, F(3, 21) = 2.50, p = .09, nor did a significant interaction between condition and initial trust
appear (b = -180.10, SE = 117.38;  = -.32, p = .14).
          In line with this result, the regression analysis with efficiency of choosing the correct fertilizer solution
as criterion variable  also  revealed, as  assumed,   a significant  main   effect for the belonging    to a  particular
condition (b = -166.27, SE = 63.20;  = -.50, p < .05): The experimental groups needed less time for finding the
correct fertilizer solution compared to the control groups (MC = 22:40, SDC = 4:42, ME = 17:16, SDE = 5:23). As
predicted, we did not find a significant main effect for initial trust (b = 33.07, SE = 78.99;  = .09, p = .68),
adjusted R² = .15, F(3, 23) = 2.52, p = .08, nor did a significant interaction between condition and initial trust
appear (b = -16.43, SE = .78.99;  = -.05, p = .84).
          The regression analyses with efficiency measures as the criterion variable, as well as condition, initial
skepticism, and their interaction as predictor variables, did not result in significant interactions. Therefore, these
results are not reported.

6. Discussion and Implications
Our  initial point was    the conflicting  empirical  findings regarding    the    impact of  mutual   trust  on group
performance. While some researchers have demonstrated that trust has an effect on group effectiveness (e.g.,
Kanawattanachai & Yoo, 2002), others have pointed out that trust has an effect on group efficiency, but not on
effectiveness (e.g. Aubert & Kelsey, 2003). In this paper, we argued that these conflicting findings could be
explained by including "the amount of individual errors made by group members" as a further factor. We
argued that in CSCL-settings, we must expect that group members will make mistakes due to the difficulties
caused by    the use of collaborative  technology  (cf.  Kiesler  et al., 1984;  Janssen   et al., 2007).  In addition,
compared to face-to-face situations, in CSCL-settings, the mutual trust is lower, and therefore, the need for
mutual control is higher, while mutual control is much more effortful. Hence, we concluded that in CSCL-
settings with increasing mutual trust, mutual control will be increasingly reduced, and as a result, it is likely that
mistakes will not be detected, decreasing group effectiveness. In contrast, with decreasing trust, we expected
increasing mutual control and, therefore, increasing effectiveness.
          We further argued that our knowledge and information awareness approach counteracts this effect of
trust. This approach provides group members with their collaborators' externalized knowledge structures and
underlying information and, therefore, allows for easy mutual control also in virtual settings. Prior studies have
shown that this approach is used if it is available (e.g. Hesse & Engelmann, 2010). Therefore, it was expected
that the groups will check each other's work if provided with this approach, independent of their amount of
mutual trust. Accordingly, it was expected that in the experimental condition, trust does not affect effectiveness.
          To  sum  up,  we    expected a  significant interaction   between   condition   and  initial trust  on group
effectiveness in a way that increasing trust will decrease effectiveness in the control condition, while in the
experimental condition trust will not have an effect on group effectiveness.

© ISLS                                                                                                             189
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                          Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

        The results of the presented study confirmed our hypothesis: In the control condition with increasing
mutual trust, group effectiveness decreased. In the experimental condition, mutual trust did not significantly
affect group effectiveness; however, there was a marginal effect indicating that high mutual trust marginally
increased group effectiveness. The negative impact of mutual trust in the control condition can be counteracted
successfully by the availability of the knowledge and information awareness approach. We explained this result
with the fostering of mutual control when the knowledge and information awareness approach is available. The
marginal effect may demonstrate that in the experimental condition mutual trust even fostered mutual control.
Another explanation  could be     that the knowledge   and information    approach  leads to a situation   with  high
structure in which trust does not have an effect on group variables anymore (e.g. Dirks & Ferrin, 2001)
        However, it is interesting to note that these effects were only found with regard to solving the pesticide
problem, but not with regard to solving the fertilizer problem. A reason for this could be that the fertilizer
problem could   only be solved    correctly if  the pesticide problem    was solved correctly; that is,   solving the
fertilizer problem depended more on solving the pesticide problem than on other reasons. In addition, it is also
interesting that we only found this effect for the factor initial trust, but not for the factor initial skepticism. Initial
trust was based on items such as "In most of the groups that I have worked with in the past, the group members
trusted each other" or "In the past, I have worked mostly together with trustworthy people". Therefore, it refers
to the amount of general trust in others developed by prior experience. Initial skepticism was based mainly on
items such as "One should be very careful if working together with strangers" or "In current times, with so
much competition, you should be on the alert or someone will probably take advantage of you" and, therefore,
refers mainly to a generalized skepticism about others, based more on a general attitude. This difference seems
to be crucial: Initial skepticism seems not to be just the opposite of initial trust. There appears to be quality
differences, at least with respect to our factors. Future studies are needed to explain this difference.
        With regard to group efficiency, we expected for control groups with high trust also low efficiency
because efficiency is dependent on effectiveness. For control groups with low trust, we also expected low
efficiency due to much mutual control that takes time. For the experimental groups, we expected, independent
of the amount of trust, high group efficiency due to the low process costs for checking the others.
        This hypothesis was confirmed: In line with prior study results (e.g. Engelmann & Hesse, 2010), the
experimental groups solved both of the problems faster compared to the control groups. As expected, neither a
main effect for trust nor an interaction between trust and condition on group efficiency were observed. Together
with the findings on group effectiveness, this result demonstrated that mutual trust may have an effect on group
effectiveness, but not on  group    efficiency. This  is accordant with    Kanawattanachai   and Yoo      (2002)  and
Jarvenpaa et al. (2004). Thus, this paper also contributes to solving the conflicting findings in the literature
regarding the effects of trust.
        Our hypotheses were derived, among others things, from the assumptions regarding mutual control.
However, in this study, we did not analyze mutual control. Future analyses could be based on the recorded
discussions. However, in order to analyze mutual control in a better way, eye tracking is needed. Eye tracking
results could contribute to further clarifying the postulated relations.
        To sum up, this study demonstrated that the availability of the knowledge and information awareness
approach overrides the negative impact of too high mutual trust that is to be expected especially in CSCL-
settings. Additionally, this study further contributes to clarifying the impact of trust on group effectiveness and
group efficiency in computer-supported collaborative situations depending on different situational factors such
as being provided with a knowledge and information awareness approach or not.

7. References
Aiken, L. S., & West, S. G. (1991). Multiple Regression: Testing and Interpreting Interactions. Thousand Oaks,
        California: SAGE Publications, Inc.
Alpert, S. R. (2005). Comprehensive mapping of knowledge and information resources: The case of Webster. In
        S.-O. Tergan, & T. Keller (Eds.), Knowledge and information visualization. Searching for synergies.
        (pp. 220-237). LNCS 3426. Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag.
Amelang, M., Gold, A., & Külbel, E. (1984). Über einige Erfahrung mit einer deutschsprachigen Skala zur
        Erfassung zwischenmenschlichen Vertrauens (Interpersonal Trust). Diagnostica, 30(3), 198-215.
Aubert, B. A., & Kelsey, B. L. (2003). Further understanding of trust and performance in virtual teams. Small
        Group Research, 34(5), 575-618.
Bortz, J. (1999). Statistik für Sozialwissenschaftler. Berlin: Springer.
Cohen, J. (1960). A coefficient of agreement for nominal scales. Educational and Psychological Measurement,
        20, 37-46.
Dehler-Zufferey, J., Bodemer, D., Buder, J., & Hesse, F. W. (2011). Partner knowledge awareness in knowledge
        communication: Learning by adapting to the partner. The Journal of Experimental Education, 79(1),
        102-125.

© ISLS                                                                                                            190
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                           Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

Dirks, K. T. & Ferrin, D. L. (2001). The role of trust in organizational settings. Organization Science, 12(4),
         450-467.
Engelmann, T., Baumeister, A., Dingel, A., & Hesse, F.W. (2010). The added value of communication in a
         CSCL-scenario    compared   to just having   access to the   partners` knowledge   and information.   In J.
         Sánchez, A. Cañas, & J.D. Novak (Eds.), Concept Maps making learning meaningful: Proceedings of
         the 4th International Conference on Concept Mapping (Vol. 1, pp. 377-384). Chile: University of
         Chile.
Engelmann, T., Dehler, J., Bodemer, D. & Buder, J. (2009). Knowledge awareness in CSCL: a psychological
         perspective. Computers in Human Behavior, 25(4), 949-960.
Engelmann,   T.  & Hesse,  F.W.    (2010). How  digital concept    maps   about the collaborators' knowledge     and
         information  influence  computer-supported   collaborative   problem   solving. International   Journal  of
         Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 5(3), 299-320.
Engelmann,   T.  & Hesse,  F.  W.  (2011).  Fostering sharing   of unshared  knowledge   by  having  access   to the
         collaborators' meta-knowledge structures. Computers in Human Behavior, 27, 2078-2087.
Engelmann, T. & Kolodziej, R. (2012). Do virtual groups recognize situations in which it is advantageous to
         create digital concept maps? In A. Cañas, J.D. Novak. & J. Vanhear (Eds.), Concept Maps: theory,
         methodology, technology. Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Concept Mapping (Vol.
         1, pp. 172-179). Malta: University of Malta.
Engelmann,   T., Tergan,   S.-O. &  Hesse,   F.W. (2010).  Evoking    knowledge   and  information  awareness    for
         enhancing computer-supported collaborative problem solving. The Journal of Experimental Education,
         78, 1-20.
Hausmann, R. G. M., Chi, M.T. H. & Roy, M. (2004) Learning from collaborative problem-solving: An analysis
         of three hypothesized mechanisms. In K. D. Forbus, D. Gentner, & T. Regier (Eds.), Proceedings of
         the 26th Annual Cognitive Science society (pp. 547-552). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Janssen, J., Erkens, G., Kanselaar, G., & Jaspers, J. (2007). Visualization of participation: Does it contribute to
         successful computer-supported collaborative learning? Computers & Education, 49, 1037­1065.
Jarvenpaa, S. L., Knoll, K., & Leidner, D. E. (1998). Is there anybody out there? Antecedents of trust in global
         virtual teams. Journal of Management Information Systems, 14(4), 29-64.
Jarvenpaa, S. L., Shaw, T. R., & Staples, D. S. (2004). Toward contextualized theories of trust: the role of trust
         in global virtual teams. Information Systems Research, 15(3), 250-267.
Kanawattanachai,   P. &   Yoo,  Y. (2002).  Dynamic   nature of trust  in virtual teams. The   Journal   of Strategic
         Information Systems, 11, 187-213.
Keller, T., Tergan, S.-O. & Coffey, J. (2006). Concept maps used as a "knowledge and information awareness"
         tool for supporting collaborative problem solving in distributed groups. In A. J. Cañas & J. D. Novak
         (Eds.), Concept Maps: Theories, Methodology, Technology. Proceedings of the Second International
         Conference on Concept Mapping (pp. 128-135). San José: Sección de Impresión del SIEDIN.
Kiesler, S., Siegel,  J., &   McGuire,   T.  W.   (1984). Social   psychological    aspects of  computer -mediated
         communication. American-Psychologist, 39, 1123-1134.
Kramer, R. M. (1999). Trust and distrust in organizations: Emerging perspectives, enduring questions. Annual
         Reviews Psychology, 50, 569-598.
Krauss,  R.  M., &  Fussell,  S. R. (1991).  Perspective-taking    in communication:   Representations    of  others'
         knowledge in reference. Social Cognition, 9, 2­24.
Liang, D. W., Moreland, R., & Argote, L. (1995). Group versus individual training and group performance: The
         mediating role of transactive memory. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 21(4), 384-393.
Nickerson, R. S. (1999). How we know ­ and sometimes misjudge ­ what others know: Imputing one's own
         knowledge to others. Psychological Bulletin, 125(6), 737-759.
Novak, J. D. & Gowin, D.B. (1984). Learning how to learn. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Peña, E. A., & Slate, E. H. (2006). Global validation of linear model assumptions. Journal of the American
         Statistical Association, 101(473), 341­354.
Salas, E., Sims, D. E., & Burke, C. S. (2005). Is there a "big five" in teamwork? Small Group Research, 36(5),
         555-599.
Schreiber,  M.  &  Engelmann,    T. (2010).  Knowledge    and   information  awareness   for  initiating transactive
         memory system processes of computer-supported collaborating ad hoc groups. Computers in Human
         Behavior, 26, 1701-1709.
Shrout, P. E., & Fleiss, J. L. (1979). Intraclass correlation: Uses in assessing rater reliability. Psychological
         Bulletin, 86, 420-428.
Wegner, D. M. (1986). Transactive memory: A contemporary analysis of the group mind. In B. Mullen & G. R.
         Goethals (Eds.), Theories of group behaviour (pp. 185-208). New York: Springer.

© ISLS                                                                                                           191
