CSCL 2013 Proceedings                      Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

    Examining High School Students' Learning from Collaborative
                          Projects Related to Alternative Energy
    Jennifer L. Weible, Heather Toomey Zimmerman, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA
                                     Email: jlw1086@psu.edu, heather@psu.edu

         Abstract:     Constructivist     learning  theory   is  used   to  examine   students'    individual
         understandings from a collaborative science-writing project on alternative energies supported
         by Web 2.0 technologies.         We  examine   how   high  school chemistry students  (n=30)  make
         sense of alternative energy constructs through analyzing changes in pre- and post-intervention
         concept maps. Through statistical and structural analysis of their concept maps, we investigate
         changes in the students' understandings about alternative energy. Our findings suggest that
         students increased their knowledge about alternative energies at different levels, reflecting
         both  surface    and deep   learning  of  related  environmental  education  concepts,  as well  as
         creating strong connections between concepts related to safety, costs, and health for different
         types of alternative energy. In addition, student elaboration increased for all energy types,
         suggesting that the jigsaw pedagogy was successful in improving individual understandings.

Introduction
Learning sciences    research   has taken   a fruitful line of  work to  provide  students engaging  in collaborative
projects with technologies to support their thinking and learning (Stahl, Koschmann, Suthers, 2006). Our work
is situated in the effort to support learners with educational technologies as they participate in science practices
with a goal of understanding how students use Web 2.0 tools as they collaborate to make sense of complex
scientific topics. However, within school settings, the collective learning that occurs in classrooms is still often
measured  on   an   individual  basis    (Sawyer,  2006).   Therefore, although  knowledge   is  constructed  through
negotiation of meaning within the group, the individual's understandings are of great importance.             For this
paper, we analyze how a collaborative unit on in two high school classrooms that uses wikis, social book
marking, and podcasts can support individuals' meaning making about alternative energies.

Conceptual Framework
Our work     adopts  a    constructivist approach   to learning:  learning is the individual's  process   of  building
knowledge    and   skills based on   their social  interactions (Pena-Shaf  &  Nicholls, 2004;  Sharples,   Taylor, &
Vavoula, 2005). In accordance with Vygotsky (1978), we view the process of construction of knowledge as
containing both individual and social practices (Scardamalia & Bereiter, 2006). This constructivist approach
connects  individual   learning   to  the  negotiation   and   understandings  of the meanings     within the    group
environment (Jonassen, Davidson, Collins, Campbell, & Bannan Haag, 1995).
         Our focus is on understanding learners' outcomes: the ways in which individuals made meaning from
the group learning experience (Sawyer, 2006).        To understand student sense making about alternative energies,
we employed qualitative and quantitative analyses of pre- and post-concept maps (Hay, Wells, & Kinchin,
2008). Students used concept maps to place their ideas about topics into nodes, and then the students were asked
to connect nodes using lines (annotated with linking terms) showing relationships between the concepts (Novak,
1990). Researchers (Hay, Wells, & Kinchin; Novak & Canas, 2008) have shown that repeated use of concept
mapping about the same topic provides the researcher data about prior knowledge; learners are integrating new
concepts into prior understandings, and making evident changes in connections that students see about concepts
through changes in the map structures (Hay, 2007; Hay, Kinchin, & Lygo-Baker, 2008). Through analyzing
how students arrange the nodes into structures such as spoke, chain, and network representations (Kinchin, Hay,
& Adams, 2000), students make visible their understanding of the concepts and provide insight into how they
made   sense  of the newly    learned    materials (Jonassen,  Reeves,  Hong, Harvey,  &   Peters, 1997). Categories
commonly used to describe the meaning making observed on concept maps (Hay, Kinchin, & Lygo-Baker)
include non-learning, surface learning, and deep learning (See Table 1).
         In this analysis, we answer the question:        How does the breadth and depth of high school students'
individual understandings about alternative energy resources change following their participation in an online
collaborative learning    project in a   high school   chemistry  class? While   we  conducted  both   qualitative and
quantitative  analyses,   only  the  quantitative   results related to  meaning   making   are  shared  due   to space
limitations.

Table 1: Levels of learning demonstrated on concept maps (based on Hay, Kinchin, & Lygo-Baker, 2008)

 Learning                   Changes on concept map                                Interpretation

© ISLS                                                                                                             185
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                    Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

 Non-learning         No changes to the structure occur.        No new learning - prior knowledge is repeated.
 Surface learning     Some    concept      nodes   can    be    Students have adopted new concepts but have not
                      eliminated. New concept nodes are         connected these to prior knowledge. Elaboration of
                      added but not connected or linked         concepts    via simple  chains   shows    sequentially
                      to the prior knowledge concepts, or       structured information has been added. Considered
                      chains of concepts are formed.            rote learning.
 Deep learning        Concept    nodes   are added   to   the   Integration of new concepts as well as significant
                      map    and   linked    to  the     prior  elaboration of original concepts with added nodes
                      concept  nodes    and/or  each other.     or   levels  of  hierarchy.    Connections       across
                      This   can   occur     as  elaborated     concepts or additional links are created. Considered
                      spokes or networks.                       meaningful learning.

Alternative energy unit
This study occurred in two rural high school chemistry classrooms using 1 to 1 laptop computing. Students
(n=30) completed a Web 2.0 technology project that focused on argumentation as a means of acquiring content
knowledge (Zohar & Nemet, 2002), related to the strengths and weakness of forms of alternative energies. The
students, aged 15 to 17, developed an online wiki resource for each other about alternative energy.            Learners
used the wiki pages to create persuasive podcasts for a fictitious scenario: to sway the town council to vote for
an alternative energy plant to be built in their local community. Alternative energies covered in the unit were
biomass, solar, wind, geothermal, hydroelectric, and nuclear power. Jigsaw pedagogy (Aronson, 1978; Brown,
1994) was used: the students were placed into small groups to each create a wiki page about one alternative
energy resource; podcasts were created for a second resource.        All students were responsible for understanding
information about every type of energy resource.         Computer-supported collaborative learning occurred within
this unit both asynchronously across two classrooms and synchronously within the classrooms.
        Before    and after  the  unit, concept  maps    were   created  by each  individual student    using the same
focusing question (Novak & Canas, 2007): "What do you know about different types of alternative energy
resources that would allow you to make an informed decision about their use in your community?" These maps
were used as an assessment of individual understanding and meaning making about alternative energies.

Methodology
We conducted a three-week video-based case study focused on the role of Web 2.0 technologies in supporting
high school  students'  engagement      in argumentation.   In  this paper,  we  present the  statistical and  structure
analyses from students' pre- and post-concept maps from two high school chemistry classes (n=30). These
analyses allow for comparison of prior knowledge and new knowledge as well as the meaning making that
occurred (or did not occur) demonstrated by changes in concept maps (Hay, Kinchin, Lygo-Baker, 2008; Novak
& Canas, 2008). Data collected for the project included: 1) video-podcasts, 2) social bookmarking records, 3)
student constructed wiki pages, 4) questionnaires, 5) interviews, 6) pre- and post-concept maps, and 7) 3-weeks
of daily video-recordings.   Our strategy provides reliability   for the overall study through triangulation of data.
        For  this  analysis, we   focus  on  individual   meaning    making  through   changes on  the   pre- and  post-
intervention concept  maps.   To  address    reliability of the  coding, a  key  was   constructed with   examples  and
definitions  (see Table  2).  The  first   author  coded    all  concept   maps.  An   independent   researcher   coded
approximately 20% of the maps and discussed differences until consensus was reached.               We conducted two
analyses: a statistical analysis of the pre- and post-concept map counts and a qualitative analysis of structure.
The concept maps were coded for organization: number of nodes, hierarchy, connections, annotations, and
branches.   During the construction     of the  wiki pages,    students  chose  topics that they   felt were  central to
understanding  how    alternative energy    plants would    impact   their  community;   these were     used  as coding
categories as well: types of energy; safety of energy; cost to community and/or individuals; impacts to the
geographic region and community space; and impacts to community and human health (see Figure 1 for a
sample coded map). In addition, we also analyzed changes in connection structures (spoke, chain, network)
within each pair of maps (Hay, Kinchin, Lygo-Baker, 2008); each map was evaluated for the level of learning
(non, surface, or deep) and was assigned a value (1, 2, 3). The counts for each coding category were entered into
Minitab statistical software and analyzed using a paired T-Test.

Table 2: Coding/counting scheme for several categories used in analysis of the concept maps.

       Code                                                      Definitions
 Nodes                Number of nodes created; this is a proxy for the number of ideas the student understands.
 Levels               Hierarchy of the map ­ the number of levels of nodes (where the first level is linked to
                      the center node); this is a proxy for the student's connections and conceptual integration.

© ISLS                                                                                                             186
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                  Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

 Types               Types   of  alternative energy   resources  that  are listed. Types  studied in  this unit  are
                     hydroelectric, wind, solar, nuclear, biomass, and geothermal.

Findings and Results
Of the coding categories, "safety", "geography/space", "costs", and "health" were found to have significant
changes at a p < 0.05 level in the post-intervention map (See Table 3). Students used these organizing topics
from the wiki, as well as specific related details about them, in their maps showing that these ideas were
incorporated into their knowledge structure. This indicates an increase in student understanding of the social and
scientific issues involved in communities adopting alternative energies. The structural differences in the maps
indicate changes in the individual student's meaning making (Hay, Kinchin, Lygo-Baker, 2008). Only 4 map
sets were identified as non-learning based on lack of changes in the structure; all other maps showed evidence
of representation changes  that  indicate   either surface or deep  learning through   elaboration   of concepts  and
complexity of the new map structure. Although few linking words or connections across maps were observed,
the number of ideas (nodes) added in complex chain and spoke structures provided evidence of change in level
of learning. A paired T-test was used to examine the assigned scores for changes in level of learning, which was
significant at a p < 0.05 level (Table 3).

        Statistical analysis indicates that   student knowledge     of alternative energy concepts   has  changed  in
breadth and depth over the course of this unit. The number of nodes, or ideas, and hierarchy of levels increased
significantly; increases in these factors show significant elaboration within the post-intervention map, indicating
that learning has occurred   (Hay, 2007;    Novak   &  Canas,  2008).   The number    of types of  energy  that  were
identified by students on  their post-maps    increased  significantly  from a mean    of 3.367   to 5.033  types. In
addition to the structural changes in the maps, ideas (nodes) added show that the number and type of terms
students' used to describe alternative energies increased on their post-concept map. These changes in breadth of
learning through the greater number of energies that students chose to include on the map indicate increased
learning at a deeper level. Through student display of content related to all types of energy on the maps, not
only the topics assigned to their groups, our analysis indicates the jigsaw pedagogy was successful in providing
supporting meaningful learning about all topics.

Table 3: Coding categories with differences in pre- and post-concept maps at a statistically significant level

               Code                           Pre-intervention              Post-intervention         Significance
                                            Mean           St. Dev.         Mean       St. Dev.          p-value
Node quantity                               9.27            4.93            18.47         7.93          p = 0.000
Levels of node connections                  1.967           0.615           2.500        0.820          p = 0.003
Energy types                                3.367           1.159           5.033        1.542          p = 0.000
Safety of energies                          0.567           0.971           1.333        1.446          p = 0.011
Costs of energies                           0.800           1.186           2.867        1.871          p = 0.000
Geography/space impacts                     0.733           1.596           1.667        2.187          p = 0.019
Health impacts from of energies             0.133           0.434           2.100        2.155          p = 0.000
Changes in learning via structure           1.400           0.563           2.533        0.730          p = 0.000

Conclusion

© ISLS                                                                                                            187
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                  Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

With a focus on collaborative work in classrooms (Sawyer, 2006), understanding how individuals make sense of
group knowledge building experiences is an important line of research. We showed that concept maps are a tool
that can assist researchers and educators in this area. Students used the pre- and post-intervention concept maps
as tools to make their individual understandings of alternative energy visible. Analysis of the map structures and
alignment with levels of learning (Hay, Kinchin, Lygo-Baker, 2008) allowed us to understand how students
were creating connections to prior knowledge and individually making sense of the group learning experience.
Future research can examine how these structural changes can assist in differentiating instruction within the
collaborative projects to better support individual learning.
        We investigated student meaning making from participation in a collaborative wiki and podcast project
through analyses of pre- and post-intervention concept maps. The statistical analysis indicates that students
learned about all types of energy in this project. They increased the breadth (number of ideas about alternative
energies) and the depth of understanding (expanding the ideas they had by connecting and reorganizing their
concepts) at a statistically significant level, indicating that individual students adopted content from both the
energy topics for which their groups specifically built resources as well as for those alternative energies that the
others in  the class created   within the jigsaw pedagogy      (Aronson,  1978).   Research  can  focus  on design
principles to  support making   connections   between   segments  of projects  in  which students are  not  directly
involved.
        Also, we found that using the student-created artifacts (i.e., the wikis) to develop the qualitative coding
scheme for the maps allowed us to understand the development of ideas from the social to the individual level.
Future research can go more in-depth into the qualitative analysis of concept maps to assess the nuanced details
of individual  meaning  constructed   through  collaborative   projects, connecting   ideas from  the in-classroom
discourse and computer supported discourse.

References
Aronson, E. (1978). The Jigsaw Classroom. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
Brown, A. L., & Campione, J. C. (1994). Guided discovery in a community of learners. In K. McGilly (Ed.),
        Classroom lessons: Integrating cognitive theory and classroom practice (pp. 229-270). Cambridge:
        MIT.
Jonassen,  D., Davidson,    M., Collins,  M., Campbell,    J., &  Bannan    Haag,  B. (1995).  Constructivism and
        computer mediated communication in distance education. American Journal of Distance Education,
        9(2), 7­26.
Jonassen,  D.  H., Reeves,  T.  C., Hong, N., Harvey,    D. &   Peters,  K. (1997) Concept   mapping  as cognitive
        learning and assessment tools, Journal of Interactive Learning Research, 8(3/4), 289­308.
Hay, D. B. (2007). Using concept maps to measure deep, surface and non-learning outcomes. Studies in Higher
        Education, 32(1), 39-57.
Hay, D. B., Kinchin, I. M., & Lygo-Baker, S. (2008).      Making learning visible: the role of concept mapping in
        higher education. Studies in Higher Education, 33(3), 295-311.
Hay, D. B., Wells, H., & Kinchin, I. M. (2008). Quantitative and qualitative measures of student learning at
        university level. Higher Education, 56(2), 221-239.
Kinchin, I. M., Hay, D. B., & Adams, A. (2000). How a qualitative approach to concept map analysis can be
        used to aid learning by illustrating patterns of conceptual development. Educational Research, 42(1),
        43-57.
Novak, J. D. (1990). Concept mapping: A useful tool for science education. Journal of Research in Science
        Teaching, 27(10), 937-949.
Novak, J. D. & Cañas, A. J. (2008), The theory underlying concept maps and how to construct and use them,
        Technical Report. IHMC. CmapTools 2006-01, Rev 01-2008. .
Pena-Shaff, J. B. & Nicholls, C. (2004). Analyzing student interactions and meaning construction in computer
        bulletin board discussions. Computers & Education, 42(3), 243- 265.
Sawyer, R. K. (2006). The schools of the future. In K. Sawyer (Ed.), Cambridge Handbook of the Learning
        Sciences (pp. 567-580). New York: Cambridge Press.
Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (2006). Knowledge building: Theory, pedagogy, and technology. In K. Sawyer
        (Ed.), Cambridge Handbook of the Learning Sciences (pp. 97-118). New York: Cambridge Press.
Sharples,  M., Taylor,  J., &   Vavoula,  G.  (2005, October).   Towards    a Theory  of Mobile   Learning.  Paper
        presented at 4th World Conference on mLearning, Cape Town, Africa.
Stahl, G., Koschmann, T., & Suthers, D. D. (2006). Computer-supported collaborative learning. In K. Sawyer
        (Ed.), Cambridge Handbook of the Learning Sciences (pp. 409-425). New York: Cambridge Press.
Vygotsky, Lev S. Mind in Society: The Development of Higher Psychological Processes. Cambridge: Harvard
        University Press, 1978.
Zohar, A., & Nemet, F. (2002). Fostering students' knowledge and argumentation skills through dilemmas in
        human genetics. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 39(1), 35-62.

© ISLS                                                                                                        188
