CSCL 2013 Proceedings                  Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

    Finding Evidence of Metacognition through Content Analysis of
       an ePortfolio Community: Beyond Text, Across New Media
             Kathryn Wozniak & José Zagal, DePaul University, 1 E. Jackson, Chicago, IL 60604
                           Email: kwoznia1@depaul.edu, jzagal@cdm.depaul.edu

        Abstract: Finding evidence of how metacognition is demonstrated in educational ePortfolios
        is often limited to written artifact analysis and ignores new media such as images, video, links,
        and navigation schema. This study seeks to begin to fill this gap through a qualitative content
        analysis of  30 learners'  ePortfolios developed     in a  networked  ePortfolio community.   We
        found evidence of learners' metacognition in their choices, integration, and organization of
        new media content in the ePortfolio. We propose that intentional analysis of learners' choices
        and arrangement of new media can help educators and researchers find additional evidence of
        metacognition beyond text within digital learning interventions like ePortfolio communities.

Introduction
Metacognition is a learner's ability to reflect upon and monitor learning activities and strategies, a key factor in
successful learning  transfer  (Bransford,   Brown,     &  Cocking,   2000).  Researchers   assert that  ePortfolio
development is valuable for metacognitive development because it helps learners track and reflect on their
learning (Blackburn & Hakel, 2006). Evidence of metacognition in ePortfolios is based on analysis of text-based
artifacts and reports (e.g., Meyer et al., 2010), but these analyses do not take into account learners' inclusion of
new media.
        Through a qualitative content analysis of new media in 30 learners' ePortfolios developed in a college-
level writing course, we found patterns across learners' choices, integration, and organization of new media
ePortfolio content such as images, videos, navigation schema, and embedded forms. These elements reflected
metacognition  characteristics including  situating  oneself  in  a learning  community,  becoming   a  writer and
navigating the learning process, and valuing writing and learning more generally. We argue that how learners
choose to organize their online environments, their choice of new media content, and how they present it can
provide evidence  of   learners' metacognition.   Thus,   it is important  that researchers consider  methods   for
identifying and assessing learning in digital learning environments that take these new ways of demonstrating
learning and metacognition into account.

Review of Literature
Metacognition, or knowledge      about one's own    cognitive   processes, is a  core learning  outcome  in liberal
education  (Ottenhoff, 2011).  Learners'  ability to    understand  and analyze  themselves  as learners and   their
learning processes leads to strengthened transfer of knowledge and skills (Bransford et al., 2000). Akyol and
Garrison (2011) developed a metacognition construct that includes three metacognition components: knowledge
of, monitoring, and regulation of cognition (see subset of construct in Table 1 below). For example, when
developing writing skills in a writing course, a learner's awareness and understanding of key self-regulating
processes like planning, drafting, and revising is a form of metacognition (Perry, 1998). While evidence of
metacognition is often elusive in educational situations, researchers have used a variety of methods to identify
metacognition in written artifacts and transcripts (Lai, 2011), but the degree to which these accurately assess
metacognition is debated (e.g., Pintrich et al., 2000).

Table 1. A subset of Akyol and Garrison's (2011) Metacognition Construct

    Knowledge of Cognition                Monitoring of Cognition                  Regulation of Cognition

    Pre-Task Reflection                   Reflection on Action                     Reflection in Action
 ·   Knowledge of factors that         ·   Asking questions for                 ·   Procedural; planning
     influence inquiry and                 confirmation of understanding        ·   Setting goals
     thinking                          ·   Commenting about self's and          ·   Providing/asking for support
 ·   Knowledge of self as a                others' understanding
     learner

        Technologies that facilitate development of, critical reflection upon, and representations of learning
have developed rapidly in terms of their scope and reach. A digital learning environment that researchers claim
facilitates metacognition is the educational electronic portfolio ("ePortfolio"). ePortfolios are championed as

© ISLS                                                                                                         189
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                   Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

tools for learners to analyze, synthesize, and share their experiences inside and outside of school in a way that
print-based portfolios  could  not. A  review  of   the literature  on ePortfolios shows  that researchers   have not
analyzed new media specifically for evidence of metacognition; however, new media researchers suggest that an
analysis of  learners' multimodal   artifacts offers  insights into learners' identity, understanding,   and creative
processes (e.g. Halverson et al, 2012).
         In  previous  interviews   with  learners  using   ePortfolios,  we  found  that  learners had  engaged   in
metacognitive practices (Wozniak & Zagal, 2012). However, we were unsure if there would be evidence of
those practices in the ePortfolio itself. In addition, if we were to find such evidence, what form it would take?
Our main research question for the current study is: What evidence of metacognition is present in an ePortfolio
community? And, considering previous research in this area has focused mainly on learners' written artifacts,
we intentionally asked: What evidence of metacognition exists specifically in new media ePortfolio content?

Method
We conducted a qualitative content analysis of 30 learners' ePortfolios developed in a college-level introductory
writing course over one term, intentionally seeking evidence of metacognition. The writing course focused on
strategies and tools   for   planning and  developing    a  writing process,  researching  and   integrating sources,
organizing ideas into essays that follow general academic conventions, and demonstrating writing proficiency
with an ePortfolio. To build their ePortfolios, learners used software with a WYSIWYG page editor with social
networking features such as commenting, tagging, and directory search. The instructors directed learners to
include course assignments, such as their writing plans and essay drafts, but also welcomed other artifacts and
elements and encouraged them to explore all the software features. The instructors gave no requirements for
how to organize and label the ePortfolio contents or types of new media elements.
         After the course, we conducted a content analysis of 30 learners' ePortfolios (with their consent) to
search for evidence of metacognition. Content analysis offers an opportunity to analyze static documentation
(usually transcripts) to evaluate deep learning, cognitive skills, and metacognition (e.g., Newman et al, 1995).
To look for evidence beyond written artifacts, we conducted a descriptive page-by-page inventory, somewhat
like an annotated sitemap, of all new media ePortfolio contents including text, image, embedded documents,
forms, video, links, commentary, and organization schema. We then used process coding (Saldana, 2009) to
code for places in these descriptive site maps where learners demonstrated metacognition in the form of self-
regulation, self-monitoring, and reflections on their learning processes in the writing course. Process coding, a
method of coding actions (codes are typically gerunds ending in "­ing"), was useful here because metacognition
is often   defined with   action-based   criteria. Our  codebook    included  process   codes  such   as "planning,"
"demonstrating process," "welcoming comments," and "inviting community." Thus, if a learner chose to embed
a contact form on a particular page within the portfolio, we coded this as "welcoming questions and comments"
and "inviting community." We analyzed those process codes to identify patterns that suggested manifestations
of metacognition in the ePortfolio community.

Findings
Our  process  codes  analysis  showed   higher-level    patterns of behavior  in the  ePortfolio with the  following
metacognition characteristics: (1) how the learners situate themselves in a learning community, (2) how the
learners understand themselves as learners/writers and navigate the learning process, and (3) what they value
with  regard  to   learning. Specifically, our     process coding   revealed  higher-level patterns   of "situating,"
"becoming", and "valuing".

A. Situating
All 30 learners chose to include a Welcome page or About Me page as the ePortfolio landing page. Some
learners only included text-based signifiers of identity, such as a general greeting, name, age, location, job, and
explanation of the purpose of the portfolio.   However, other learners also chose to include images, videos, and
links that reflected the topic of the course (writing) or some aspect of the learner's identity (see Figure 1). Many
learners also added a preset "Contact Me" form or asked visitors to use the default Comment form in their
Welcome    or About    Me  page, suggesting   that  a form  of   contact should  not be an afterthought,  but  a  first
consideration for the audience. One learner stated in his portfolio, "As a techie, [this portfolio] really allows me
to have fun in creating it but also as a place to see my work in an open space where others can comment as well
for great feedback." Another learner chose to make a commenter's message public, that of her teacher, and
points it out to her audience: "I am also including feedback from my professor for the essay drafts to show the
progression of my writing."

© ISLS                                                                                                            190
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                  Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

 Figure 1. Images and videos that reflect the course topic and learners' identities as learners and professionals.

        By choosing to include these elements in their "Welcome" and "About Me" pages, learners situated
themselves in the learning community in non-textual ways. Instructors did not require learners to include a
Welcome/About Me page, integrate new media elements reflecting their identities as learners, or invite the
community to connect with them and join them in discussion about the ePortfolio contents. We believe learners'
intentionally chose to include new media elements in this way because not only are they conventional elements
for other digital representations of self such as personal homepages and social media, but also because these
were common elements they identified in other learners' ePortfolios in the system through the directory. Yet,
their unique choices of new media content for these pages gave them an opportunity to show others what they
valued and could contribute, and what they wanted from the community in return. This is a metacognitive
characteristic that shows   learners intentionally   and independently   thinking about the discipline   of writing,
building their ethos, and recognizing what it takes to enter and situate oneself in the larger learning community.

B. Becoming
How a learner decided to organize and label new media in the ePortfolio was evidence for how they were
"becoming"     writers and  reveals, symbolically,    how   they  "navigate"  their own  learning.  The    type   and
organization of the ePortfolio menu items reflected their process as writers and their intentions to move from
novices ("First Drafts" or "Start of the Term") to experts ("Final Drafts" or "End of the Term"). Even if learners
were reiterating the order of assignments in the course syllabus, or following the structure they saw in another
portfolio, their deliberate choice to "re-mix" the labels and organization of the pages in this way demonstrates
metacognition because they recognize and take ownership of strategies inherent and important in the expert
writing process.
        Additional evidence of learners' move from novice to expert, a process of "becoming," was seen in
their choices and arrangement of new media in the context of their early assignments compared to their final
assignments.   Learners included quotes, images and videos about writing from perceived authorities (authors,
scholars) with early assignments. In final assignments, they generated their own quotes or theories on writing, as
"emerging authorities," with supporting images and video (see Figure 2). For example, on her Welcome page, a
learner quoted a professional writer and, on her "Goals" page, she linked to a video, "Writers on Writing".
Later, she writes in her final reflection, "I was able to reflect on my ability to target my audience, identify my
writing task, and effectively reach the goal of my writing. I then concluded that I am a writer." While some of
these  reflections were  assigned, learners' decision    to post and  place them  in  specific locations within   the
portfolio demonstrates their recognition of self-monitoring in learning as well as a community that values this
type of reflective practice or reflection-in-action.

    Figure 2. Images and videos show learners' thoughts on being a writer and aspects of the writing process

C. Valuing
Learners signaled what they valued in their learning experiences in the format and topics of the essay drafts they
posted in the ePortfolio. In more than half of ePortfolios, learners cut and pasted their drafts from Microsoft
Word docs, did not change the format (including the MLA paper heading of name, date, instructor at the top),
and only sometimes provided context for how a particular draft or set of drafts made a contribution to their
learning or the learning community. We took this lack of "re-mediation" as a sign that learners were appealing
to the requirements    for the course. They  completed    tasks  that mattered to the teacher  with little  focus on

© ISLS                                                                                                          191
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                     Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

connecting or building a community through representations of their identities and experiences as we saw in the
About Me/Welcome pages.
          On the other hand, after exploring other elements of the learners' portfolios, it became apparent that the
topics of  the essay   drafts  often reflected  something    related to  the learner's    interests and, in   a few cases,
connected to signifiers of identity in their About Me and Welcome pages. Many of the essay assignments in the
course encouraged learners to write about something that interests them or with which they had experience, and
a few   learners  did  make    these connections  explicit   for the community        in the digital environment    of  the
ePortfolio. They did this by adding reflective statements at the top of pages that connected one page to the next,
removing   print-based   formatting   elements  like  headings,  embedding      links to  information  on  the  web  when
relevant in the body of their writing, and embedding images that support the content of their essays, all without
guidance from the instructor.

Discussion
This content analysis shows how learners revealed, beyond text and across new media, their situation in a
learning community, learning process, and understanding and value of a discipline (writing, writers). Analysis
beyond    textual content--specifically   an  inventory,   coding,   and thematic     analysis of   learners' choices  and
arrangement    of  new  media--can    help  educators  and   researchers  find  additional   evidence   of  metacognition
within  learning   environments      like  ePortfolio  communities.      For  example,     those    seeking   evidence  of
metacognition in learner-controlled environments such as course wikis or learner blogs can pay special attention
to learners' new media elements such as menu item labels, navigation schema, and the location and type of
embedded images, videos, and forms.
          Finally, while  this  study  focused  on   finding evidence    of metacognition,     not  an assessment   of  the
strength of metacognition demonstrated in the ePortfolio community, we felt the connection between identity as
a learner, the learning experience, and the community was often underdeveloped. This suggests the need for an
intentional,  long-term   approach    to   metacognitive   development       in the   classroom     and  within    learning
communities    such   as  this one.  A    few learners demonstrated      strong  metacognition      through   the creation,
organization, and integration of ePortfolio content and their connection with the online community, so we hope
that researchers and educators continue to explore approaches to metacognitive development with a focus on
learners' creation and arrangement of new media elements in identity construction and collaborative learning
environments.

References
Akyol, Z., & Garrison, D. (2011). Assessing metacognition in an online community of inquiry. The Internet and
          Higher Education, 14(3), 183-190.
Blackburn, J., & Hakel, M. (2006). Enhancing self-regulation and goal orientation with eportfolios. In C. K. A.
          Jafari (Ed.), Handbook of research on eportfolios (pp. 83-89). Hershey, PA: Idea Group.
Bransford, J., Brown, A., & Cocking, R. (2000). How People Learn. Washington, D.C.: National Academy
          Press.
Halverson, E. R., Bass, M., & Woods, D. (2012). The process of creation: A novel methodology for analyzing
          multimodal data. The Qualitative Report, 17(2), 430-456.
Lai, E.   (2011,  April). Metacognition:    A  Literature  Review.   Retrieved    September    30,   2012,  from   Pearson
          Assessment and Information Research Reports: http://www.pearsonassessments.com
Meyer, E., Abrami, P. C., Wade, C. A., Aslan, O., & Deault, L. (2010). Improving literacy and metacognition
          with electronic portfolios: Teaching and learning with ePEARL. Computers & Education, 55(1), 84-91.
Newman, D., Webb, B., & Cochrane, C. (1995). A content analysis method to measure critical thinking in face-
          to-face and computer supported group learning. Interpersonal computing and technology, 3(2), 56-65.
Ottenhoff, J. (2011). Learning How to Learn: Metacognition in Liberal Education. Liberal Education, 97(3/4).
Perry, N. (1998). Young children's self-regulated learning and contexts that support it. Journal of Educational
          Psychology,, 90(4), 715-729.
Pintrich, P.,  Wolters,   C., & Baxter,   G.  (2000).  Assessing   metacognition      and self-regulated  learning.  In G.
          Schraw,  &   J. C.   Impara  (Eds.), Issues  in  the   measurement    of    metacognition.   NE:  University  of
          Nebraska-Lincoln.
Saldana, J. (2009). The Coding Manual for Qualitative Researchers. Los Angeles: SAGE.
Wozniak, K., & Zagal, J. (2012). Adult Learning and ePortfolio Development: Validation, Empowerment, and
          Identity. Proceedings of EdMedia 2012 (pp. 2082-2087). Chesapeake, VA: AACE.

Acknowledgments
Many   thanks  to  the  learners, program     coordinator, and   instructors for  allowing    us to  study  their  learning
community.

© ISLS                                                                                                                 192
