CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                             Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

Constructing and Deconstructing Materially-Anchored Conceptual
          Blends in an Augmented Reality Collaborative Learning
                                                  Environment

 Noel Enyedy, UCLA, 2027 Moore Hall, Box 951521, Los Angeles, CA 90095 USA, enyedy@gseis.ucla.edu
  Joshua A. Danish, Indiana University, 201 North Rose Ave, Bloomington, IN 47405, jdanish@indiana.edu
             David DeLiema, UCLA, 2027 Moore Hall, Box 951521, Los Angeles, CA 90095 USA,
                                             david.deliema@gmail.com

          Abstract: Science and math school activities around modeling often involve students stepping
          into a simulation to play the first-person roles of (often inanimate) components. In this case
          study, we examine how a student maps her own experience onto a ball to simulate the physics
          of force and friction. We study this mapping from a conceptual blending perspective, tracking
          how the narrative structure of a board game, the physical floor materials (e.g. linoleum), the
          student's first-person   embodied    experiences,  the third-person     live camera    feed,  and  the
          augmented reality symbols become integrated in the modeling activity. The student's concepts
          of force and friction, in turn, are rooted in the blend between the narrative, the body, and the
          physical materials.

Introduction
There is a new class of computer-supported tools to aid learning referred to as mixed reality or augmented
reality (henceforth AR).     In AR environments, the physical world is digitally enhanced by viewing reality
through a video feed or device that augments the display with a graphical or informational overlay.              Studies
have shown AR to be successful at promoting learning across the grade levels and across subject domains
(Enyedy et al., 2012; Klopfer, 2008).     While designing new technologies that effectively promote learning is a
laudable  goal in and   of itself, as learning scientists, our primary  goal  should    be to  discover  why  these new
technologies work. Further, as learning scientists, we want to turn the question on its head and ask what these
new technologies can reveal about the basic processes of learning and instruction.         In this paper we suggested
that AR   is uniquely   positioned    to support  learning  through its   ability to   support  students  in  developing
conceptual blends (Fauconnier & Turner, 1998)--cognitive spaces developed through the layering of multiple
prior ideas in a way that allows students to draw new inferences.

An example Augmented Reality system
In the Learning Physics through Play (LPP) project, we designed an augmented reality system that uses socio-
dramatic play as a form of scientific modeling and helps young students learn the core concepts of force and
motion (Enyedy et al., 2012).  There are two key components to the LPP system:          1) an augmented reality system
that uses computer vision to record and display the students' physical actions and locations, and 2) software that
translates this motion into a physics engine and generates a visual display based on the sensing data. We tracked
students' physical motion in a 12' x 12' carpet area at the front of the classroom to create a modeling space. In
this space, young children make predictions by pretending to be objects in motion and they see (simultaneously)
their physical motion projected onto a large screen behind them in the form of an animated ball. For example, a
student might act out the motion of a ball given a large force by walking quickly over tile and then slowly over
an imagined sand pit.
          After making predictions by directly modeling motion with their bodies, students in the LPP project
seamlessly   transition into a physics    microworld,  comparing    their predictions   to what   happens    in the ideal
Newtonian simulation. Like other microworlds, LPP allows students to see and manipulate a situation in ways
impossible in the real world (e.g., turning off friction). We call students' initial activities in the AR system play-
as-modeling because students are oriented toward using multiple experiences and resources to model motion as
a set of rules. Much like in pretend play, one's activity is governed by and oriented toward articulating the rules
of the imaginary situation (Sidnell, 2011). During these play-as-modeling activities, students wear geometric
figures mounted on cards or hats. The computer can track the motion of several figures at once, and the scene is
displayed on a shared interactive whiteboard. Instead of seeing themselves walk around the rug, students see a
ball moving across the floor, propelled by forces and slowed down by friction.
          An important part of our pedagogical design was that the students developed all the images of objects,
invisible forces, and   the  background    art used   in the LPP  system    during     earlier lessons. Inventing   these
representations   increased  understanding     of the target   concepts   and helped    students   create   a personally
meaningful context for the activities. Moreover, as students refined their symbols collectively, they were also
determining which aspects of the phenomenon were important to capture in its representative symbol.               In this

© ISLS                                                                                                              192
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                                Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

way the activities slowly transitioned students from play-as-modeling to reasoning from symbols and concepts
in a way that more closely resembles what is commonly recognized as scientific modeling.
         In this project, the vast majority of second-grade students significantly improved their understanding of
physics (see Enyedy et al., 2012 for full details). To date we have been able to illustrate what learning looked
like in this environment focusing on our two design principles of the role of play and the role of progressive
symbolization.   However, what is needed is a microgenetic account of learning that allows us to pinpoint the
details of how the affordances of AR relate to cognition       and learning.    Our  prime candidate is conceptual     blends.
Conceptual blending describes a type of reasoning where selective inputs from two separate spaces are projected
into a new space together to form an emergent structure (Fauconnier, 1994; Fauconnier & Turner, 1998). The
blending framework helps us account for how the AR environment laminates virtual semiotic resources onto
material structures.
         Our goal in this paper extends beyond applying the conceptual blending framework to our data.                     We
wish to extend the blending framework in three ways.            First, we wish to argue that there is a special case of
conceptual blends    where     one   of the source    domains   is the student     herself.  The   first-person,   subjective
perspective as a source domain may create a powerful type of blend that is particularly useful when learning or
problem   solving.   This   is consistent   with  some   of the  hypotheses     of the  power  of  agent   based   reasoning
(Wilensky  &   Resnick,    1999)   and   `liminal  worlds'   (Ochs,   Gonzalez,     Jacoby,  1996).   Second,     conceptual
blending has primarily been    used  to explain stable forms    of reasoning.   We are particularly interested    in learning.
We  will  extend   the blending    framework     by examining    learning    as the  process  of construction     and  partial
deconstruction of blends. Third, although the blending framework was developed as a cognitive theory that
makes   rather large   assumptions    about   the amount    of  computation     that occurs  within  the head,    we   follow
Hutchins' lead (2005) and examine the material circumstances of blending, attempting to remain agnostic about
the degree to which blending happens inside the head. These physical objects in material (Hutchins, 2005) or
real (Dudis, 2004) space--including the body, visual symbols, and physical objects--become components in the
microworld that structure students' inferences.
         In summary, this research project is oriented toward the following research question: How does the
conceptual blending framework account for students and teachers' interactions with multiple resources (e.g.
bodies, symbols,   physical    materials,   narratives) during   a microworld      learning  environment?     What   can   the
blending  framework    reveal   about   foundational  processes    of learning   and  instruction?  Using     the conceptual
blending  framework,     we    track how    the  verbal  discourse,   augmented-reality     technology,  physical    objects,
abstract symbols, and students' own bodies selectively fuse together to create a blend through which students
reason about physics.

Conceptual Framework
Conceptual  blending,    an extension    of mental    spaces   theory (Fauconnier,    1985),  is a general    model    for the
integration of concepts and the creative construction of meaning. In theory, a conceptual blend is created by
coordinating   multiple,  distinct   conceptual   spaces,   or  source domains,      and  projecting  them    into a   hybrid
conceptual space that has emergent properties not found in the source domains (Fauconnier & Turner, 1998).
For example, Fauconnier and Turner (1998) offer the hypothetical example of a professor who is lecturing and
begins to have an argument with Kant.         In this case, one source domain is the modern day professor.         A second
source  domain  is Kant   himself,   dead   now   for hundreds   of   years.  Projected together into a blend, one can
imagine how Kant might comment on the writings of Hegel or Wittgenstein or argue with the modern-day
professor he   never could  have   know   would   exist.   That is, the blend has emergent properties that afford the
production of new inferences.
         The process of conceptual blending is hypothesized to involve three operations.             The first operation is
composition,   where   the  different   source   domains    are evoked   and    elements    from one  source      domain   are
explicitly mapped to another.      The second phase is completion, where an inference or a computation is made
from the emergent properties of the blend.          Often,  completion  is   thought   to involve  filling in  the blend   by
matching it to memories or frames stored in long-term memory (Coulson & Oakley, 2000).                However, we argue
that the important aspect of completion is putting the blend in relation to a goal and then using the blend as a
tool to achieve that goal.  As many have noted about representations and other mental structures, a structure in
the absence of activity is meaningless (Greeno & Hall, 1997) and computation assumes that there is a reason for
making the computation.     Hence, for us completion is fundamentally about putting the blend to use.              The third
phase is elaboration.  Closely related to completion, elaboration involves extending the blend by continuing to
bring in new elements, running the blend as a simulation, and extending it to new situations.              In our analysis,
and for  education   more   generally,   this is  perhaps  the  most  important    part of  blending, as   it is  here where
different semiotic resources are put in relation to one another in different combinations to produce new insights.

© ISLS                                                                                                                     193
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                           Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

Materially Anchored Blends
A potential difficulty in using conceptual blends to inform educational research is that, consistent with the
norms of cognitive linguistics, CB theory was developed from hypothetical cases rather than empirical cases.
As a result, it can be seen as broadly applicable to almost every case of reasoning (Coulson & Oakley, 2000).
Further, these hypothetical cases involving purely mental computations and blends can be difficult to verify.       In
response, many    have   considered  the  relationship  between  (observable)   physical  materials  and  conceptual
content (Dudis, 2004; Hutchins, 2005; Lidell, 1998). Hutchins (2005), for example, extended this work to a
number of empirical cases where one can see the computations in the blend being performed in the material
world.  These `materially anchored blends' re-envision the composition phase as the construction of material
objects that  literally superimpose  structures on  top of  one another.  For example, in a historical case from
nautical navigation, he shows how the 32 points of the compass rose, which represents the cardinal directions, is
superimposed with solar time (i.e., a 24 hour clock), dividing 24 hours into 32 45-minute periods.            Because
these 45 minutes were a good approximation of lunar time and the difference between high tide on consecutive
nights, this blended structure was  then used to compute at  what time high  tide would   occur at a given  port. The
blend in this case was external and the computation was done by manipulating the representational state of the
material world. However, it is important not to read too far into Hutchins' examples, as this would preclude the
option that some of the structures in the blend are not materially present but are instead made present by the
subject through action, talk, or imagination.

Liminal blends
In our case, one of the central resources that is being blended with other semiotic resources is the child's own
body, an example of a real space blend involving gesture or action (Parrill & Sweetser, 2004).      In pretending to
be  an object in  motion   and physically  moving   in  the AR  world,   students  using their bodies-as-objects   are
blended with abstract symbols and rules articulated through talk.    To understand this special class of materially
anchored and embodied blends, we draw on the work of Ochs and colleagues (1996) who coined the term
`liminal worlds' to describe cases where "the distinction between the scientist as subject and the physical world
as object is blurred" (p. 347). In a study of professional physicists trying to understand emergent theories of the
atomic structure of condensed matter, Ochs, Gonzalez, and Jacoby (1996) found that scientists were, "taking on
the perspective   of (empathizing   with) some   object being   analyzed and    by involving themselves    in graphic
(re)enactments of the physical events" (p. 360). For example, in trying to describe a finding related to atomic
spin, a scientist switched into first person language and imagined himself to be the atom as it moved through a
series of transitions, saying things such as, "when I come down I'm in the domain state," (p. 331). Ochs et al.
described these linguistic constructs where the participants moved between a normative scientific description of
a phenomenon to more personal 1st person description as liminal worlds, because they were episodes in which
objective facts were blended together with subjective reasoning from a first-person perspective. These liminal
worlds created a qualitatively different set of resources from which to reason and were found to be productive in
model and theory building. The LPP environment deliberately created this sort of liminal world where one's
subjective understanding (and the resources that come with embodied cognition) is laminated onto the more
formal and symbolic world of traditional computer simulations, and where students are supported in moving
fluidly between the two.

Methods
Our analysis is grounded in the tradition of cognitive ethnography (Hutchins, 2003). Video tapes of a single
lesson of second-grade students engaged in learning about friction were used to inductively examine how the
conceptual   blending   framework   applied to  our data.   The activity itself brings   together students, teachers,
physical materials, abstract symbols, and live video in an augmented reality simulation focused on modeling an
object's trajectory through different types of friction. The class session occurred within a larger 15-week unit on
basic physics. In this analysis, we attempt to trace what resources were being mapped together (composition),
what   inferences or    computations were   being  made   about  the speed  of   a  ball under  different  conditions
(completion), and    the  way  that the publicly  available blend  was   elaborated  through   collaborative  activity
(elaboration). The case study student chosen for analysis, Marissa (a pseudonym), was fairly typical of the class
as a whole.   Most important for the present paper, her qualitative answers on the topic of friction showed that
on the post test she understood the mechanism for friction, but still had difficulty in conceptualizing low or no
friction environments.   This was typical of our results for the intervention as a whole.   In Enyedy et al. (2012),
we reported that only 16 of 43 (37%) of the students received significantly higher scores on a question that
addressed friction during the posttest than on the pre-test (Z = 2.38, p = 0.02).    For example, when asked why
friction slows and stops an object, Marissa explained: "Because the grass has a hard friction...It's bumpy and it
sticks up to the ball, have to fight to get over it." However a little further into the question Marissa talks about
what happens when the ball rolls onto ice: "It will go faster. Because it's just smooth surface." In this way,

© ISLS                                                                                                            194
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                       Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

Marissa fits  the profile  of  many  of the students     in the class in showing    a promising  but incomplete
understanding of friction.

Findings
In an activity aimed at having students explore the effect of friction on motion, the teacher lays out a life-sized
game board on the floor --in reality a long strip of paper marked off into several squares.    The students take
turns `playing' the ball and deciding how the speed of the ball changes as they receive force cards or friction
cards. At the same time, an overhead camera records the play space and projects a live feed on a white board
mounted to the wall, and overlays the friction and force cards with symbols on the video feed. That is, the
student, force cards, and friction cards on the carpet space in turn appear in the video space as a black ball,
forward-facing red arrows, and backward-facing red arrows (see figure 1a and 1b).

                                               Figure. 1a and 1b

In this first section, we demonstrate composition, how disparate resources from distinct spaces in the classroom
become mapped together to create the life-sized board game environment. That is, we show how the discourse
between students and instructors in addition to the material anchors--despite being spread out over time and in
the classroom--fuse together or join side-by-side into a board game blend.
        Composing the Floor space. The first space established in the activity is the floor space--a 10-foot
long, rectangular sheet of white paper marked off into a dozen 10'' x 10'' squares.      Three squares have real
sheets of flooring material--linoleum, carpet, and an outdoor welcome mat. Researcher 1 notifies students that
they will need to place cardboard patterns in the appropriate places so that the computer knows the correct
amount of force or friction in each game square. The floor space is marked with multiple resources: cardboard
patterns, paper, students' bodies, and floor materials.
        Composing the Narrative space of playing a game. Researcher 1 helps to establish the overarching
narrative structure. Researcher 1 sits down with the students on the carpet and initiates a whole-class discourse
that explicitly maps the conventions of game playing onto the physical floor space.       She makes a sweeping
gesture from the start to the finish of the paper board game, showing the spatial trajectory typical of a board
game.
        Composing the overhead Live Feed space. As the activity unfolds, students quickly orient towards a
live feed from a camera mounted directly above the carpet space and pointing downward. The camera feed is
projected onto the white board. That is, if students look toward the white board, they can see live video of the
carpet (and themselves moving around) seen from a bird's eye perspective. This creates a mapping between
students' first-person perspectives and the camera's third-person perspective.
        Composing the Video Symbol space. Researcher 2 hands Marissa one of the flat cardboard symbols and
says, "Marissa, do you want to hold the ball while you walk?" This interaction blends Marissa's first-person
experience of her  body,   the video image  of her body,    and the animation  of a ball into one object.  Other
cardboard pieces appear as colored symbols in the live feed space, floating on top of the carpet. The ball symbol
appears on screen as a black ball and the 2-force cards appear on screen as two horizontal red arrows (see figure
1b).
        Composing Math. The final input space involves simple mathematics: adding two integers. The math
space projects structure into the blend during multiple moments of the activity. We detail the completion and
elaboration of these input spaces in the sections below.

Episode 1: Completing the blend of narrative, game board, and sensory experience
The activity begins with Marissa and Researcher 1 standing at the start of the game board. After Marissa draws
a "force of 2" card, she takes two steps forward and pauses at the second square. Marissa's small steps are a
somewhat trivial completion of the very complicated blend that has been collaboratively constructed. She has
blended together several of the available resources to compute the number of squares she is supposed to move
on the game board.  The number of squares moved in       turn is used to represent the constant speed she would be

© ISLS                                                                                                      195
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                      Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

traveling. The narrative space of the board game--the game piece, board, dice, movement along a track, and
event cards--offer the conceptual framework that structures movement of the body (see Figure 2). The carpet
space offers the elements of Marissa's whole body, a white rectangular paper, squares on the paper, bits of paper,
and cards with information about force numbers. Marissa, the instructors, and other students experience the
fusion of the narrative and carpet space. The blend is now publicly available for others to comment on, elaborate,
or re-mix. In this episode, Marissa and Researcher 1 discuss Marissa's speed after she lands on the second
square, which contains a symbol for 1 force.

        Researcher 1: Well, what did you start with? (pointing at Marissa)
        Marissa: (Turning her shoulders to look back at the start square) Two...three
        Researcher 1: So you're going two and then you're going three because...
        Marissa: (Turning her shoulders again to look back at the start square) I st--I had two.
        Researcher 1: (Pointing to the start square) You had two (and then pointing to the second square) and
then
        you landed on a...
        Marissa: Three
        Researcher 1: (Leaning in to take a closer look at the second square). A three?
        Marissa: A one.

  Figure 2. A string of blends that combine the narrative space, floor space, math space, and sensory memory
                             space to produce a numerical representation of speed.

Researcher 1 and Marissa's discussion of speed involves mathematics rooted both in the physical resources in
the room and in the narrative structure of the game board. Marissa has a chance to provide a description of her
speed within the context of the blended narrative and floor spaces. The math input space (a + b) becomes an
additional tool to evaluate the events in the  narrative and the floor blend. There     is a 2-force symbol that
advanced Marissa from the first square and there is a 1-force symbol on Marissa's current square. In the blend,

© ISLS                                                                                                      196
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                           Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

Marissa can combine these two moments in the journey--the initial 2-force and the 1-force--to tally the total
forces accrued.
         Importantly,   the numerical  total represents units  of force tied  historically to specific  events in  the
narrative, both conceptually and physically. In the same way, Fauconnier & Turner (1998) note that, "In the
blend, but not in the original inputs, it is possible for an element to be simultaneously a number and a geometric
point" (p. 147). Marissa's reasoning, in this context, incorporates integers, forces, historical moments in the
game, and specific spaces on the game board. Speed, in turn, is construed in terms of the (history of the) game
board narrative   and  in terms of the   physical semiotic  structures of the game   board.   The   concept of    speed
becomes housed in numbers and in locations on the game board, not in the actual speed with which Marissa
moves her body between squares.

Episode 2: Elaborating the blend to reason about friction
After landing on the force square in the previous episode, Marissa prepares to advance three squares, where she
will land on the linoleum slab used to represent a low friction surface. She walks slowly from one square to the
next, and when she steps on the linoleum, Marissa, who is wearing socks, slips slightly forward with her right
foot. Researcher 1 initiates a dialogue with a question about what will happen next:

         Marissa: I slip? (followed by three exaggerated motions swiveling on the linoleum back and forth in
         socks)
         Researcher 1: Oh, we have an interesting situation...
         Marissa:  I'm    SLIPPING!    (co-timed  with feet intentionally sliding on  the   linoleum;  arms raise   up
         slightly)
         Researcher 1: Marissa is going speed 3, and then she landed on the linoleum. So she says she might slip.
         What's that going to do to your speed?
         Marissa: Make it faster.
         ...
         Marissa: Because, because, if there's a 3, and I'm going very fast (steps back one square and faces
         forward), I would land on this and I would slide (walks forward and slides her feet forward in a
         controlled way on the linoleum; then returns to standing on the linoleum tile), because it's slippery.

In this episode,   the experience  of  placing feet on  actual linoleum   causes the blend  to be   remixed  and   the
computation to produce an unexpected answer. Marissa's initial slip, and her memories of slipping on linoleum
in socks (an event she later describes as "freaky" and "scary"), leads her to the conclusion that her speed will
increase. This inference emerges from an interaction between blends that draw on different source inputs.
         The game board blend described in the prior episode fused the number of forces with the number of
game board squares. In the blend, greater forces instantiate as greater numbers of squares traveled on the board.
Speed, similarly, is represented as the number of squares Marissa can traverse given the forces on the game
board. Marissa, then, despite receiving a strong force of three, can slowly walk from square to square; the
kinesthetic response to force is never projected into the blend. However, as Marissa walks slowly from one
square to the next in the current slipping episode, she steps on the linoleum and encounters a new input to the
blend: the kinesthetic experience of actual slipping. The slip happens fast relative to the deliberate, slow pace of
walking. Marissa   simulates   her prior slip  several times on   the linoleum   square and   cries out in  jest, "I'm
slipping!" From a blending perspective, Marissa integrates two embodied representations of speed--the slip on
the linoleum and the slow walk--despite that one of those representations was an incidental representation of
speed (see Figure 3). The walk between squares represented a default walking speed that never increased with
increases in force. That is, even though Marissa had increased her "numerical" speed on previous turns, she
never walked any faster. The distance traveled on the game board represents speed in the blend, not how fast the
body moves. The result is that Marissa construes the linoleum as increasing her speed even though the increase
is relative to the red herring walking experience of speed. The numerical depictions of speed are selectively
projected into the blend as independent entities. After Marissa draws the conclusion that she will speed up in an
embodied sense, she decides to bump up the numerical representation of speed from 3 to 4. This episode reveals
that blends   can  be  used to produce   both  normative  and   non-normative    inferences depending    on how    the
emergent structure is elaborated.

Episode 3: Comparing the computer's blend to Marissa's blend
At   multiple points   throughout  the activity, Researcher  1, Researcher   2,  and Marissa   establish a  mapping
between Marissa's journey through the floor space game board and the ball's journey through the live feed
space projected on the white board. Researcher 1 notes early on that the cardboard symbols in floor space are
"for the computer" and will appear as symbols in the live feed space. Researcher 2 both hands Marissa the flat
cardboard square for the ball, asking "Marissa, do you want to hold the ball while you walk?" and asks Marissa,

© ISLS                                                                                                            197
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                      Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

"Can you bring me the ball?" upon which Marissa brings over the cardboard square. The ball, in other words,
becomes synonymous with the cardboard square symbol and also takes the same journey as Marissa, albeit seen
from an overhead view on the classroom wall instead of on top of the white paper on the carpet.

       Figure 3. Blending the quantitative representation of forces and the physical experience of slipping.

        As shown above, interaction and collaboration is used to establish a direct and public blend between
Marissa, the narrative journey, and the image of the ball. In the blend, cardboard and arrow depictions of forces
move Marissa and the image of the ball. The participants work to align the elements in the floor space, live feed
space, and  symbol   space according  to the narrative structure of the  board game. With        this blend  firmly
established, Researcher 2 organizes a comparison between Marissa's journey and the computer's depiction of
the ball's journey:

        Researcher 2: Let's try to see if the computer agrees with her (Marissa's) prediction.
        ...
        Researcher 2: So the question is, when we run this, is it going to speed up or is it going to slow down
        when the ball hits the linoleum, right? (moves the cursor in the live feed space to point to the linoleum
        square). So, Marissa, you said, when the ball get's here, it's gonna get faster, right?
        Marissa: Where?
        Researcher 2: Right here (moving the mouse up and down)
        Teacher: Look at the screen, Marissa.
        Marissa: Yeah.

If the fusion between Marissa and the ball was implicit before, the mapping now becomes public and explicit.
Researcher 2 refers to "Marissa's prediction" of what happens "when the ball get's here," while pointing with
the cursor to the live feed space. Marissa's early movements with her own body on carpet space are collectively
realized as a prediction of how the computer will show the ball moving in live feed space. Marissa, at first, does
not realize that Researcher 2 is pointing toward the live feed space. Up until this point, the journey had been
extremely focused on the carpet space; cardboard symbols were merely "for the computer." Now, the spaces
have become fully integrated, and Marissa quickly agrees that her earlier embodied prediction corresponds with
how the ball will interact with linoleum as determined by the computer.
        Despite that the inputs to the computer blend remain completely hidden--there is no mention of how
the computer  generates  the simulation--Marissa  is   strongly impacted  by the computer's        prediction. The
computer shows the ball rolling across the game board in the live feed space and then slowing down at the
linoleum (the opposite of her earlier prediction). Marissa, after agreeing that the ball did slow down on the
linoleum, maps the experience "back to the input spaces" (Fauconnier & Turner, 1998) of her earlier movement.
She introduces a caveat to her earlier prediction: "If I go on this (walking to stand on the linoleum square), I
could slip (acting out the slipping with her right foot) and then I would fall and then it would make me go
slower because I would slip." Marissa introduces the event of falling on the linoleum--which would slow her
down--in order to match the computer's prediction of the ball's journey across the game board. Marissa and the
ball have been fused to such an extent that the computer's prediction invites Marissa to backtrack and revise her
own prediction. Importantly, she revises her prediction by adding the event of falling rather than changing her
inferences about linoleum friction.

© ISLS                                                                                                         198
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                        Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

Discussion
In these three episodes, we see mathematics and physics rooted in a game board narrative, a physical game
board, bodies,  and   augmented-reality  symbols. Toward    the end  of the  activity, the computer   simulates  the
normative model of the ball encountering friction using the representations Marissa had already put into action,
which leads Marissa to revise the description of how her own body encounters friction. The augmented reality
activity establishes a liminal world blend between Marissa and the ball that allows for a dialogue between
Marissa's first-hand experiences and classical physics simulations. Importantly, the computer receives high
epistemic credibility as a source of how balls move on linoleum. This finding begs for the study of interactions
between social others (e.g. teachers and peers) and the cognitive spaces that people blend to produce inferences.
         The   liminal blend   allows continuity between  past  and  present sensory    experiences   and the ball's
classical response to force and friction. Once the ball and Marissa become coupled in their trajectory through the
game board, Marissa comes to believe that the events that the ball encounters according to the computer in the
live feed space need to match how she moves through the floor space. The blend simulating the journey of
Marissa/ball call for Marissa to look back at the inputs to her own blend and think about her experience in new
ways. However, this integration does not happen in a vacuum. The kinesthetic experiences are read into a
narrative and into semiotic infrastructure that creates two contrasting roles for the body. Is the body enacting the
movement of the game board player or an interaction with the physical surface? Is speed the mathematical total
of forces   or how    the body responds  to  walking and  slipping?  The  blend  combines    these  inputs, making
predictions based on the resources in this environment problematic. Conceptual blending, in this way, shows
how resources gather meaning against the ground of other resources, and how accounts of learning need to
consider integration across these resources.

References
Coulson, S. & Oakley, T. (2000). Blending basics. Cognitive Linguistics, 11(3/4), 175-196.
Dudis, P. G. (2004). Body partitioning and real-space blends. Cognitive Linguistics, 15(2), 223- 238.
Enyedy, N, Danish, J. A., Delacruz, G., & Kumar, M. (2012). Learning physics through play in an augmented
         reality environment. International Journal of Computer Supported Collaborative Learning 7 (3) DOI:
         10.1007/s11412-012-9150-3.
Fauconnier, G. (1985). Mental spaces. Aspects of meaning construction in natural language. Cambridge, MA:
         MIT Press-Bradford Books.
Fauconnier, G. & Turner, M. (1998). Conceptual integration networks. Cognitive Science, 22, 133-187.
Greeno, J., & Hall, R. (1997). Practicing representation: Learning with and about representational forms. Phi
         Delta Kappan, 78, 361-367.
Hutchins,   E. (2003). Cognitive  ethnography.   Plenary address for the  25th  annual   meeting   of the Cognitive
         Science Society, Boston.
Hutchins, E. (2005). Material anchors for conceptual blends. Journal of Pragmatics, 37(10), 1555­1577.
Klopfer,  E.   (2008) Augmented   Learning:  Research  and  Design   of Mobile   Educational  Games.    MIT   Press,
         Cambridge, MA.
Liddell, S. K. (1998). Grounded blends, gestures, and conceptual shifts. Cognitive Linguistics, 9, 283­314.
Ochs, E., Gonzalez, P., Jacoby, S. (1996). When I come down, I'm in a domain state: Grammar and graphic
         representation in the interpretive activity of physics. In E. Ochs, E. A. Schegloff, & S. Thompson,
         (Eds.), Interaction and grammar (pp. 328-369). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Parill, F., & Sweetser, E. (2004). What we mean by meaning: Conceptual integration in gesture analysis and
         transcription. Gesture, 4(2), 197-219.
Sidnell, J.  (2011).  The  epistemics of make-believe.   In T.  Stivers and  J. Steensig   (Eds.), The  Morality of
         knowledge in conversation (pp. 131-156). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Wilensky, U., & Resnick, M. (1999). Thinking in levels: A dynamic systems approach to making sense of the
         world. Journal of Science Education and Technology, 8(1), 3-19.

© ISLS                                                                                                         199
