CSCL 2013 Proceedings                  Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

   Learning how to learn together (L2L2): Developing tools to support an
                  essential complex competence for the Internet Age
                           Yang Yang, University of Exeter, UK,   y.yang@exeter.ac.uk
                      Rupert Wegerif, University of Exeter, UK,   r.b.wegerif@exeter.ac.uk
                     Toby Dragon, Saarland University, Germany,       toby.dragon@celtech.de
                    Manolis Mavrikis, London Knowledge Lab, UK,         m.mavrikis@lkl.ac.uk
                   Bruce M. McLaren, Saarland Univeristy, Germany, bmclaren@cs.cmu.edu

        Abstract: Learning to learn together (L2L2) is a complex competence requiring that all the
        group members are able to coordinate, regulate and plan the learning task by balancing issues
        of individual ability, motivation and expectations through constant dialogue. In this paper we
        report on a project to define the complex competence of L2L2 and to support it with a set of
        web-based    tools and  associated  pedagogy,   the  Metafora   Project. The   system we   develop
        embodies our theory of L2L2 and the results of our design-based research suggest that this
        system can succeed in making key elements of L2L2 explicit in the talk and actions of groups
        of learners.
Learning how to learn (L2L) is often referred to as the most important knowledge age skill since it equips
people to adapt flexibly in a time of rapid change (OECD, 2001; 2004). However, we argue that the reality of
Internet mediated learning is more about learning how to learn together (L2L2) with others than about learning
to learn as an individual. L2L2 goes beyond L2L because it combines the dimension of task management, (how
to organise  complex  inquiries  with  multiple stages  and  strands)  with  the dimension  of social  relationships
(working with   attitudes, expectations  and identities in  order to   participate constructively in  learning  as a
collective accomplishment). In this paper we report on a project that attempts to define the complex competence
of L2L2  and   to support  it  with a Metafora   system (Wegerif  et   al, 2012),  which  includes a   planning and
reflection tool; a dynamic concept mapping space (Loll et al, 2011) and a chat, and associated pedagogy. In the
first part of this paper we characterise L2L2, presenting elements of our design framework for teaching L2L2
and in the second part of this paper we describe design-based research used to test and refine the theory of L2L2
presented in the first part and to develop the working Metafora system.
Part 1: Characterising L2L2
Transferable learning skills and competences such as L2L have mainly been understood as the attributes of
individuals. L2L2  is different  because it  is primarily the attribute   of a group   or collective. We  hope  that
individuals who participate in one group acquire skills and competences that they can take with them when they
go to work with other groups. However, these skills and competences are essentially social and do not exist
outside of social interaction. Viewed through the analytic lens of the group, L2L2 is about group norms that
support distributed leadership, mutual engagement, peer assessment, and collective thinking.
        Teaching skills and competences to groups can be understood as a form of intentional culture change
(Cobb & Bauersfeld, 1995; Wegerif, 2002). This process can be partly understood using a modified version of a
commonly     used schema    in the  teaching of   individual  skills: the  process  of moving   from    unconscious
incompetence, through conscious incompetence, to conscious competence and on, eventually, to unconscious
competence (Howell, 1982). The implicit norms of the culture in a classroom can be changed in a similar way.
One important difference between teaching individual skills and changing cultures is that cultures are people
plus tools including communications technology. This means that the tools that support communication within a
culture are not only scaffolds that will fade away as new skills and competences are learnt but these tools can
also be essential enablers of collective thoughts and actions (Pea, 1993). The Metafora system is designed to
serve a dual role of supporting the teaching and learning of L2L2 and supporting the continuing practice of
L2L2. This means that it provides tools to help make group norms explicit and change the culture but it also
provides tools to help groups that are already good at L2L2 work together effectively and creatively.
        In the first stage of this pedagogy the groups are made aware that they need to coordinate their work
together but are not sure how best to do this, this initial stage is called the `challenge' when they are presented
with a complex problem. Explicit tools are provided by the Metafora system to support them. These tools,
especially icons representing aspects of L2L2 (Table 1), make some of the implicit norms followed by effective
groups, explicit. In the full system icons, representing aspects of L2L2, are combined with dynamic concept
mapping spaces for discussions (LASAD, see Figure 2), microworlds and a pedagogical strategy.
Component                                       Explanation                                    Visual
 Activity stage Key stages of dialogic inquiry-based learning process, e.g. Explore, Reflect
                on process

© ISLS                                                                                                          193
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                  Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

Component                                       Explanation                                        Visual
    Activity     Key activities to concretize the process of each activity stage, e.g. Report,
     process     Anticipate
    Attitude     Key intersubjective   orientations   to specify    the group    attitudes  during
                 activity stage and process, e.g. Critical, Ethical
     Role        Key roles  to manage   and   mediate  collaboration   and   cooperation between
                 learners and groups, e.g. Manager, Evaluator

    Resource     Available resources for activity stages and processes, e.g. Group discussion
                 map, Microworld artefact, etc.
    Connector    Key relationships   between   all the   components,    e.g. causal  relationship,
                 temporal relationship
                           Table 1: Six Components of a visual language for L2L2
         To unpack the complexity of the L2L2 competence, four key aspects are emphasised in our design of
technology and pedagogy.
(1) Encouraging distributed leadership moves: Distribution of leadership in groups has both social (e.g.,
Crow, Hausman, & Scribner, 2002) and situational (e.g. Steed, et al, 1999) aspects. Each activity stage of the
visual language represents a snapshot of the group learning situation, which reveals a need for different kinds of
leadership distribution pattern. This awareness of distributed leadership around particular topics breaks down
dominating coalitions, hierarchical relationships, social exclusion and isolation.
(2) Mutually engaged through/around shared objects: Shared object/artefacts provide a rich repertoire of
referential anchors for mutual engagement and understanding. The shared model of the group learning process
which is made explicit using the visual language plays a crucial role in supporting mutual engagement and
creating a shared framework for collaboration.
(3) Peer  assessment  for   group   awareness:   We   argue   that  ability  to take different general attitudes    is a
prerequisite for successful group    learning, for example    taking  a  creative  attitude to attempt a  speculative
approach. The `Attitude' components of the visual language offer students an opportunity to anticipate and
consider what their likely responses might be, and implicitly, to consider any difference between the ideal
response and their likely response.
(4) Group reflection on the social dimension of learning: To make this process of knowing explicit to the
group, we identified three distinctive temporal opportunities for group reflection around an online discussion
map:
    Beginning: Reflecting on individual preferences, collective responsibility and intended level of participation.
    Middle: Reflecting on emerging roles, norms and gaps between individual and collective outcomes.
    End: Reflecting  on   original  group learning    interpersonal   structure   and emergent     structure, intended
      individual learning outcomes and achieved outcomes.
Part 2: Design Based Research on the theory of L2L2
The theory of L2L2 described above was embodied in the first iteration of the Metafora system combining the
visual language (Table 1), a dynamic concept-mapping dialogue space, microworlds and pedagogy. The exact
format of each design-based research case study varied across the partners (in the UK, Spain, Israel and Greece),
but all involved a class of students using Metafora tools (e.g. a planning and reflection tool, a discussion map
tool and a chat) to solve a complex challenge. During the study, we video recorded groups working around
computers. We then interviewed the participants in an open-ended way about their group learning experience.
We analyzed the data to identify the emergent L2L2 themes relating to the four key aspects of L2L2 using
interpretative discourse analysis influenced by socio-cultural discourse analysis. When possible we also used
Key Event Recall analysis (Wegerif et al, 2010).
Results
Four  examples   selected from   our different  case  studies illustrate    how  the  Metafora  tools and  associated
pedagogy support awareness of L2L2 towards the `Conscious Competence' stage of culture change. Learners
between 13 and 16 years old worked together after having been given a learning challenge that implied they had
to plan and organise their learning together.
Episode 1: Distributed leadership moves around the planning and reflection tool
This episode  is a group    of students using   an  online chat    to discuss   how   they  should conduct    their co-
construction activity in a Microworld called eXpresser (Mavrikis et al, 2012), after they have use the tool to plan
how they should allocate roles.

© ISLS                                                                                                              194
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                 Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

Role allocation with the visual language                    Role negotiation in the chat
                                         ZOH: how many blue tiles have u got
                                         SHK: we have to coordinate with each other
                                         HIK: you seriously expect me to count them all?
                                         ZOH: yes
                                         ZOH: SRY you have to work with NOO
                                         HIK: ok, ZOH, you make sure the animation's coloured
                                         ZOH: ok
                                         SHK: and me?
                                         HIK: SHK, you check that the aniamtion works without
                                         messing up
                                         SHK: ok
                                         HIK: And I'll make sure the computer's model is coloured
                                         HIK: then we'll decide about the pattern later
                                         SRY: what shall i do?
                                         HIK: you'll have to discuss that with NOO, SRY
                                         SHK: oh right
                                         HIK: So ZOH, you're doing the My Model colouring, And
                                         I'm checking that the Computer Model is coloured.

Figure 1: Take responsible for different kinds of leadership moves
This discussion indicates an understanding of the function each one assumes when working together. Both the
shared plan and the chat reveal that different students were responsible for different kind of leadership moves,
for example, SRY was acknowledged at being better at the mathematical aspect of task, whereas SHK showed
more managerial leadership moves.
Episode 2: Mutually engaged to elaborate the process of group learning
This episode is a group of students engaged in a dialogue around their visual model of group learning process.
This dialogue demonstrates how Metafora visual language promoted and mediated the reflection about scientific
process to solve the task.
        Aln: so, in theory we are still here. We have not done anything, right? ((laughs))
        Ada: yeh ... but from this, we should do an experimental design shouldn't we? Or something.
        Aln: if
        Ada: This is experimental design, right? [[looking for experimental design icon]]
        Aln: wait, wait, wait. First are the hypothesis
        Ada: We put and if we do better steps to follow first, and observe second
        DNLA: if ... and reflect as well. Now we are reflecting, aren't we?
        Aln, if also
        Ada: thinking ...
        Aln: here and to reflect put an arrow. So, after everything we've done we look in the mirror. Can I do
        it? ... [[requested photocopies of the icons in the DNLA]]
Episode 3: Peer assessment to co-construct a discussion map
This episode illustrates   how the different `attitudes' given icons in the visual language  extend the group's
capacity to create ideas and assess each other's ideas
         1st stage: Work independently with attitudes                2nd stage: peer review

     Figure 2: From independent thinking with attitude to co-construct a collective discussion map.
        In the post focus group discussion, we found an improved understanding of how to learn together in a
web-based environment.
        Interviewer: Were these colours useful?

© ISLS                                                                                                     195
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                  Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

          Charlie: Yes, they are all very useful, because you knowing what people are talking about. Sometime,
          you  might  find someone   could   write something    in a  blank one,  you can  think   is     it positive or
          something else?
We could find that the attitude types offered the students a way to structure their thinking together process, not
in terms of the ideas, but in terms of the attitude they took to approach to the questions and tasks.
          Henry: I will put all our negative ideas on the top.
          Rose: Yes, I think we could delete No. 17, because it is the same idea to the No.      13. They are both
          about `secure the eggs'.
          [[Rose pointed to the shared screen and Henry deleted text box No.17 as Rose asked.]]

Episode 4: Advancing ideas through an group reflection
This  episode illustrates how interchangeably   using  different  Metafora  tools together enable  a      group  of UK
students to "move their ideas bigger and better".
          Researcher: Do you think discussion before planning helps you plan?
          Rose: Yes, definitely. We all have ideas, we all spoke about our ideas and in plan we move our ideas
          bigger and better, because we have all talked about it.
          Charlie: Yes you can look at LASAD and see your ideas again, and write down in the text boxes in the
          plan. Because you can change ideas and you can put extra ideas in.
By analyzing the video data, we find that continuity of children's experience of using the discussion mapping
tool and the planning and reflection tool nurtures their reflection on their group learning process both at concrete
level (i.e. task specific ideas) and abstract level (i.e. the visual language, the task general process).

Conclusion
This paper unpacks four key aspects of learning to learn together (L2L2) and proposes a visual language which
was embedded in the web-based Metafora system to help enculture its users toward successful group learning .
In most classrooms, learning to learn together requires culture change. The four episodes of Metafora-supported
collaborative learning shown as illustrative example of our design-based research demonstrate how the four
aspects of L2L2 are experienced by the students mediated by the external representations of group learning
model and group discussion space. Such collaborative activities around these shared objects allow the new
norms of L2L2 to become implicit over time as groups practice learning together in response to challenges in
maths and science. The system we developed embodies our theory of L2L2 and the results of our design-based
research suggest that this system can succeed in making key elements of L2L2 explicit in the talk and actions of
groups of learners. Further research is continuing to explore the changes over time that happen in the use of
metafora. Our hypothesis is that the use of explicit reminders and supports for L2L2 will reduce gradually as
aspects of L2L2 become implicit within the shared culture of groups and classrooms.

References
Cobb,  P., &  Bauersfeld,  H. (Eds.).  (1995). Emergence    of  mathematical   meaning:  Interaction      in  classroom
          cultures. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Crow, G., Hausman, C. S., & Scribner, J. P. (2002). Reshaping the principalship. In J. Murphy (Ed.), The
          educational leadership challenge (pp. 189-210). Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
OECD (2001) Defining and Selecting Key Competencies. Paris: OECD.
OECD (2004) Problem Solving for Tomorrow's World ­ First Measures of Cross Curricular
Howell, W.S. (1982). The empathic communicator. University of Minnesota: Wadsworth Publishing Company
Loll, F.,  Pinkwart,  N.,  Scheuer, O., McLaren,    B.M.  (2012)     How Tough    Should   It Be?  Simplifying        the
          Development of Argumentation Systems using a Configurable Platform. In Pinkwart, ed.: Educational
          Technologies for Teaching Argumentation Skills. Bentham Science Publishers
Mavrikis,  M., Noss,   R., Hoyles,  C.  Geraniou   E.: Sowing    the seeds  of algebraic generalisation:      designing
          epistemic affordances for an intelligent microworld. In Noss, R. and DiSessa, A. (eds) Special Issue on
          Knowledge Transformation, Design and Technology, Journal of Computer Assisted Learning. (2012)
Pea,  R.  D.  (1993). Practices of distributed intelligence    and designs for  education. In   G. Salomon        (Ed.).
          Distributed cognitions (pp. 47­87). New York: Cambridge University Press
Steed, A., Slater, M., Sadagic, A., Tromp, J., & Bullock, A. 1999. Leadership and collaboration in virtual
          environments. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Virtual Reality (Houston, TX, Mar.).
Wegerif, R (2002) Walking or dancing? Models of learning to think in education. International Journal of
          Interactive Learning Research 13(1), 51-70.
Wegerif, R., McLaren, B.M., Chamrada, M., Scheuer, O., Mansour, N., Miksatko, J., Williams, M. (2010)
          Exploring creative thinking in graphically mediated synchronous dialogues. Computers & Education)
          613-621

© ISLS                                                                                                              196
