CSCL 2013 Proceedings                     Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

Computer-Supported Metadiscourse to Foster Collective Progress
                          in Knowledge-Building Communities

                      Jianwei Zhang, Mei-Hwa Chen, Jingping Chen, Teresa Ferrer Mico
                                                  University at Albany
         Email: jzhang1@albany.edu, mchen@albany.edu, chgping@gmail.com, tferrerm@gmail.com

         Abstract: This study investigates metacognitive conversations in two grade 5/6 classrooms
         that engaged in knowledge building about the human body using Knowledge Forum. The
         metacognitive   conversations    were    supported    by Idea Thread  Mapper    (ITM),  which    makes
         collective progress     in online  discourse    visible  for  collaborative reflection. The     analyses
         elaborate the processes of the metadiscourse and the teachers' role.

Introduction
Inquiry-based   learning programs      need  to   foster a self-sustained,   progressive trajectory  of   inquiry  among
students in line with knowledge practices of real-word creative communities (Sawyer, 2007). Instead of relying
on teacher-specified procedures, scripts, and resources of inquiry, students take on collective responsibility for
monitoring and advancing their community's knowledge (Scardamalia, 2002). Previous research suggests the
importance of metacognitive conversations--metadiscourse--as a means to fostering collective responsibility.
Through metadiscourse, students review the conceptual landscape generated through their knowledge-building
discourse, monitor core problems and goals, reflect on what they have achieved as a community, and identify
deeper goals  and   collaborative   actions  (Zhang  et   al., 2009).  Despite the   importance  of  metadiscourse,  this
discourse pattern is rarely seen in computer-supported collaborative classrooms (van Aalst, 2009). In online
discourse through threaded discussions, chatting, and messaging, student ideas are distributed across individual
postings over time (Suthers et al., 2008). It is difficult for students to understand the conceptual landscape of
their collective work, to identify knowledge advances, and to reflect on gaps and challenges.
         To represent collective knowledge in extended online discourse, we recently created a timeline-based
collective knowledge-mapping tool: Idea Threads Mapper (ITM). An idea thread represents a line of inquiry
composed of a series of conceptually related discourse entries that address a shared focal problem, extending
from the  first to  the  last discourse     entry (Zhang   et   al., 2007).  Interoperating  with    Knowledge     Forum
(Scardamalia & Bereiter, 2006), ITM helps students to review shared focal themes, as communal goals, that
have emerged from interactive discourse and identify and review ideas contributed to address each focal goal
over time. ITM integrates three levels (or units) of ideas in knowledge-building discourse: an idea contributed in
a discourse entry (e.g., Knowledge Forum note), an idea thread consisting of multiple entries addressing a focal
issue, and a network of idea threads for a whole inquiry initiative (Figure 1) (see Chen et al., 2013 for more
details). This study investigates how ITM can be used to support metacognitive conversations among young
students for  sustained  knowledge     building.  Our    research  questions ask:  how   do young    students engage   in
metadiscourse to co-construct idea threads to represent and advance collective knowledge in extended discourse,
and with what support from their teacher?

Method
This study was conducted in two grades 5/6 classrooms, each of which had 22 students who investigated the
human body systems over a two-month period. The two classrooms were taught by two teachers: Teacher A in
her first year and B in his sixth year working with knowledge building/Knowledge Forum. By analyzing these
two classrooms as two cases, we attempted to discover a grounded theory (Glaser & Strauss, 1967) about how
ITM-aided  metadiscourse      is conducted   to support    knowledge    building. The  classroom    processes  integrated
knowledge-building    conversations,    individual  and    group-based    reading,   student-designed    experiments and
observations,   and interactions    in Knowledge    Forum.     The   researchers  worked with    the teachers  to  design
procedures   of ITM-aided     reflection,   which  was    implemented     around  the  midpoint   of  the  inquiry  using
approximately two hours to review progress and plan for deeper inquiry.
         For data analysis, the ITM-aided reflection session in each class was video recorded. The videos were
transcribed and analyzed using a narrative approach to video analysis (Derry et al., 2010). Two researchers first
browsed the videos and transcriptions to develop an overall sense of the reflective processes, and then identified
"digestible" chunks in the videos--major episodes of the reflective conversations by which students identified
and negotiated "juicy topics," selected important discourse contributions, synthesized progress, and planned for
deeper inquiries.   These chunks       were contextualized     and linked to develop  a  storyline   for each classroom,
showing  how    the two  communities      engaged   in   metadiscourse    on collective  knowledge    progress.   Further
analysis was conducted focusing on the teachers' conversation turns to understand how they scaffolded the
metadiscourse and co-reflection. Through a grounded theory approach, two researchers             developed raw codes to

© ISLS                                                                                                               197
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                       Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

capture the roles of the teachers. They then shared and discussed the raw codes in relation to the data coded,
resolved disagreements,                                and     classified             the           codes     into              larger        themes              that indicated               different     patterns              of
scaffolding (see Results for the patterns). Complementing the video data, we interviewed five students from
each classroom                   before   and               five      different              students        after       the          ITM-aided              reflection.         The           interview     focused               on
student awareness of the important themes explored by their community, advances, problems, and experience
with ITM.

Figure 1. A map of idea threads created by a grade 5/6 classroom studying the human body.                                                                                                              Each stripe
represents an idea thread addressing a focal theme. Each square in the threads represents a note, and a line
                                                              between two notes represents a build-on link.

Results
The video analysis revealed multi-level collaborative interactions in the metadiscourse that gave emergence to
collective knowledge. Figure 2 shows the multi-level, emergent interactions captured in class B's metadiscourse
aided by ITM, with similar processes observed in class A's videos.

                    Communityinteractions        brain         nerves                 muscles                     heart                                                                                             Teachersleepmemoryparticipation
                                                                                 Only 3 notes;                                             Don't know much;                   Refreshed interest;
                                                                              Connect to nerves               Don't know                  interesting; connect to              connect to nerves
                                                 Most discussed                     & brain                        much                       memory &brain                          & brain;
                   Synthesizingadvances andplanning for deeperwork                                                                                                                                           Co-reviewing ideathreads; co-planning

                                                                                                       A network of idea threads
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Explaining,
                 Co-constructing                                                                                                                                                                                   modeling
                    idea threads                                                                                                                                                                            supporting ITM use

                                           allergies                             memorysleep                   hair innervesbrainskin                              digestion                    heartinjuriesdeathmuscles

                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Facilitating
                 Co-generating a                                                                                                                                                                                negotiation to
                 collective list of                                                                                                                                                                         screen and develop
                 "juicy topics"                                                                                                                                                                               "juicy topics"

                                                     nerves          memory            brain          sweat                hair      blood             death                         Musclesdigestion
                                              allergy        sleeping                                          Goosemovementmessagebumps     Getting          Eye                                hearttearshurtboogerconversation

                Identifying     focal                                                                                                                                                                             Framing &
                issues from online                                                                                                                                                                               stimulating
                     discourse                                                                                                                                                                                   co-eflection

                                                                                  99   notes in knowledge building discourse on the human body

         Figure 2. Multiple levels of emergent interactions to reflect on collective knowledge progress.

Identifying Focal Issues and Co-Generating "Juicy" Topics
Enabling emergence of ideas at the micro level, students engaged in online knowledge-building discourse and
face-to-face interactions                             to    generate        ideas            about          how         the     human               body     systems            work,          with      139 Knowledge
Forum notes created in class A and 99 in class B prior to the ITM session. In the ITM-aided reflection, students
reviewed and rose above diverse ideas in the knowledge-building discourse by identifying core "juicy topics."

© ISLS                                                                                                                                                                                                                            198
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                     Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

In class  A,  facilitated by    a relatively junior teacher,  this   was    done  through   two   phases: Students   first
individually reviewed their Knowledge Forum discourse and wrote down important themes in their notebooks.
Analysis of the notebooks indicated that each student recorded one to three topics. They, then, shared the topics
to generate a collective list of "juicy topics" that represent the community's collective focuses. Classroom B,
facilitated by a more experienced teacher, integrated the above two phases into a whole class conversation in
which students proposed major topics and co-reviewed the proposals to construct a shared list of "juicy topics."
          The teachers' role to support the co-emergence of "juicy topics" focused on framing and stimulating
co-reflection. They highlighted the epistemic need to review and organize collective knowledge advances, such
as by saying: "In just about like three weeks, ...we got 99 notes, and I was trying to look at this [Knowledge
Forum view] today and I realize that...it's big and complicated... There's a new way of kind of organizing some
of these ... into a way that might help us to understand what we have done, what we like to...do more. Um, I
want to ask, ... what are some big, `juicy topics' that have come out here?" (Teacher B) The teachers further
discussed about what might be considered as a "big idea" or "juicy topic:" "big ideas that you came across in
the view that will help us really understand important things about the human body and help us to sort of
progress what we know as a class." (Teacher A)
          Students then proposed topics of inquiry based on their personal understanding of the community's
discourse. Students in class B proposed a total of 22 possible topics for the community to review, including
allergies, nerves, sleeping, and so forth (see Figure 2). These topics were proposed for collaborative review and
screening to judge the importance, elaborate the scope of issues explored, and discuss their relations to other
issues investigated. The teachers facilitated and participated in the co-construction of core, "juicy topics" and
recorded the accepted proposals on a blackboard. Some of the topics proposed were discussed and directly
accepted by the community (e.g., allergies, death). Broad topics (e.g., brain) were elaborated and expanded to
highlight the more specific focuses (movement, memory). A few topics proposed using intuitive language (e.g.,
getting hurt,  bleeding,  healing)   were elaborated   to clarify the deeper,    scientific ideas (e.g., injury, immune
system). Meanwhile, a few topic proposals, such as eye-booger and tears, were commented as minor issues.
Through such reflective conversation, Class B generated a collective list of 11 "juicy topics:" allergies, brain,
sleeping, nerves,  hair  in skin,  memory,   digestion,   death,  injuries, heart,  and muscles.  Class   A generated  a
collective list of eight "juicy topics," including the brain, messaging in the body, central nervous system, heart,
muscles, nutrition and eating, and immune system.

Co-Constructing Idea Threads by Reviewing and Selecting Idea Contributions
To review knowledge building progress related to the "juicy topics" identified, students created idea threads
using ITM. In both classes, the teacher explained the purpose and intention of ITM, co-constructed one idea
thread  with  the whole   class,  as an example,   formed   voluntary    small-groups   to  construct idea  threads, and
provided technical assistance. For example, teacher A first introduced and explained ITM: "We are going to
sign in ... this really exciting new tool... If I say an "idea thread," you know what I mean? [Several students
talk] Sort of like a chain of ideas that link to each other and that...starts with a question or idea and builds
more and more knowledge... and hopefully also more questions as the idea moves along..." Focusing on a focal
topic (e.g., messaging in class A and allergies in class B), the teacher worked with students to decide what key
terms should be used to search for Knowledge Forum notes using ITM, review the notes, and selected notes that
contributed  to the community's      understanding.    ITM  displayed    the notes  selected  as  an idea thread,  which
became accessible and editable by all the community members. Following the processes to construct the above
thread, as an example, students then worked as small groups, each of which created an idea thread focusing on
one of the topics they previously identified. The teacher's role in this process focused on co-reviewing idea
contributions,  co-interpreting   patterns   of conversations    in each    thread, and  providing    technical  support.
Displaying idea threads on a timeline with options to zoom in/out helps students to see idea connections and
build-on over time.

Synthesizing Collective Advances and Co-Planning for Deeper Work
With all the idea threads mapped out and projected on a screen (see class B's map in Figure 2), the teacher then
worked with the whole class to review their collective work in the different lines of inquiry, reflect on major
advances, and identify weak areas. They looked at the length of each idea thread and density of build-on links,
and discussed how the different streams of inquiry related to one another. For example, by reviewing their idea
threads map, students in class B found that they had conducted long and intensive discourse about the brain,
nerves, and allergies, which were core topics that they were aware of prior to the ITM reflection. However, they
were surprised to find that the thread on memory had engaged extensive discussions (10 notes by nine authors),
and that the thread on heart, a critical part of the human body, only had two notes, one of which was shared with
the idea thread on death. Based on the co-reflection, students discussed areas that were interesting and needed
deeper  work,   including   the brain, nerves,  heart, and  sleep   (see the  top   of Figure 2).  Similarly, teacher A
facilitated metacognitive conversations among her students as they co-examined their map of idea threads. As

© ISLS                                                                                                               199
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                   Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

an important insight, they realized that the human body is a system where everything is connected and that there
are some parts (heart, messaging system) that seem important and tie all the other parts together.
          Students further worked in small-groups to write "Journeys of Thinking" that included three sections:
our problem, our progress, and we need to do more. Each section has a set of scaffold supports. For example,
synthesizing their progress in the idea thread on messaging in the body, students wrote: "[We used to think:] ...
that the body just moved by itself. You just thought it, and it happened! [We now understand:] that the nerves
help you move; your brain sends the message that you want move; the vertebrae help you move and send
messages."
          As  the  student interviews   suggest,  the  reflective conversations  aided  by ITM     increased   student
awareness of their collective knowledge. Each student identified 2 to 3 major topics of inquiry in the individual
interview. Idea threads constructed by the community highlighted many more themes (eight in class A and nine
in B), bringing important focuses and ideas of the community to the attention of all its members. ITM further
helped students to understand their collective trajectory of ideas through its temporal display of notes and build-
on  links   within each  idea   thread and  across  the whole     knowledge  building  initiative, and   through  co-
summarizing "Journeys of Thinking" about advances and deeper issues. As the students commented, "I think
that it can help you know what you should study more and look into more."

Discussion
The analyses resulted in a grounded theory about ITM-aided metadiscourse as multi-level emergent processes.
The  fifth-  and  sixth-graders co-constructed   core  "juicy topics" based   on their monitoring   of   ideas in the
extended knowledge-building discourse; reviewed and selected important ideas addressing each juicy topic to
construct idea threads; rose above the specific idea to co-summarize "Journeys of Thinking"; and co-reviewed
the map of idea threads to identify advances and weak areas for the whole knowledge building initiative. Such
reflective   processes helped   to increase   student  awareness   of their  community's   knowledge     and   inform
collaborative, deepening efforts to further advance it. The teachers' role to support the metadiscourse focused on
(a) framing   and  stimulating  co-reflection such  as  by  highlighting the  epistemic need   to  review collective
knowledge and elaborating what counts as big ideas or "juicy topics," (b) explaining and modeling ITM use
(e.g., what makes an idea thread) and providing in-situ technical assistance, (c) facilitating negotiation to co-
construct "juicy topics" and review contributions, (d) co-reflecting on the idea threads to synthesize progress,
and  (e) co-planning   knowledge   building   in areas that needed    deeper work. Building  on    these preliminary
findings, we are conducting further design experiments to engage students in ITM-aided metadiscourse on an
ongoing basis and examine the impact more comprehensively by using an expanded range of research measures.

References
Chen, M.-H., Zhang, J., & Lee, J. (2013). Making collective progress visible for sustained knowledge building.
          In: Proceedings of CSCL 2013. Madison, WI: ISLS.
Derry, S. J., Pea, R. D., Barron, B., Engle, R.A., Erickson, F. Goldman, R., et al. (2010). Conducting video
          research in the learning sciences. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 19, 3­53.
Glaser, B. G., & Strauss, A. (1967). The discovery of grounded theory. Chicago, IL: Aldine.
Sawyer, R. K. (2007). Group genius: The creative power of collaboration. New York: Basic Books.
Scardamalia, M. (2002). Collective cognitive responsibility for the advancement of knowledge. In B. Smith
          (Ed.), Liberal Education in a Knowledge Society (pp. 67­98). Chicago, IL: Open Court.
Suthers, D., Vatrapu, R., Medina, R., Joseph, S., & Dwyer, N. (2008). Beyond threaded discussion. Computers
      and Education, 50, 1103-1127.
van  Aalst,   J. (2009)  Distinguishing  knowledge-sharing,       knowledge-construction,  and knowledge-creation
          discourses. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 4 (3), 259-287.
Zhang,   J., Scardamalia,  M.,  Lamon,   M.,  Messina,  R.,   &   Reeve, R.  (2007). Socio-cognitive   dynamics    of
          knowledge building in the work of nine- and ten-year-olds. Educational Technology Research and
          Development, 55, 117­145.
Zhang, J., Scardamalia, M., Reeve, R., & Messina, R. (2009). Designs for collective cognitive responsibility in
          knowledge building communities. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 18, 7­44.

Acknowledgment
This research was supported by a Cyberlearning grant (1122573) from the National Science Foundation.

© ISLS                                                                                                            200
