CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                           Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

       Understanding Collaborative Practices in the Scratch Online
     Community: Patterns of Participation among Youth Designers
                             Deborah A. Fields, Michael Giang*, & Yasmin B. Kafai
                          Utah State University, 2830 Old Main Hill, Logan, UT 84321
                     *Mount St. Mary's College, 12001 Chalod Rd., Los Angeles, CA 90049
                     University of Pennsylvania, 3700 Walnut Street, Philadelphia, PA 19104
                     Email: deborah.fields@usu.edu, mgiang@msmc.la.edu, kafai@upenn.edu

          Abstract: Most research in massive online youth communities has focused on understanding
          patterns of participation and collaboration in games, social networks, and virtual worlds. Few
          studies have examined the nature and dynamics in amateur design communities where youth
          contribute content they  have  designed  themselves.   In this  paper, we    examine quantitative
          trends of participation in a youth design site focused on programming. Scratch is an online
          community with over 1 million registered youth designers 11-18 years of age. Drawing on a
          random sample of 5,000 youth programmers and their activities over three months in early
          2012, we examined log files that captured the frequency of their contributions and comments
          on the site, making visible distinct classes of users who engaged in different sets of practices
          that support design on a collective scale. In the discussion we discuss implications for the
          design of collaborative spaces, tools, and communities.

Introduction
A growing body of research in massive online communities has sought to understand patterns of participation
through collaboration in online sites, games, social networking sites, and virtual worlds. Research into these
sites has provided insights into how people develop collaborations in massive communities within and beyond
the designed structures, for instance developing fluid social networks for information gathering and gameplay
(Williams, Contractor, Poolec, Srivastad, & Cale, 2011), building trust in long-term relationships that promote
more    effective teamwork  (Chen, 2012),   and  engaging   in knowledge   sharing  and   problem  solving    in game
forums (Steinkuehler & Duncan, 2009). Our own studies illustrated how younger users (tweens) drew on many
social resources to learn secret commands in a virtual world, navigating relationships in-person as well as with
familiar and unfamiliar people in the online community (Fields & Kafai, 2009).
          Increasingly  however, interest  is growing   in online communities      where users   contribute the main
content through collaborative or "cooperative" work (Benkler, 2006). In such communities, often organized by
community members rather than companies, the content is generated by members themselves. Research into
these communities begins to reveal the motivation behind such volunteer collaboration as well as mechanisms
for holding together both small and massive collaborative work. Finding fellow collaborators to work on a
project and hold that collaboration together in an amateur design site can be a challenge. Indeed, some studies
have noted in these cases that most groups fail (e.g., Luther, Caine, Zigler & Bruckman, 2010). Communication
by leaders both to coordinate work (Luther et al, 2010) and to maintain socio-emotionally sustaining personal
and social discussions (Aragon, Poon, Monroy-Hernandez, & Aragon, 2009) is key in nurturing collaborative
design work. This importance of high levels of communication has also been noted in larger scale studies of
native  "in the   wild" collaborations. For instance, Benkler   (2006)    noted the importance  of recognition    and
communication by key leaders in sustaining vast unpaid volunteer contributions in Wikipedia and Linux. Yet it
is unclear what other site-wide practices and design structures might support collaborative learning in amateur
design sites. In addition, studies are rare for youth amateur design communities that are the focus of this paper.
Understanding     youth amateur  design  communities   writ large   can allow   us  to make more   informed      design
decisions   on how   to sponsor collaborative  learning at  a  collective level as  well as which  users     may  need
scaffolds in participating in collective design communities.
          In this paper, we tackle two challenges related to understanding collaboration in massive websites: (1)
to understand site-wide group dynamics and behaviors that depict and promote collaboration at a collective level
and (2) to study a youth programmer community. We examine broad trends of participation in the Scratch online
community (http://scratch.mit.edu), with over 1 million registered youth predominantly aged 11-18 years who
share creative programming projects. Drawing on a random sample of 5,000 active designers and their activities
over a three-months time period in early 2012 we examined log files that captured the frequency of different
kinds of contributions and comments on the site and addressed the following research questions: What are the
profiles of users on Scratch.mit.edu and what is their participation over time? How do users engage in the social
and/or creative aspects of Scratch.mit.edu? Are there users who engage in one versus another? What role does
gender play in users' participation in the website? In the discussion we review our approach to profile analysis
and outline implications for the design and study of collaborative online spaces and tools.

  
© ISLS                                                                                                            200
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                            Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

Background
Prior CSCL work has focused on understanding various dimensions of smaller group work including different
group arrangements (e.g., Engelmann & Hess, 2010), scaffolds for promoting group work (e.g., van der Pol,
Admiraal,   &   Simons,   2006),    and interactions  between online   and offline  collaborations   (e.g., Birchfield &
Megowan-Romanowicz, 2009). With some exceptions (e.g., Fields & Kafai, 2009; Rick & Guzdial, 2006), there
is one assumption about collaboration underpinning many of these efforts, which is the idea that collaboration
happens in small groups, often of dyads and triads, as they engage in computer-supported collaborative tasks.
Research is now starting to examine collaboration in collective levels found in massive websites, as can be
found in amateur design communities that are the focus of this paper. This may involve the smaller enterprises
of   individual collaboratives   who    work   together  on shared  projects  as   well as  the   broader   dynamics   of
participation in amateur design communities. Although there are growing numbers of such communities where
youth share art (e.g., Deviant Art, Bitstrips), mods of games (e.g., Little Big Planet, the Sims), or stories (e.g.,
Fanfiction.net, Storybird), we don't know much about who is participating in these productions or who engages
in which aspects of or combinations co-designing, sharing and commenting.
          We do know from observational studies that a number of collaborative practices such as small group
collaborative design and remixing, broadly dispersed constructive feedback, and social incentives for design
have sprung up on amateur design sites. Co-design in user-created small groups is closest to the type of small
group collaboration often studied in CSCL. In Scratch, many groups of kids or "companies" gather together to
work on creating games (Aragon, Poon, Monroy-Hernández, & Aragon, 2009) or interactive stories (Brennan,
Valverde, Prempeh, Roque & Chung, 2011). This is similar to the collaboration amongst small groups (collabs)
of adult Flash video designers in Newgrounds studied by Luther and colleagues, but as mentioned earlier, most
collabs fail to produce a final product (e.g., Luther et al, 2010). Another collaborative practice is remixing,
where users download designs made by others, edit them, then re-post. Remixing plays a double role as a
collaborative practice. Users can learn by studying and editing others' projects and they also create social links
through the traces left by remixing one another's projects, sometimes creating networks of thousands of remixes
from just one generative project (Monroy-Hernandez, 2012). Finally, social feedback is type of collaborative
practice  that  supports  design    in online design  communities.  These   can  take   the forms  of peer   reviews   on
fanfiction sites (Black, 2008), constructive criticism as well as "flames" with negative feedback (Brennan, 2011).
Successful  small   scale   efforts have   been made   to educate  select  website  members    to leave more    positive,
constructive criticism in targeted design challenges (e.g. Roque, Kafai & Fields, 2012) but without measures for
how widespread certain practices are (i.e., who leaves comments and who does not) it is difficult to measure
change with any certainty.
          In developing a framework for parsing computer supported collaborative learning at multiple scales, we
need to analytically bring together different practices that support collaborative design on a collective scale,
from creating to remixing to commenting, and investigate who engages in these practices, in what combinations
of activity, and for what duration. This means that we need to focus not only on the artifacts of networked
collaborations but also on the "networking residues" meaning the traces left on projects or profiles such as
"love-its," friend requests, "favorites," "likes" and even gifts are types of that show that users have viewed and
appreciate projects (Grimes & Fields, 2012). Networking residues can even become a type of commodity as
they   elevate  the virtual presence    of a  person  or project through   signs of popularity.   In Scratch,  members
leverage networking residues to support user-created design contests, offering projects, illustrations, love-its,
and friending as prizes (Nickerson & Monroy-Hernandez, 2011). Yet while we see evidence of a range of
collaborative practices supporting design in amateur online communities, we cannot judge how widespread or
distributed these practices are across a full range of users on these sites, nor what patterns of activities users take
up over time. To understand connections between practices of creating and sharing that traditionally have been
seen as the cornerstone of collaborative design together with collective practices that create the underlying
social fabric that encourages and supports continuing and iterative design practices, we examine participation
patterns through log files collaborative activities (such as designing, remixing, commenting) of a random sample
of users in the Scratch online community, thus complementing prior case studies of individuals, groups of
designers (collabs), or common practices of activities (e.g., remixing).

Context & Methods
Scratch.mit.edu is an online massive community where participants, mostly youth ages 11-18 years share their
computer programs (Resnick et al., 2009). Kids who share an interest in programming post animations, games,
stories, science simulations, and the interactive art they have made in the visual programming environment of
Scratch. Launched in May 2007 out of the MIT Media Lab, the Scratch site has grown to more than 1.2 million
registered members with nearly 1500 Scratch projects uploaded everyday. As a type of social networking site,
activity centers around sharing user-created projects. User profiles are portfolio based, showing individuals'
created  projects,  "favorite" projects,   and  links to  user-created galleries (collections)  of projects   and recent
"friends" on their home page. While there are small spaces for a thumbnail picture and city/country information,

  
© ISLS                                                                                                             201
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                              Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

projects dominate the user profile: one gets to know others through the quality of their projects or the comments
they leave. Networking residues show up in comments, inclusion in someone's "favorites," and descriptive
statistics listed under a project, including the number of views, taggers, "love-its," remixes, downloads, and the
user-curated galleries in which the project is located. Projects with more views, comments, and love-its may
eventually    make   it to the  front  page of   Scratch through    categories   like "Featured   Projects,"  "What   the
Community is Loving," "What the Community is Viewing," and other sections. The front page is a prized area
for Scratchers; having one's project on the front page (or linked from the front page) means getting more views,
more feedback, and more visibility. Yet even though the Scratch site is primarily project-based, project creation
and social networking are deeply intertwined and the site allows for a number of forms of participation.

Data Collection and Analyses
To understand the group dynamics and behaviors of Scratch users, we used latent class analysis (LCA) to
identify  communities     of  similar Scratch  users   based   on their participation  behavior   (for more  details, see
Muthen & Muthen, 2000). LCA identifies the maximum number of latent classes (groups of similar individuals)
based on a set of observable categorical and/or continuous variables that can be observable online activities.
This process can uncover different patterns of activity in various "classes" of users in addition to casual users,
social users, and hard-core users that have been identified with more traditional cluster analyses (Giang, Kafai,
Fields & Searle, 2012). To do so, LCA relies on model fitting statistics and theoretical interpretation of each
class to identify the optimal number of latent classes. This approach avoids the risk of identifying classes with
only a few users or a class that is generally similar to another except for minor statistical differences in specific
observed activity. The second advantage of LCA is its ability to create unique profiles for each latent class.
When dichotomous categorical data, each latent class contains a probability of answering `yes' to questions
about participation. For example, Scratch users can choose to participate by posting a bulletin board comment.
The probability of answering `yes' to this might be 80% for the first class, 20% for another, and 10% for the
third class. The first class may consist of social users, while other classes may be different types of casual users
who do not socialize.
          We used LCA to examine the patterns of relations amongst a set of six Scratch participation variables:
1) Remixing: downloading, editing and reposting a project that someone else originally posted. 2) Downloading:
clicking on a project to download it. This is indicative of looking into the inner workings (i.e., programming) of
a project, since all projects can be played online without downloading them. 3) Commenting: leaving a comment
on a project or a set of projects (a gallery). 4) Favorites: clicking "favorite" on a project. Favored projects show
up on the profile of the user who clicked "favorite," meaning that others users can see an individuals' "favorite"
projects by others. 5) Love-its: clicking "love-it" on a project, which leaves a heart on the project. 6) Friend
Request: sending a friend request to a user. Friend requests on Scratch are unidirectional ­ they do not have to
be reciprocated. Friends' latest projects show up on a users' homepage, making it a way to keep track of favorite
designers.  
          Participants included a random sample of 5004 users from amongst more than 20,000 users who logged
into Scratch during the month of January 2012. This sample reflected the broader population on Scratch in
regard to self-reported gender and age. As there are no definitive indicators for the correct number of latent
classes, both statistical and substantive criteria were used to identify the best model fit for each wave of analyses
­ one for each of three months (January, February, and March 2012). However, prior to conducting LCA, we
had to transform the continuous variables as they were highly skewed, with many participants engaging in no or
very few instances of a practice and a few participants engaging in hundreds of instances of a practice. For
instance,    4101 users  left no   comments,   163 users  left  one  comment,    104   users left 2   comments,  but  six
individuals left more than 1000 comments. As a solution, we dichotomized each variable to indicate no activity
(0) or activity (1).

Findings
This   section  reveals  different aspects  of   participation in  collaborative practices:  (1)  the  impact of  project
creation in participation, (2) variability in participation over time, and (3) differences in participation between
user groups.

Project Creation Influences Participation
The first discovery we made was that making a project was a gateway for other forms of visible participation on
the   website.  Previous   studies have    found  that  Scratch   project creation and   commenting     are  not equally
distributed amongst the users. Only about 29% of Scratch site participants, primarily male users, share projects.
Of    these,  about half contribute   only to  a single project   (Grimes  &  Fields,  2012).  Some    Scratchers prefer
activities like commenting, live role-playing or forum posting over project creation (see Brennan, 2011). Our
analyses revealed that creating at least one project in a given month was a gateway to all other activities. For
instance, in the month of January, there were no users who posted comments who did not create at least one

  
© ISLS                                                                                                                202
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                         Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

project, whereas there were many users who created projects but did not post comments. This meant that users
who did not create projects also did not participate in any other activities (social or otherwise) represented by
the variables, making that group difficult to study with the data available. From our sample of 5004 users, 1379
created an original project in one of the three months (January ­ March 2012), 533 created a project in each of
two months, and 313 created a project in all three months. Thus, 2225 users (67% boys, 33% girls) who created
at least 1 project across a three-month period formed the new sample from which all further analyses reported in
this paper are drawn. This sample represents about 44.5% of the initial random sample of users.
  
Participation Varies over Time   
We    then  examined  participation in the other   collaborative practices (remixing, downloading,   commenting,
favorites, love-its, and friend requests) for each of three months, January, February, and March. To unpack these
rather complex analyses, we take first a look at the findings for January (see Figure 1) that resulted in a 5-class
model.
  

               Figure 1: The 5-Class Model for January and the percentage of users for each class.

           Here we see a "high class" profile of users (8.4% of all users) who are likely to participate in nearly
every type activity studied. They have a 55% chance of posting a remix, a 100% chance of downloading a
project, and very high (above 85%) chances of commenting on a project, favoriting a project, and 100% chance
of loving a project and making a friend request. It is worth noting that the existence of this high class profile is
consistent across all three months, as we will show later. A second profile we nickname the "download class"
(17.2%) because there is a 100% chance that they will download projects from the Scratch site. There is also a
profile of users who are likely to participate in most of the social networking activities available on Scratch a
"social + download class" (16.3%), including commenting, favoriting, loving, and less likely friending. They
are also very likely to download projects (75%). A fourth profile is the "download + comment class" (16.1%)
who has a strong likelihood of participating in downloading project, commenting and projects, and friending,
with low likelihoods of favoriting or loving projects. The fifth class is the "low-level class" (class 5, 43.9%) who
are unlikely to do anything except post a project during the month.
           The high class in particular is interesting, because it suggests that the core users on the Scratch site are
the ones most likely to participate in remixing projects and in commenting, favoriting, loving, and issuing friend
requests. In addition, the next class of users (download+social) most likely to participate in the social activities
on the website are also very likely to download projects (75% likelihood). Indeed, against our expectations,
there was no class of individuals who were likely to participate in commenting, favoriting, loving, or friending
others without also having a strong likelihood of downloading projects, an activity which suggests that kids are
not just playing projects but investigating and looking into them. In other words, besides posting a project,
downloading a project is a second gatekeeper to social activity on the Scratch site. Although leaving networking
residues such as favorites, love-its, and friend requests would seem to have the lowest bars for participating in a
social networking website, this actually appears to be a practice in which only those who are most involved in a
full range of practices on the site participate.
           Another one of our key findings is that rather than having the same class model for each month, the
statistical analyses suggested a different  class   model for each  month   (for details of the LCA  analysis, see
Appendix A). In the models for February and March we see the continuation of a high class of users who were
very likely to participate in all forms of activities we studied, from remixing to friending. The percentage of
users in this class stayed steady from January (8.4%) to February (8.6%) and increased into March (11.6%),

  
© ISLS                                                                                                         203
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                      Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

perhaps because of the decrease in number of classes in the model. A class of downloaders+commenters also
continued across all three months and remained relatively consistent (from 15.1% in January, 12.5% in February,
and 11.4% in March), and the low class of users who were only likely to post one project also remained present
(increasing from 43.9% to 70.1% to 77.1% in each subsequent month). This supports the idea that clicking love-
it or favorite on projects or sending friend requests are high-end activities among a relatively small group of
users compared to practices like downloading projects and commenting on projects. It also suggests that users
who were active in one month (our sample was drawn from active users) are likely to drop off in activity in
subsequent months.

             Figure 2. Four Class Model for February (left) and Three Class Model for March (right).

Absence of Gender Differences in Participation
Girls only represent one-third of all registered members on the Scratch site. The gender distribution in our
overall sample reflected the distribution of self-reported gender on the Scratch site: 67% male, 33% female.
Given this prior knowledge about differential membership in Scratch community, we tested whether gender was
proportionately represented in each of the latent class. The distribution of gender within each class model was
generally insignificant with only two exceptions: a higher proportion of girls in the high class in the month of
January and a higher proportion of boys in the download+comment class in the month of March (for more detail
on statistical analyses, see Appendix A). These analyses suggest that while males dominate the population of
Scratch at large, within class profiles gender differences are minimal, an interesting finding for a youth amateur
design site focused on programming.

Discussion
This   paper examined   broad quantitative trends of participation in a  youth amateur   design site focused on
programming, making visible sets of practices that support design on a collective scale. Prior qualitative studies
have documented that many of the activities on the Scratch site are collaborative in nature and support youths'
programming designs though social supports (love-its, favorites, friend requests, comments) and constructive
criticism as well as through opening up youths' designs to each other through the opportunity to play, download,
and remix others' projects (e.g. Brennan, 2011; Roque et al, 2012; Aragon et al, 2009; Kafai et al, 2012). Before
this study we had little idea of what kinds of participation patterns users exhibited in the variety of collaborative
design practices common on Scratch. Our findings suggest that there are several classes of users in Scratch and
that making a project and downloading others' projects are gateways for other more prominently social activities.
This is a surprising finding given our own prior assumptions that clicking "love-it" or "favorite" on a project
were the lowest bars of activity. Indeed only a small percentage of the active Scratch population engaged in
those activities: those already engaged in creating, downloading, and commenting on projects. Instead, active
Scratch users prioritize designing projects and downloading others' designs, a finding that suggests studying
social networking forums focused on design may be qualitatively different from the social networking sites
discussed more prominently in popular media (e.g. Facebook, MySpace) that center on relationships.
          Our results suggest several future steps for deeper analyses. First, the unavailability of data such as
views of projects, home page, and notifications make the activities of a large proportion of users (55%) in the
study invisible. The development of Scratch 2.0 is designed to capture these kinds of data, which should help
illuminate the activities of this hidden group of participants. In addition, we need better ways of documenting
the relative richness and sophistication of projects and comments at a quantitative scale. This will allow us to
differentiate between types of project creators and comment posters, for instance between users who post many
relatively simple projects or users who share one or two highly sophisticated or complex projects. Further,
although   the current class models of participation we presented   here are static, in future analyses we will
investigate which users transition between classes in each month's model, seeing what proportion of high-class

  
© ISLS                                                                                                     204
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                                    Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

(and other) users remain in that class or move to other classes. We also plan to investigate the role of experience
in Scratch in seeing which users move between classes as well as analyzing whether other users' activities
(clicking love-it on a project, commenting on a project, etc.) have an effect on users moving between classes.
These analyses would provide richer information on who is participating in Scratch and what kind of users'
activities may influence the likelihood of their changing their involvement on the site. Establishing models of
participation in Scratch was an important precursor to these other analyses.
           The larger goal of this research is to illuminate collaborative practices in massive communities that
support learning and design, to see who is participating in those activities, and to evaluate how to sustain those
types   of  activities.  In  the   end  we  want  to  engineer    online sites  to more    productively       encourage               computer
supported collaborative learning on a collective level. Analyses presented in this paper are a first step toward a
broader understanding of who participates in which activities over time in Scratch. Future interventions at a
website-design level and at various local levels will be able to more intentionally target certain classes of users
to involve them in more collaborative kinds of work. Some models for this already exist albeit in a small scale,
for   instance  supporting      highly  involved  designers   to  learn  to  post  more    positive,  constructive       criticism          or
helping other users connect to each other for collaborative co-design through semi-structured design challenges
(see Roque, Kafai & Fields, 2012; Kafai, Fields, Roque, Burke, & Monroy-Hernandez, 2012). Yet these types of
interventions reach out primarily to the "high class" of users who already engage in most opportunities on the
site. Analyses in this paper suggest opportunities to target other classes of users, for instance reaching out to
those in a     "downloading" class to engage them in one additional collaborative practice such as commenting.
The importance of design to this community also suggests that interventions should be targeted on youths'
designs,    perhaps by    drawing      attention to new    users' designs   who    might   benefit   from     feedback   or            making
designs more easily searchable so that users can connect with others who have common interests. More broadly,
further research is needed on site-wide analyses of other youth amateur design sites to see if similar trends
prevail.

Appendix A
The LCA analysis resulted in a 5-class in January, a 4-class in February, and a 3-class model in March based on
the indicators for each model fit (Hagenaars & McCutcheon, 2002; Muthen, 2002). For each participant, LCA
generates probabilities for membership into each class, and generally one class has the highest probability of
members. For instance, results show the students classified into their highest probability latent class had a 76-
94% probability of being in that class, and a 0-24% of being in the other classes. Among the latter, 2 of the 20
classification were above .19. Taken together, these results support a 5-class model. LCA results for February
indicate that a 4-class model provides the best fit for the data (see Figure 2). This is supported by a non-
significant LMR p-value at the 5-class model (p= .08). In addition, aBIC value dipped to its lowest point at the
4-class model. Further, the substantive interpretation of the four model provided greater clarity. Additional
statistical support can be provided by the average most likely latent class membership probability. For the 4-
class model, students classified into their highest probability latent class had a 75­97% probability for being in
that class, and a 0 to 21% of being in the other class (with only 2 of the 12 other class probabilities being above
10%). LCA results for March indicate that a 3-class model provides the best fit for the data (see Figure 2). This
mainly supported by lowest BIC and aBIC values for that class. In addition, the most likely class probabilities
ranged from 85.5% to 98.0%, and 0 to 8.7% for the other classes. Interpretation of the 3-class model provided a
better, more parsimonious interpretation of the data. A 4 class model was substantively rejected because one
class consisted of a small number of users (1.4%) and it was only distinguished to another class by 1 of the 6
indicator items.   Due to space constraints we have        not put in  the  model  fit indices table as we     did   for January.
  
Table 1: Model Fit Indices for January.

    DICH       January: N = 2225 (Includes project creators for any of the 3 months)
               likelihood    free par       BIC         aBIC          LMR p-value    Entropy     AIC
          1     -6456.55                6   12957.97    12938.91         N/A             N/A       12925.10
          2     -5527.54               13   11152.31    11111.01         0.0000          0.828     11081.09
          3     -5477.94               20   11105.44    11105.44         0.0176          0.681     10995.87
          4     -5448.24               27   11098.41    11012.63         0.0000          0.818     10950.48
          5     -5426.66               34   11107.59    10999.58         0.0000          0.804     10921.31
          6     -5416.54               41   11139.71    11009.46         0.0466          0.773     10915.08
Note. The Lo-Mendel-Rubin (LMR) likelihood ratio tests whether the current model is an improvement over the model with
one less class. For instance, the p-values indicate the 5-class model provides the best fit. The non-significant p-value at the sixth
class  (.1129) suggests that it is not an improvement over a 5-class model. In addition, information criteria (i.e., Akaike

  
© ISLS                                                                                                                                    205
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                                          Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

Information Criterion (AIC), Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC), sample size Adjusted BIC (aBIC)) were used to compare
models, wherein models with additional model parameters were penalized in the search for the most parsimonious model and
information criteria with the lowest values indicate the best model fit. As values begin to level off (especially if there values do
not increase), substantive interpretation and selection criteria take a greater role. For this analysis, the lowest value is at the 5-
class model, wherein BIC and aBIC values begin to increase. In addition, a 5-class model provides a more meaningful and
distinct interpretation of the class than models with fewer or great classes.

          For   assessing   the distribution  of  gender, we   performed              multiple  chi-square  tests   for independence
analyses. For January, 2 (gender) x 5 (latent classes) chi-square analyses initially revealed that gender was
distributed differently across the 5 latent classes, 2 (4) = 9.635, p = .047. However, upon close inspection of
standardized    residual  scores  comparing    difference  between               the  observed    and  expected, only    1 marginally
significant difference emerged (z > 1.96). That is, there were more women in the class 1 (high class) than
expected, z = 2.030. For February, chi-square test for independence suggest that each latent classes had a similar
proportion of boys and girls, 2 (3) = 5.613, p = .132. For March, chi-square test for independence initially
revealed that gender was distributed differently across the 3 latent classes, 2 (2) = 10.040, p = .007. However,
standardized    residual    comparisons      revealed  showed                 only  one  significant   difference    within            Class   1
(download+comment), z = -2.152; that is, there were fewer girls found in this group than expected.

References
Aragon,   C.,   Poon,   S., Monroy-Hernandez,      A.,  &  Aragon,              D.   (2009).  A   tale of  two online   communities:
          Fostering collaboration and creativity in scientists and children. In Proceedings of the Creativity and
          Cognition Conference (pp.9­18). Berkeley, CA. New York: ACM Press.
Benkler,  Y.    (2006). The    wealth  of networks:   How  social             production   transforms   markets  and    freedom.          New
          Haven and London: Yale University Press.
Birchfield, D. & Megowan-Romanowicz, C. (2009) Earth science learning in SMALLab: A design experiment
          for mixed reality. International Journal of Computer Supported Collaborative Learning, 4 (4), 403-
          421.
Black, R.W. (2008). Adolescents and online fiction. New York: Peter Lang.
Brennan, K. (2011). Mind the gap: Differences between the aspirational and the actual in an online community
          of  learners.  Proceedings      of the  International               Conference   of Computer     Supported    Collaborative
          Learning.
Chen, M. (2012).      Leet noobs: The life and death of an expert player group in World of Warcraft. New York:
          Peter Lang.
Engelmann,    T.  &   Hesse,    F.W.  (2010)   How    digital concept              maps  about  the   collaborators' knowledge             and
          information influence computer-supported collaborative problem solving. ijcscl 5 (3), pp. 299-320.
Fields, D. A. & Kafai, Y. B. (2009). A connective ethnography of peer knowledge sharing and diffusion in a
          tween virtual world. International Journal of Computer Supported Collaborative Learning, 4(1), 47-68.
Giang, M. T., Kafai, Y. B., Fields, D. A., & Searle, K. A. (2012). Social interactions in virtual worlds: Patterns
          and participation of tween relationship play. In J.Fromme & A. Unger (Eds.), Computer games and
          new media cultures: A handbook on the state and perspectives of digital games studies. New York:
          Springer Verlag. 543-556.
Grimes,   S. &   Fields,    D. (2012).   Kids  online: A  new  research              agenda   for understanding   social   networking
          forums.   New     York.  The    Joan   Ganz  Cooney    Center              at Sesame    Workshop.    Available               online at
          http://www.joanganzcooneycenter.org/reports-38.html.
Hagenaars    J, &   McCutcheon     A.  (Eds).  (2002).  Applied               Latent Class Analysis.   Cambridge,    UK:   Cambridge
          University Press.
Kafai, Y. B., Fields, D. A., Roque, R., Burke, W. Q., & Monroy-Hernández, A. (2012). Collaborative agency in
          youth  online     and  offline  creative production    in             Scratch.  Research     and Practice   in   Technology
          Enhanced Learning, 7(2), 63-87.
Luther, K., Caine, K., Ziegler, K., & Bruckman, A. (2010). Why it works (when it works): Success factors in
          online  creative   collaboration.   In GROUP    '10:   Proceedings              of  the ACM     Conference    on Supporting
          Group Work (pp. 1­10) New York: ACM Press.
Monroy-Hernandez, A. (2012). Designing for remixing: Supporting an online community of amateur creators.
          Unpublished dissertation. MIT.
Muthen B. 2002. Statistical and substantive checking in growth mixture modeling. Retrieved January 2007 from
          http://www.gseis.ucla.edu/faculty/muthen/full_paper_list.htm.
Muthen    B,  Muthen    L.  (2000).   Integrating  person-centered              and  variable-centered    analyses:  Growth             mixture
          modeling with latent trajectory classes. Alcohol Clinical Experimental Research, 24 (6), 882­891.
Nickerson,    J.V., Monroy-Hernández,        A.  (2011).  Appropriation               and  Creativity:    User-initiated   Contests           in
          Scratch. In Proceedings of the Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS '11).

  
© ISLS                                                                                                                                     206
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                            Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

Resnick, M., Maloney, J., Hernández, A. M., Rusk, N., Eastmond, E., Brennan, K., Millner, A. D., Rosenbaum,
           E., Silver,  J., Silverman,   B., &    Kafai, Y.     B. (2009). Scratch:   Programming   for   everyone.
           Communications of the ACM, 52(11), 60­67.
Rick,   J. &   Guzdial,  M.  (2006).   Situating CoWeb:   A scholarship    of application. International Journal of
           Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 1(1), 89-115.
Roque, R., Kafai, Y. B., & Fields, D. A. (2012). From tools to communities: Designs to support online creative
           collaboration in Scratch. Proceedings of IDC 2012,. Bremen, Germany.
Steinkuehler, S., & Duncan, S. (2009). Scientific habits of mind in virtual worlds. Journal of Science Education
           and Technology, 17(6), 530­543.
van der Pol,    J., Admiraal, W. & Simons, P.      R. J. (2006).    The affordance   of anchored discussion for the
           collaborative    processing  of   academic    texts.    International  Journal  of  Computer-Supported
           Collaborative Learning, 1(3), 339-357.
Williams, D., Contractor, N., Poolec, M. S., Srivastad, J., & Cale, D. (2011). The Virtual Worlds Exploratorium:
           Using Large-Scale Data and Computational Techniques for Communication Research. Communication
           Methods and Measures, 5(2), 163-180.

Acknowledgments
This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation (NSF-CDI-1027736) to Mitchel
Resnick, Yasmin Kafai and Yochai Benkler.. The views expressed are those of the authors and do not
necessarily represent the views of the National Science Foundation, Utah State University, St. Mary's College,
or the University of Pennsylvania. Special thanks to Anant Seethalakshmi for help with gathering data and to the
Scratch Team for providing feedback on analysis.

  
© ISLS                                                                                                        207
