CSCL 2013 Proceedings                   Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

Understanding the Teacher's Role in a Knowledge Community and
                                         Inquiry Curriculum
                                      Naxin Zhao, James D. Slotta
                Ontario Institute for Studies in Education, University of Toronto, Canada
                          Email: naxin.zhao@utoronto.ca, jslotta@gmail.com

         Abstract: This study examined teacher's role in a Knowledge Community and Inquiry (KCI)
         curriculum. Three science teachers and their students in a climate change curriculum unit
         involved in this design-based research. Curriculum design documents and video recordings of
         teacher-students interactions were the sources of data. Grounded theory coding techniques and
         a video coding scheme were applied to the analysis of data. Analysis examined the roles that
         teachers played in the KCI curriculum as well as the teacher-students interactions. Teachers
         played  a predominantly     logistical role in   the beginning    of  the enactment      of this  KCI
         curriculum, followed by increasingly pedagogical practices.

Teachers are critical to the success of any reform-based curricula that often require them to substantially change
their perspectives of teaching and learning to adopt an innovative pedagogy (Blumenfeld et al., 1991; Fishman
et al., 2004). Prior research  has   advanced   one  promising    approach  to  teaching  and learning    (Bielaczyc &
Collins, 1999; Slotta & Najafi, 2010) that transforms classrooms into knowledge communities with the support
of technology where students can acquire the 21st century skills (Brown & Campione, 1996; Scardamalia &
Bereiter, 1992). This knowledge community method requires that teachers transform their classroom into a
community of learners. Teachers are often suggested to play a role of "coach" or facilitator of knowledge
construction,  supporting students   to construct   their own   knowledge      within a complex      range of  activities
(Blumenfeld et al., 1991; Brown et al. 1993; Brown & Campione, 1994; Hewitt & Scarmadalia, 1998; Hmelo-
Silver & Barrows, 2008; Scarmadalia, 2002). However, it is challenging to describe how such pedagogical
practices can be achieved in the classroom by teachers.       Indeed, the research literature has very little to say
about the specific role of teachers (Putnam & Borko, 2000). There is no research has specifically addressed
what teachers are actual doing and what they should be doing in a knowledge community approach.
         The knowledge community approach has not enjoyed much success at the secondary level (Staples,
2007),  partly because of  the heavy    content  expectations  teachers   must  address,  the traditional  assessments
students must perform, and the challenging forms of teaching practice      (Slotta & Peters, 2008). In order to make
this method more accessible to teachers, Slotta and his colleagues (Slotta, 2007; Slotta, & Peters, 2008) have
introduced  the Knowledge   Community     and   Inquiry   (KCI)   model   that integrates a dimension      of scaffolded
inquiry  within a  knowledge   community    approach.     In  the KCI    model,  students   first engage   in collective
knowledge   construction  activities to explore  and  examine     their own ideas,    which are   then aggregated  into
community knowledge base. Next, students work collaboratively in scaffolded inquiry activities, drawing on
knowledge elements from the community knowledge base to produce new elements to that knowledge base and
specific outcomes that serve as assessments of individual understanding.
         Early implementations of the KCI model have been successful (Slotta & Peters, 2008). Nevertheless,
their approach has ignored any specific description of the teacher's role within the model. To inform such a
description, the present study has recorded large amount of videos of teachers' enactment of KCI curriculum for
the purpose of examining the detail of teachers' interactions, and to analyse the role they play at various points
in a KCI curriculum. The objective of this study is to create a fine-grained description of the teacher's role by
analysing the curriculum design documents and the teacher-students interactions in the practical enactment of a
technology-infused science curriculum unit. The following research questions have guided this study:
         1. What roles does the teacher play in the classroom during a KCI curriculum?
         2. What kinds of interactions with students does the teacher implement during different phases of KCI?
         3. How does the teacher scaffold students' inquiry and collaboration in a KCI curriculum?

The study
This study was conducted to understand the teacher's role in a global climate change curriculum unit that was
designed according to the KCI model. The overall research program employs a design-based methodology
(Brown, 1992; Collins, 1992) where the investigations are embedded within a deeply contextualized curriculum.
Because teacher's understanding of the theoretical position and faithful enactment of the curriculum are critical,
a co-design process (Shrader et al., 2001; Roschelle & Penuel, 2006) was employed where researchers and
teachers worked in close collaboration in the development of research materials and instructional designs. The
research site of the study is a private secondary school in Toronto. Three teachers and their students from five
class sessions at grade eight participated in this study. In this paper, we present two analyses that we conducted.

© ISLS                                                                                                             201
Pedagogical: WCI, SGI
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                     Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

                          Curriculum     Design  Analysis. The    goal of  this analysis  is to identify the   teacher's role as it was
designed (explicitly and implicitly) within the curriculum. In this analysis, we examined the curriculum design
documents, teacher's lesson plans, and emails between the teachers and the researchers. We used open coding
and axial coding techniques in the grounded theory method (Strauss & Corbin, 1998).
                          Teacher-student Interaction Analysis. The purposes of this analysis are: 1) to describe the roles that the
teachers                  played   in their  practical enactment  of   the designed  KCI   curriculum;   2) to identify  teacher-student
interaction patterns. By reviewing literature, we developed a two-level coding scheme (Table 1) to analyse
video recordings of teachers' classroom enactment. At present, we have analysed the video from the first class
period only, across all five sections of the class, although this analysis will be scaled to 20 or more class periods.

Table 1: Coding scheme for video analysis

                           Code                                                        Meaning
Logistical: WCI, SGI                          Teacher provides procedural or logistical information to students in the whole class
                                              (WCI) or in small groups (SGI), such as managing students' behaviour, helping
                                              students solve technical difficulties, giving instructions on how to use software, etc.
Conceptual: WCI, SGI                          Teacher talks about science concepts to students in the whole class or in a group.
                        Connection            Teach helps students to recall or connect to prior knowledge, experience, or personal
                                              relevance.
                        Context               Teacher sets the context for following instruction or activities, such as introducing
                                              learning activities, talking about the content that will be learned and agenda, etc.
                        Elaboration           Teacher elicits students' thinking; asks or helps students to elaborate their thinking,
                                              explain their own idea clearly, or think beyond what they are learning.
                        Evaluation            Teacher evaluates, assesses, or monitors students' progress, their understanding of
                                              concepts, their learning outcome, and praise them.
                        Guidance              Teacher guides, explains, or engages student in inquiry activities or process; give
                                              directions or suggestions on how and what to do next in order to continue their
                                              learning process, how to find learning resources, etc.
                        Modelling             Modelling of reflective thinking, connecting of knowledge, collaborative working,
                                              and building on other's ideas, etc.
                        Question              Quick responses to student's questions
                        Reflection            Encourage or request students to reflect on their learning activities, learning process

Results
Curriculum Design Analysis
The following categories of teacher's role were identified from the coding of the designed curriculum: content
lecturing, evaluating students, introducing learning activities, making connections, explanation or elaboration,
and classroom management role. These reflect the intention of the design team, with regard to what activities we
felt the teacher should be engaged with, and when.                         It is important to conduct this analysis, so that it can be
compared with observations of the enactment, to inform the more abstract or general model (i.e., KCI).
                          Content   lecturing  is the  most frequent   role   identified for the teacher  within  our   design. Content
lecturing happens mostly during the collective knowledge construction stage of KCI where the teacher would
lecture about various science concepts and principles relating to climate change: carbon dioxide and greenhouse
effects, carbon sinks and carbon sources, heat transfer, ocean circulation, weather patterns, and many others.
                          Evaluating students is an important role articulated for the teacher within our design. Teacher evaluates
students in two ways: first, to give students periodic quizzes during the implementation of the curriculum and a
final                   examination   at the end  of this unit; second,    to evaluate students' contribution  to the   advancement  of
community knowledge. In our design, the teacher should examine individual student's editing history of the
regional pages, issue pages and remediation pages and give marks based on the quality of each student's editing.
To implement this second type of evaluation properly, teacher needs to introduce students the rubric that will be
used in evaluating their editing contributions to the wiki pages.
                          Introducing    the learning  activities and   explain  in detail   how  they will  be  enacted   was   another
important element of our design, since the particular learning activities within this curriculum unit were quite
novel (e.g., editing wikis). This includes the demonstration of any technologies used in the curriculum unit.
                          Making connections refers to that teacher should help students to connect the climate change issues
they are investigating to the science content they are learning and to connect climate change science concepts to
climate models. In our design, this connection role happens when students collectively construct community
knowledge base.
                          Elaboration refers to a role that the teachers play to help students gain deeper understanding of content.
The teachers may highlight or clarify science concepts and principles; follow-up on things that the teacher

© ISLS                                                                                                                              202
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

thinks the students have difficulty in understanding; explain the role of a science model. Facilitating and leading
student discussion on climate science content or remediation plans are also considered as elaboration role.
        Coordination was a final role described for teachers: grouping students, assigning students to peer
review groups, giving students class time to complete their reflections, assigning reference topics, etc.
Teacher-student Interaction Analysis
Table 2 shows the frequency, the total time, and the average time (in seconds) teachers spent on each type of
interaction. Table 2 indicates that logistical interaction, happened 166 times in small group and in whole class, is
 Table 2: The frequency, average time, and total timeteachers spent on each typo of interactionthe most frequent form of interaction between theteacherandthestudents.Thismeansthattheteachersinteractedwithstudentsmoreoften
 Code                  Frequency     Time     Average     provide   logistical  or     procedural   assistances     tostudents.The emphasis on logistics and pedagogy
 SGI_Conceptual            1         33.92     33.92      is due to the fact that the video data we analysed so
 SGI_Logistical           89       2002.01     22.49      far are only from the very first class period of the
 SGI_Pedagogical          18        392.93     21.83      curriculum, where teachers needed to introduce the
 WCI_Conceptual            6        289.72     48.29      technology that used, help students solve technical
 WCI_Logistical           77       2765.11     35.91      difficulties, and explain the activities.
 WCI_Pedagogical          68       3249.11     47.78                A more detailed coding of the pedagogicalcontentofstudent-teacherinteractionswillreveal
                                                          more information about the teacher's role within a
KCI curriculum or a knowledge community approach, more generally. Figure 1 displays a finer grain coding of
the pedagogical   interactions (WCI_Pedagocial   and  SGI_Pedagogical,  from   Table    1 above)   from      the  three
teachers in this first class period. While all three teachers clearly performed many "Whole class" Context and
Guidance interactions, this is reasonable because at the beginning of a new unit the teachers need to set the
learning context and provide students with guidance about the activities. Figure 1 also suggests differences
among the three teachers in terms of their interaction patterns. For example, Teacher 3 shifted his interactions
with student very often, 40 times for Teacher 3 vs. 31 for Teacher 1 or 15 for Teacher 2. While these differences
are not statistically significant, the coding is in the early stages, and these patterns will be a focus of future
analysis. These preliminary results suggest that in the first activity the teachers interacted with students more
often for the purposes of 1) providing logistical or procedural assistances, and 2) setting the learning context and
guiding students. Also, teachers perform pedagogical interactions differently. We believe that as more data are
analysed, they will reveal important relationships between the nature of the KCI model, the specific curriculum
topics and interventions, and the kinds of interactions that occur in the classroom.

           14  

           12  

           10  

            8  

            6                                                                               Teacher  1  

            4                                                                               Teacher  2  

            2                                                                               Teacher  3  

            0  

            Figure 1. Frequency distribution of each type of interaction among the three teachers

Discussion
Understanding    the dependencies of innovations on   dynamics within  the classroom      is an important     goal  in
learning sciences research. Even if the classroom teacher is deeply involved in the design of the innovation (i.e.,

© ISLS                                                                                                             203
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                   Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

in co-design), the true nature of our interventions only takes shape during enactment. Hence must address these
dependencies. This  study   is creating   a fine-grained description of the  teacher's role in the KCI model    by
examining three teachers' enactment of a climate change curriculum unit. Results so far indicate that the roles
played by teachers during curriculum enactment differ, at certain degrees, from what the design had specified.
They played more roles than we had designed during the curriculum design stage, with a lot of logistical and
procedural interactions, which were not anticipated in the design. Ideally (in subsequent activities), teachers
who enact a knowledge community approach should spend more time on pedagogical interactions to set the
learning context, guide    students, elaborate students'  thinking,  connect students  with previous experiences,
evaluate and monitor students, and encourage reflection about learning activities.
         Our future analysis will extend the teacher-student interaction analysis to 20 class periods. As we code
the more substantive activities (i.e., in the middle and end of the curriculum) we anticipate that the pattern of
interactions will vary. We are also analyzing the teachers' background knowledge and see how this variable
affects their interactions with students.

References
Bielaczyc, K. and Collins, A. (1999). Learning communities in classrooms: A reconceptualization of
         educational practice. In Reigeluth, C. (Ed.), Instructional design theories and models (pp 269­292).
         Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Blumenfeld, P., Soloway, E., Marx, R. W., Krajcik, J. S., Guzdial, M., & Palincsar, A. (1991). Motivating
         project-based learning: Sustaining the doing, supporting the learning. Educational Psychologist, 26,
         369­398.
Brown, A. L. (1992). Design experiments: Theoretical and methodological challenges increating complex
         Interventions in classroom settings. Journal of the Learning Science, 2, 141-178.
Brown, A. L., Ash, D., Rutherford, M., Nakagawa, K., Gordon, A, & Campione, J. C. (1993). Distributed
         expertise in the classroom. In G. Salomon (Ed.), Distributed cognitions: Psychological and educational
         considerations (pp. 188-228). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Brown, A. L., & Campione, J. C. (1994). Guided discovery in a community of learners. In K. McGilly (Ed.),
         Classroom lessons: Integrating cognitive theory and classroom practice (pp. 229-270). Cambridge,
         MA: MIT Press/Bradford Books.
Collins, A. (1992). Toward a design science of education. In E. Scanlon & T. O'Shea (Eds.), New directions in
         educational technology (pp. 15­22). New York: Springer-Verlag.
Fishman, B., Marx, R., Blumenfeld, P., Krajcik, J. S., & Soloway, E. (2004). Creating a framework for research
         on systemic technology innovations. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 13, 43-76.
Hewitt, J., & Scardamalia, M. (1998). Design principles for distributed knowledge building processes.
         Educational Psychology Review, 10, 75-96.
Hmelo-Silver, C. E, & Barrows, H. S. (2008). Facilitating collaborative knowledge building. Cognition and
         Instruction, 26, 48-96.
Putnam, R. T., & Borko, H. (2000). What do new views of knowledge and thinking have to say about research
         on teacher learning? Educational Researcher, 29, 4-15.
Roschelle, J., & Penuel, W. R. (2006). Co-design of innovations with teachers: Definition and dynamics.
         Proceedings of the International Conference of the Learning Sciences, Bloomington, IN, 7, 606-612.
Scardamalia, M. (2002). Collective cognitive responsibility for the advancement of knowledge. In B. Smith
         (Ed.), Liberal Education in a knowledge society (pp. 67­98). Chicago, IL: Open Court.
Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (1992). A knowledge building architecture for computer supported learning. In
         E. De Corte, M. C. Linn, H. Mandl, & L. Verschaffel (Eds.), Computer-based learning environment
         and problem solving (pp. 265-283). Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
Shrader, G., Williams, K., Lachance-Whitcomb, J., Finn, L.-E., & Gomez, L. (2001, April). Participatory design
         of science curricula: The case for research for practice. Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the
         American Educational Research Association, Seattle, WA.
Slotta, J.D. (2007, July). Supporting collaborative inquiry: New architectures, new opportunities.  Paper
         presented at the annual Computer Supported Collaborative Learning (CSCL) conference, Rutgers, NJ.
Slotta, J. D., & Najafi, H. (2010). Knowledge communities in the classroom. In P. Peterson, E. Baker, & B.
         McGaw (Eds), International Encyclopedia of Education (Vol. 8, pp. 189-196). Oxford: Elsevier.
Slotta, J.D., & Peters, V. (2008). A Blended Model for Knowledge     Communities:  Embedding Scaffolded
         Inquiry. Proceedings of the International Conference of the Learning Sciences, Utrecht, The
         Netherlands, 8, 343-350.
Staples, M. (2007). Supporting whole-class collaborative inquiry in a secondary mathematics classroom.
         Cognition and Instruction, 25, 161-217.
Strauss, A., & Corbin, J. (1998). Basics of qualitative research: Techniques and procedures for developing
         grounded theory (2nd ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.

© ISLS                                                                                                      204
