CSCL 2013 Proceedings                  Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

                    Design of a Collaborative Learning Platform
              for Medical Doctors specializing in Family Medicine
 Sabrina Ziebarth, Anna Kötteritzsch, H. Ulrich Hoppe, University of Duisburg-Essen, Lotharstr. 63/65, 47058
           Duisburg, Email: ziebarth@collide.info, anna.koetteritzsch@uni-due.de, hoppe@collide.info
    Lorena Dini, Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Charitéplatz 1, 10117 Berlin, lorena.dini@charite.de
 Svenja Schröder, Jasminko Novak, Humboldt-Viadrina School of Governance, Wilhelmstr. 67, 10117 Berlin,
           Email: svenja.schroeder@humboldt-viadrina.org, jasminko.novak@humboldt-viadrina.org

         Abstract: Access to occupational knowledge exchange and collaborative learning is highly
         restricted for doctors in specialty training for general practitioners/family medicine (GPs) in
         Germany, since they are not organized in coherent vocational training programs. Based on an
         analysis of the target group's needs, this paper presents our pedagogical concept and a first
         prototype of a community sharing and knowledge building platform for this target group. This
         platform can be accessed independently of space and time and shall support collaborative
         learning with peers.

Introduction
In Germany, doctors need a medical specialization in family medicine to work as general practitioners (GPs).
The German Medical Association has empirically shown that there is an increasing lack of GPs in eastern
Germany, since 38 % to 48 % of the current GPs will retire within the next ten years and there are not nearly
enough graduated doctors specializing in family medicine (Kopetsch, 2010). The affected federal states are
mostly spread across large rural areas. Thus, GPs and their trainees are geographically dispersed and have to
overcome broad distances to interact with peers. The curriculum of specialty training in family medicine takes at
least five years  and is  regulated by  17 federal  medical   associations  in partly different ways. In   a typical
trajectory, doctors in special training start with positions in hospitals to fulfill the general requirements that
could also be used for other specializations. The phase of working in a GP's office mostly takes place later in
the training. Because of the broad spectrum of tasks required in the curriculum of family medicine, doctors in
training work in at least four different locations in hospitals and medical practices. These are often separated by
large distances and not connected. The five year training is self-organized, which implies that the doctors have
to find jobs on their own initiative, partly for periods of only six months. This takes much time and effort
(DEGAM, 2009). Except of local initiatives, these conditions often cause doctors in training to be isolated and
not supported by organized communities of practice. Peer contacts are hard to establish and often hampered by
job changes. Missing opportunities for networking highly restrict the occupational knowledge exchange as well
as collaborative learning in peer communities, so that missing team work is often criticized (DEGAM, 2009).
To address these problems and needs, the project KOLEGEA (http://www.kolegea.de/), which is facilitated by
the German federal ministry of education and research, aims to support doctors specializing in family medicine
by providing a platform for collaborative learning in occupational, social communities.

KOLEGEA's pedagogical approach
In our pedagogical approach, we focus on collaboratively working with shared cases in the spirit of problem-
based  learning   (PBL). PBL  was   originally developed   to "facilitate the  acquisition and  practice of  clinical
reasoning  skills through   exposure to  real  patient problems"  (Distlehorst  &  Barrows,   1982)  and   has been
introduced  to  many  medical  curricula since  the  1970s  (Barrows,  1996),   thus  many  graduated    doctors are
familiar with it. In PBL, students work collaboratively in small groups to solve realistic, ill-structured problems
(Barrows, 1996; Hmelo-Silver, 2004). Information needed for solving the cases is acquired through self-directed
learning. The teacher's or "tutor's" role lies in facilitating the PBL process rather than transferring medical
knowledge. Yet, in addition to being experts on PBL tutoring, good tutors are also considered to be experts in
the area   of study  (Barrows,  1996).   PBL   involves   loops on  problem    formulation,  self-directed learning,
problem reexamination, abstraction and reflection (Koschmann et al, 1992). Goals of PBL are the construction
of  extensive and  flexible knowledge,   effective problem-solving  skills, self-directed, lifelong learning   skills,
collaboration skills and intrinsic motivation to learn (Hmelo-Silver, 2004).
         The GP specialty training is based on learning by solving real problems/cases in every day working life
under  the supervision   of experienced  GPs   who  are  accredited specialist-trainers. Thus,  learning already  is
problem-based, self-directed and based on intrinsic motivation. Our goal is to support this through an online
community platform for collaborative learning and knowledge building in occupational social communities
which aims at overcoming the problem of missing opportunities for occupational knowledge exchange and
collaborative peer learning.

© ISLS                                                                                                           205
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                     Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

         For this purpose we build on the existing intrinsic motivation of the trainees to solve real-world cases.
Hence, key aspects of the platform are the autonomous creation of anonymous case descriptions and problem
formulations based on working experiences as well as the facilitation of discussions and cooperative finding of
solutions in small groups. To support these group processes, the case studies should be linked to applicable
medical guidelines, studies, articles and web pages (self-directed learning). This approach also has the potential
of training the practical appliance of guidelines to actual cases. To provide a hands-on experience, case studies
can be augmented by anonymized multi-media contents like pictures (e.g. X-rays or CT scans), sketches (e.g.
position of aches or  wounds), videos (e.g.   motion  sequences) and    sounds  (e.g. untypical coughing noises)   that
are approved by the patients. While we focus on learner-generated use cases, there will be an initial collection of
realistic multi-media case studies to prevent cold start problems and provide best practices.
         Social interaction  as   well  as collaborative learning   is supported  on  different levels. Our  focus  for
collaborative learning is the small group. There are two types of small groups with regards to the tutor. For the
challenging period of working at a GP's office (see next section) tutors ("mentors") are experienced GPs, who
not only facilitate the PBL-process, but also support the trainees based on their experience in finding high
quality solutions. These groups provide their own cases and collaboratively identify possible solutions based on
medical guidelines. After solving a case, the results are quality controlled by the mentor and can be published in
the platform's  archive   to be   used  as  "emerging  learning  object"   (cf. Hoppe   et al., 2005)   for the whole
community. Thus, our platform also supports a knowledge-building community in which members create shared
knowledge   artifacts on   the basis   of  current research  and theory   in the  context  of   authentic practice  (cf.
Steinkuehler et al.,  2002).   Furthermore,   the  platform  admits and  hosts  self-regulated  small   groups without
constant support of an experienced GP. In these groups a trainee who is experienced with PBL can adopt the
role of the tutor. In addition to discussing own cases, archive cases can be used to train the appliance of specific
medical guidelines or to extend knowledge in certain fields. For example, these groups are adequate for trainees
preparing for their final exam or maintaining contacts.
         Apart from the work in small groups, there will be tools for community support like forums, which can
be used for occupational, but also social exchange. Following Steinkuehler et al. (2002), we consider group
discussions to be asynchronous and threaded, since this can produce discussions and results of higher quality
than synchronous communication and is more flexible regarding time. To particularly aid trainees in rural areas
and areas with low infrastructure, we support mobile recording of multi-media notes as well as mobile services
to access to the portal.

Analysis of the target group
To decide, whether such a platform is suitable for the target group and which contents are considered especially
important, we used an online questionnaire, receiving 73 responses from family medicine trainees. In addition
we  conducted   15    qualitative  phone    interviews   with  stakeholders,    including  experienced    trainers and
representatives of medical associations. Since there is no monitoring of the number of doctors in specialty
training, the accurate size of our target group is not known. In 2008 as well as 2009, there were around 1200
acknowledgements of new GPs in Germany (Kopetsch, 2010). Extrapolating this number regarding the five year
training, the target group consists of at least 6000 trainees.
         The  target  group's  attitude  towards   computers   was  measured    based on  FIDEC   and   the confidence
based on  COMA     (Richter    et al., 2010). The   trainees show   a  very  positive attitude  towards   computers  as
instruments for working and learning and are rather confident of their usage (see Figure 1). They are also open
for new technologies, thus, 59% could imagine tablets and 32% smart pens as potentially helpful for their daily
work, although only few are familiar with the usage of tablets (11%) and non with smart pens.

    confidence of computer usage                                 attitude towards computers as instruments for
                                                                 working and learning
                      Figure 1. Confidence of computer usage and attitude towards computers.

We found that the majority of trainees uses the internet for gathering information rather often (61.6% daily,
31.5% several times a week) and 71.2% use online learning platforms in general. Regarding online learning,
they especially like the independence of time (92%) and space (89%) and the easy accessibility of information
and materials (84%). Reasons for not using online learning platforms are mainly missing opportunities (16.4%)
and awareness (5.5%). The interviews show that in order to enable trust and collaborative learning trainees and

© ISLS                                                                                                             206
   trainees
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                              Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

trainers request a platform to be a protected zone only for doctors, without access for patients or laymen.
Furthermore, there has to be a quality control of the contents. During the interviews, trainers and representatives
of medical          associations    expressed   the   desire  for  a  stronger    integration   of medical    guidelines   into    specialty
training. A well-known approach for practical medical training is the discussion of case studies: 90% of the
polled trainees consider them suitable for learning, 81% can image to derive therapy recommendations, 70%
expect        support   for    diagnoses   and  examples     for  uncommon       deseases,    62%   consider     them   as a   medium    for
discussing        contents     with  collegues     and   48%  as  useful    for safeguarding     difficult   decisions.    The  interviews
highlight        that  learning     with  case  studies    reduces   the   level  of   abstraction  and     enables    working   based    on
symptoms (a main approach in general practice) and not only by taking typical desease patterns into account. To
create a hands-on experience with case studies, they should not only contain text, but also multi-media objects
like pictures, videos and sounds. According to the survey conducted with trainees, they are familiar with many
recording and editing devices and they already use them for work (see Figure 2).

    100%          97%       92%          79%     79%     95%                                         78%
            75%50%  34%        56%             51%                     56%42%47%52%         53%44%30%19%21%29%                private59%41%at work
            25%                  8%    11%1%                  4%     5%     7%                3% 11%4%  11%                   no usage
             0%                                                                                                               unkown
                 cell phone  laptop    netbook     pc      camera    video      voice     smart     tablet   smart pen
                                                                    camera    recorder    phone

                                                      Figure 2. Trainees` tool usage.

                Furthermore, the interviews show that the phase of working in a GP's office is especially challenging.
Doctors starting their specialty training are usually familiar with working in hospitals where they can consult
different specialists, have many diagnostic opportunities, treat only patients related to one field at a time and
concentrate on a limited number of patients. Whereas in a practitioner's office, they only have one reference
person,         highly restricted    diagnostic    opportunities   as  well  as   a diverse   and  unrestricted     field  of  consultation
purposes         and   disease     presentations.  Furthermore,      they   treat a   high  number     of   patients   within  little   time,
requiring        fast  decisions.    Thus,     there  is often    uncertainty   and    an unsatisfied      need  to    discuss unusual    or
problematic cases, e.g. to receive feedback on alternative diagnoses or therapies to support the decision-making
process.
                Summarizing        these  results, the   target  group   is ready     to use  the  planned    platform     regarding    their
technology acceptance and competence, but stress that trust is an important factor. To enable trust on a social
level, only doctors registered as members of the Medical Association (registrations mandatory for all German
physicians) will have access to the portal and face-to-face kickoff workshops will be conducted. As considered
in the pedagogical approach, learning by discussing case studies is well established and will therefore be central
in our platform. Furthermore, there will be support to access and link medical guidelines to improve their
integration into specialty training. Since the phase of working in a GP's office is especially challenging, PBL
groups in this phase will be supported by experienced GPs.

Prototype of the KOLEGEA environment
The KOLEGEA environment will consist of a web portal and mobile (tablet, smart phone and smart pen)
applications for accessing the portal and multi-media note taking. Currently (after one year of the three year
project) there is a first prototype of the portal focusing on the creation and representation of multi-media case
descriptions and their discussion as well as a tablet app for multi-media note taking for medical cases. Both
tools have already been exposed to the target group on five occasions. The feedback was positive, but it was
pointed         out that    in order  to  use  the   system  trainees   require   time    provided  by     their training  institutions   or
employers.
                Regarding the role of technology, the mobile note taking app is conceived as a digital replacement for
analog pen and paper notes with the added value of multi-media integration as well as digital availability of
notes and media for the creation of authentic case descriptions. Since doctors have limited time during a patient
consultation,         we    expect  them   to  only   collect   basic  information     on   the patient's    case  using   the  tablet   and
complete the case description using the web portal on a PC or laptop afterwards. The portal provides access to
the virtual community and its knowledge artifacts (user-generated contents as well as links to artifacts of current
research). Figure 3 shows an example of a case description, its discussion and links to knowledge/learning
resources        used    in    the discussion.   The   case  description    is  structured    based  on     the  phases    of  the    medical
consultation        containing      information      about the    anamnesis,     examination,      diagnostic    investigation,    tentative
diagnosis and procedure. Photos, handwritten notes and text, but also videos and sounds can be integrated to a

© ISLS                                                                                                                                  207
CSCL 2013 Proceedings               Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

case description and shared with the small group. Discussion is enabled with a forum like tool, which facilitates
comments on the problem as well as on the comments of other group members. Furthermore, knowledge and
learning resources relevant to the problem can be shared.

                Figure 3. Portal prototype with medical description (left) and discussion (right).

Discussion and Prospects
We have introduced our approach as well as a first prototype of a community portal for supporting occupational
exchange and collaborative learning of doctors in specialty training for becoming general practitioners. Our
approach is supported by an analysis of the target group, which considers the opinions of trainees (bottom up),
as well as trainers and representatives of medical associations (top down). Exposition of our prototypes to the
target group generated positive feedback, but also indicated the necessity of training (time) to use it. We are
currently acquiring training institutions and especially GPs who are willing to support their trainees in using our
platform. Furthermore, we are conducting usability tests with the target group, but also with usability experts to
further enhance our tools for the pilot operation phase, which will start in June 2013.

References
Barrows, H. S. (1996): Problem-Based Learning in Medicine and Beyond: A Brief Overview. Journal of New
         Directions for Teaching and Learning, 68, 3-12.
DEGAM (2009): Report on Speciality Training for General Practice in Germany - A Report by a Panel of
         Invited International Experts, http://tinyurl.com/ 8bh6g8j.
Distlehorst, L. H., & Barrows, H. S. (1982): A New Tool for Problem-Based, Self-directed Learning. Journal of
         Medical Education, 57, 486-488.
Hmelo-Silver,  C. E.  (2004):  Problem-Based   Learning:    What     and How   Do Students    Learn?   Journal of
         Educational Psychology Review, 16(3), 235-266.
Hoppe, H. U.; Pinkwart, N.; Oelinger, M.; Zeini, S.; Verdejo, F.; Barros, B., & Mayorga, J. I. (2005): Building
         Bridges within Learning Communities through Ontologies and "Thematic Objects". In Proceedings of
         the International Conference on Computer Supported Collaborative Learning (CSCL 2005), Taiwan.
Koschmann, T. D.; Feltovich, P. J.; Myers, A. C., & Barrows, H. S. (1992): Implications of CSCL for Problem-
         Based Learning. SIGCUE Outlook, 21(3), 32-35.
Kopetsch, T. (2010): Dem deutschen Gesundheitswesen gehen die Ärzte aus! Studie zur Altersstruktur und
         Arztzahlenentwicklung,   Bundesärztekammer       und  Kassenärztliche    Bundesvereinigung,      Berlin,
         http://www.kbv.de/publikationen/36943.html.
Richter, T., Naumann,   J., & Horz, H. (2010): Eine  revidierte  Fassung    des Inventars   zur Computerbildung
         (INCOBI-R). Zeitschrift für Pädagogische Psychologie, 1, 23-37.
Steinkuehler, C. A., Derry, S. J.; Woods, D. K., & Hmelo-Silver, C. E. (2002): The STEP Environment for
         Distributed Problem-Based  Learning on the  World    Wide    Web.  In  Proceedings  of  the International
         Conference on Computer Supported Collaborative Learning (CSCL 2002), Boulder, CO, USA.

© ISLS                                                                                                      208
