CSCL 2013 Proceedings                 Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

    Promises and Perils of Using Digital Tools in Informal Science
    Learning Environments: Design Considerations for Learning

Susan Yoon, University of Pennsylvania, 3700 Walnut Street, Philadelphia, PA 19104, yoonsa@gse.upenn.edu
Chris Quintana, University of Michigan, 610 East University Ave, Ann Arbor, MI, 48108, quintana@umich.edu
     Leilah Lyons, University of Illinois at Chicago, 51 S. Morgan, Chicago, IL 60607, llyons@uic.edu
                   Judy Perry, MIT, 20 Ames Street, Cambridge MA, 02139, jperry@mit.edu
         Scot Osterweil, MIT, 77  Mass. Ave., Bldg. E15-315, Cambridge,    MA     02139, scot_o@mit.edu
         Robb Lindgren, University of Central Florida, 12461 Research Parkway, Orlando, FL 32826,
                                            robb.lindgren@ucf.edu

         Abstract:  In this  panel,  six informal   science   projects discuss   how   instructional  and
         technological design elements interact with the unique affordances and constraints of informal
         environments  to  impact learning. A  central   goal of the panel   is to engage  colleagues  in
         examples that illustrate design decisions that inform research trajectories to move the field of
         CSCL forward in the design of informal learning environments.

Panel Topic
The National Research Council report on learning science in informal environments (NRC, 2009) examines the
potential that non-school settings such as zoos and museums, have for engaging large portions of the population
in scientific investigation. These experiences often stand in contrast to those typically found in traditional school
science.  The voluntary nature of participation    often satisfies a sense of identity; fulfills individual social,
emotional, and intellectual needs; and provides a degree of personal control over learning activities (Falk &
Dierking, 2000). As informal activities have increasingly included digital tools, the NRC report also calls for
more research on how digital platforms improve the learning experience. However, before we can study any
impacts on learning, we need to construct good interventions and investigate how the designs do or do not
optimally engage learners. In this panel discussion, we include six informal science projects that have gone
through this critical design phase. We use the lens of design research due to its emphasis on a wide range of
variables that may have contextual importance (Confrey, 2006) and the grounded-in-practice nature of the
research, which increases the likelihood that interventions will be successful in the real world (Bielaczyc &
Collins, 2007). An   additional  goal of  the  panel  is to   engage   colleagues  in examples    of research that
Puntambekar and Sandoval (2009) suggest can illustrate design decisions that inform research trajectories to
move the CSCL field forward in the design of informal learning environments.

Panel Focus and Format
Panel contributors will focus on how instructional and technological design elements interact with the unique
affordances and  constraints of informal  environments    and  will  address factors  that impact  learning.  Each
presentation will introduce the context and learning goals, describe the design elements of the technology and
associated activity, and provide an analysis of the design considerations in light of improving the learning goals.
The panel incorporates perspectives from several different informal settings and a variety of digital tools. As we
expect the topic of the panel to have a high degree of saliency in the CSCL community and would like to learn
from other design researchers who conduct similar research in informal science environments, we would like to
leave ample room for interactive dialogue with panel attendees. Thus, panelists will speak for 12 minutes about
their project and 30 minutes will be devoted to community exchange. The five panel projects are listed below.

Doing Augmented Reality and Knowledge-Building in a Science Museum: Formalizing
an Informal Learning Experience
Susan Yoon, University of Pennsylvania & Karen Elinich, The Franklin Institute Science Museum
The project Augmented   Reality  for  Interpretive and Experiential  Learning    (ARIEL),  seeks  to create digital
augmentations   of science museum     devices that  provide   hidden information   to visitors to develop   deeper
understanding of scientific phenomenon. In this presentation, we will report on a series of quasi-experimental
studies in which increasing scaffolds were used in different conditions to support learning (Yoon et al., 2012).
Building on the success of knowledge-building communities in formal classrooms, several conditions were
constructed to encourage   increased  peer-to-peer collaboration, access to  community     knowledge   and  greater
abstractions from interacting with the device. Results showed that students in the knowledge-building condition
were better able to theorize about the scientific phenomena than students in other conditions. They demonstrated
greater time on task, and discussed ideas with others in their group in more goal directed, intentional ways.
However, in observations of device interactions, students in the knowledge-building conditions also behaved in
ways that were more like in-school behaviors, less playful, inquisitive, and self-directed­­which are hallmark

© ISLS                                                                                                        213
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                   Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

characteristics of learning and participation that make informal environments unique and engaging. We discuss
the trade-offs of what   we  have   termed  formalizing an    informal  learning  experience    and   implications  for
structuring learning for deeper understanding.

Contextual     Fit   between      Formal     and   Informal     Contexts        for  Middle     School       Science
Inquiry
Chris Quintana, Wan-Tzu Lo, & Shannon Schmoll, University of Michigan
Our  Zydeco  project  is exploring  the coordinated, integrated    use  of mobile    devices  (e.g., smartphones    and
tablets), web applications, and the cloud to support middle school science practices across formal classroom and
informal out-of-class (e.g., museums and parks) contexts (Quintana, 2012). Zydeco helps students plan their
inquiry in  classrooms,  collect different data  artifacts  (e.g., photos,   videos, audios   and    texts) outside the
classroom, and analyze those artifacts to build a scientific explanation, thus framing an activity structure that
integrates different contexts  into a larger   educational  setting. As we   develop   projects with   middle   school
teachers and museum educators, we are identifying different issues when trying to create a more cohesive fit
between formal and informal contexts: (1) resource fit, or the challenge teachers face in understanding what
resources are available in out-of-class contexts and how those resources connect to their curricula and current
science standards, (2) supportive fit, or the scaffolding features that need to be developed and embedded in the
mobile tools, museum exhibits, and other resources to support students with the reflective and analytic activity
needed for sensemaking with respect to their science questions and goals, and (3) cultural fit, or the potential
mismatch   between   the goals of   structured and free-choice     contexts, the way   these  different goals   impact
exploratory activity, and the anxieties about technology that arise in many informal contexts.

Embodying       Data:    Using    Performative     Embodied          Interaction     Experiences        to   Engage
Visitors in Data Interpretation in Zoos and Museums
Leilah Lyons, UIC & the New York Hall of Science
Informal Science Institutions (ISIs) have traditionally played an educational role by either hosting the curated
products of scientific endeavor (e.g., pottery, animals) or providing access to the processes of scientific inquiry
via hands-on exhibits (e.g., light tables, heat cameras). What does it mean for ILIs now that the products of
science have evolved to be large data sets, and the processes involve the interpretation of those data sets? In two
projects we explored the use of embodied interaction as a low-threshold, personalized entry point for data
interpretation. One, with the Brookfield Zoo, asks visitors to role-play as polar bears in a game that plots their
effort expenditures  on  a graph, co-constructing  a visualized    product   illustrating the accelerating   impact  of
climate change (Lyons et al., 2012). In a second project with the Jane Addams Hull House Museum and the
New York Hall of Science, we allow visitors to "embody" subsets of georeferenced data, animating them with
bodily  motions,  to transform   inter- and    intra-subset comparisons    into  an  active   social process   of   data
interpretation. In the former case, we find that participation leads to better learning, but audiences also need
opportunities to learn. In the latter, we find that visitors generate good questions about the data, but need further
support (with representational fluency or background knowledge, or both) to then answer those questions. We
are now exploring how docents might be incorporated dynamic digital exhibits to address these challenges.

Race Against Time: Leveraging an Augmented Reality Game to Engage Students with
Global Climate Change Issues in a Zoo Setting
Judy Perry & Eric Klopfer, MIT Scheller Teacher Education Program
For the past decade, MIT's Scheller Teacher Education Program (STEP) Lab has been developing augmented
reality (AR) games as well as toolkits to make AR games.           These location-based AR experiences utilize the
player's mobile device to provide a digital layer of information enhancing the real-world experience.         MIT and
the Columbus Zoo and Aquarium (Columbus, OH) partnered to develop new AR games to enhance visitor
experiences by engaging    players with the Zoo's physical  space employing   a narrative, game-like experience.     In
Fall 2011, a mixed methods study was conducted comparing the experiences between (a) students visiting the
Columbus Zoo playing an AR game, and (b) students freely exploring the same physical areas of the Zoo.
Findings suggest that playing the AR game impacted students' beliefs and ideas about global climate change
(the theme of the AR game) more than the control group.      Observations of students also provide data comparing
the movement, discussion and gaze patterns between AR and control students. Findings here also suggest trade-
offs in terms of students' time looking at animals and exhibits, versus time engaging with AR game elements.

Harnessing Imagination in Fostering Scientific Identity in Curated Games
Scot Osterweil, MIT Education Arcade
In collaboration with the Smithsonian Institution, the MIT Education Arcade developed a new form of informal
activity, the Curated Game. Staged as an eight-week long event, played on-line by middle-schoolers across the

© ISLS                                                                                                              214
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                    Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

country, the first curated game, titled Vanished, engaged players in a mystery quest that resulted in thousands of
players  collaborating   on a  nested   series  of  scientific investigations.  In the  course    of the   game   players
investigated topics such as cryptography, geology, forensic anthropology, archaeology and climatology. In the
process  they participated     in data  collection,  investigations in  museums     and scien ce     centers, hypothesis
formation, scientific argumentation and calibration. They collaborated with fellow players while being mentored
daily by MIT undergraduates on-line, and weekly by Smithsonian Scientists through videoconferences. The goal
of the game was not to develop expertise in any particular scientific domain, but rather to expose players to
scientific processes and    to increase  student   identity with scientists and  scientific practice.   Analysis  of the
thousands of forum posts generated in the game show solid evidence of this effect, as well as new findings
about the role of imagination in fostering serious scientific thinking and disciplined scientific practice. We will
discuss these findings both in the context of the completed game Vanished, and how they are influencing the
design of our follow-on curated game project devoted to engineering practice, Gadgets.

Supporting        Body      Cueing        with     Immersive        Technology          to   Promote          Science
Learning in Informal Spaces
Robb Lindgren, Michael Tscholl, Eileen Smith, and J. Michael Moshell, University of Central Florida
Informal learning frequently occurs in spacious environments that afford physical exploration and engaging
one's body in the process of conceptual development. The MEteor project leverages these features of informal
learning   spaces to build  middle     school students' intuitions  about   physics in  an  interactive    mixed  reality
simulation of planetary astronomy (Lindgren, Aakre, & Moshell, 2012). Working with two Science Centers in
Central Florida we have designed the room-sized immersive simulation game to support a type of embodied
interaction where a learner moves in specific ways as a means of understanding the functionality of a target
domain. In the case of MEteor, a learner uses their body to enact predictions of an asteroid's trajectory as it
encounters planets and other entities in space. Different configurations of audio, visual, and physical cues guide
learner movements    and    scaffold their understanding    of  important  physics  concepts  such    as   Newton's  an d
Kepler's   laws.  MEteor    participants   have   shown  greater   engagement,     self-efficacy, and    more    adaptive
knowledge structures compared to learners who use a desktop computer version of the same simulation. We are
currently  investigating the   effects of  social  feedback  in  MEteor--harnessing    the  input    of visitors "on the
sidelines" who assist in guiding participant movements.

References
Bielaczyc, K. & Collins, A. (2007). Design research: Foundational perspectives, critical tensions, and arenas for
         action. In J. Campione, K. Metz, & A. M. Palincsar (Eds.), Childrens learning in and out of school:
         Essays in honor of Ann Brown (pp. 89-111). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Confrey, J. (2006). The evolution of design studies as methodology. In Keith Sawyer (Ed.), The Cambridge
         handbook of the learning sciences (pp. 135-150). New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Puntambekar, S., & Sandoval, W. (2009). Design research: Moving forward. Journal of the Learning Sciences,
         18, 323-326.
Falk, J. H. (2001). Free-choice science education: How we learn science outside of school.              New York, NY:
         Teachers College Press.
Falk, J. H., & Dierking, L. D. (2000). Learning from museums: Visitor experiences and the making of meaning.
         Walnut Creek, CA: AltaMira Press
Lindgren, R., Aakre, A., Moshell, J. M. (2012). You're the asteroid! Body-based metaphors in a mixed reality
         simulation  of  planetary   astronomy.    Proceedings   of the  International  Conference      of the Learning
         Sciences, Sydney, Australia.
Lyons, L., Slattery, B., Jimenez, P., Lopez, B., and Moher, T. (2012). Don't Forget about the Sweat: Effortful
         Embodied    Interaction    in Support    of Learning.   In Sixth   International   Conference     on  Tangible,
         Embedded, and Embodied Interaction (TEI '12), ACM, 77-84.
Quintana,  C. (2012).  Pervasive    science:  Using  mobile    devices and  the cloud  to support    science   education.
         Interactions, 19, 4, 76-80.
Yoon, S., Elinich, K., Wang, J., Steinmeier, C., & Tucker, S. (2012). Using Augmented Reality and Knowledge-
         Building Scaffolds to Improve Learning in a Science Museum. International Journal of Computer
         Supported Collaborative Learning, 7(4), 519-541.

Acknowledgments
This research is supported by grants from the U.S. National Science Foundation: 0741659 (ARIEL); 1020027
(Zydeco); 0917442 (Vanished); 1114621 (MEteor); 1043284 (CliZEN); 1248052 (CoCensus); and support from
the U.S. National Endowment for the Humanities HD 51357 (CoCensus).

© ISLS                                                                                                               215
