CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                            Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

                          The Joint Action Theory in Didactics
              A case study in videoconferencing at primary school
  Gruson Brigitte, Sensevy Gérard, CREAD (Research Centre on Education, Learning and Didactics), IUFM de
                 Bretagne-UBO, CS 54 310 - 153, rue Saint-Malo, 35043 Rennes Cedex, France.
                       brigitte.gruson@bretagne.iufm.fr, gerard.sensevy@bretagne.iufm.fr

         Abstract: In this paper, we aim to show how the Joint Action Theory in Didactics (JATD)
         may contribute to the construction of a science of instructional practice. In this perspective,
         we propose two concepts: the student's twofold semiosis and the teacher's equilibration work,
         which allow us to understand the instructional practice and the learning process in the same
         conceptualization. We illustrate these concepts and our video research methodology with a
         case study in videoconferencing at primary school (Second Language Learning). We attempt
         to clarify how this technology-enhanced learning environment enables a reconstruction of the
         learning situation in a specific inquiry process, requiring a particular teacher's equilibration
         work and a specific student's entitlement. We eventually argue that the Joint Action Theory in
         Didactics could contribute to the development of Learning Sciences research.

Introduction
In this paper, we address three major issues.
         First,  we concentrate   our  analysis on  practice,   and particularly   on instructional  practice. Sharing
Koschmann's question "How... do we begin to construct a real science of instructional practice?" (Koschmann,
2011, p. 6), we try to provide some elements to contribute to this construction. In that perspective, we sketch a
theory, the Joint Action Theory in Didactics (Sensevy & Mercier, 2007; Sensevy, 2011a; Sensevy, 2011b) that
we describe according to its main lines, offering a glimpse into its structure and some of its elements. This
theory aims   at linking teaching   and   learning and  postulates  that   one cannot   understand   learning  practices
without understanding related teaching practices.
         The second issue of our paper concerns the way the teaching/learning relationship can be effectively
mediated  by  technology.  In  order   to work  out   this issue, we   present  how   a specific technology-enhanced
learning environment, videoconferencing, can foster teachers and students' activity. We give some elements of a
comparative analysis between an "ordinary class" and a "videoconferencing class", where English is studied as
a Second  Language    at primary   school,  grounded   in  the categories  of  the Joint Action  Theory   in  Didactics
previously described.
         The  first two  issues   are interrelated in so   far as the  purpose  of  this paper   is both to  emphasize
videoconferencing as a method to study and document didactic transactions in relation with JATD.
         The third issue of our paper seeks to show that French Didactics Concepts, and particularly the Joint
Action Theory in Didactics, could contribute to the Learning Sciences research.

The Joint Action Theory in Didactics: origin and main principle
The Joint Action Theory in Didactics (JATD) stems from French Didactics (in particular, Brousseau, 1997;
Chevallard, 2007; Laborde, Perrin-Glorian & Sierpienska, 2005). In this perspective, we will refer to what could
be termed the first theoretical principle of French Didactics. This principle states that in order to understand a
didactic activity (i.e. an activity where someone teaches and someone learns), one needs to understand a system,
the  didactic system, which    is a   system of  three subsystems,     the subsystem     of Knowledge    (the  piece of
knowledge in question), the subsystem of the Teacher, and the subsystem of the Student. By arguing that the
didactic system is an undividable system, we emphasize the fact that all theorisation in didactics rests on the fact
that one  cannot    understand  the   teacher's behaviour      without simultaneously    understanding   the   student's
behaviour and    knowledge  structure   and  function. It  suffices to  replace the   word  "teacher"  with  the words
"student" or "knowledge" in the preceding sentence to obtain three assertions that constitute the core meaning of
this framework.

The Joint Action Theory in Didactics: an epistemological background
In order to understand the meaning-making process in practices, we have to understand the logic of practice on
which people base their behaviors. In our conception, acting according to the logic of a practice is to be able to
master a specific language-game in a particular life-form (Wittgenstein, 1997). In order to master this language
game, one has to be able to produce and decipher signs of various kinds in an appropriate way. From that
perspective, Mead (1934) provides us with a remarkable conception. Indeed, he considers that a social act is an
act in which certain features of a participant's conduct are taken as "stimuli" by her partners, and reciprocally.
The joint action thus rests on what we may call the semiosis of others, the deciphering of actions ­ verbal as

© ISLS                                                                                                             216
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                           Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

well as bodily ­ that other persons carry out in a given situation. In a similar way, Dewey argued that "things
gain meaning by being used in a shared experience or joint action' (Dewey, 1916/1985, p. 20)". We contend that
the teaching-learning process could contribute to the paradigm of joint action (Clark, 1996, Sebanz et al., 2006).

The Joint Action Theory in Didactics: some theoretical tools

The fundamental grammar of the didactic game
We describe the didactic transactions (1) (Dewey and Bentley, 1949) between the teacher and the students as a
game of a particular kind, a didactic game. What are the prominent features of this game? It involves two
players, A and B. B wins if, and only if, A wins, but B must not give A the winning strategy directly. B is the
teacher (the teaching pole). A is the student (The studying pole). This description allows us to put forward that
the didactic game is a collaborative game, a joint game, within a joint action. But what kind of joint action? If
we look at a didactic game more carefully, we see that B (the teacher), in order to win, has to lead A (the
student) to a certain point, a particular "state of knowledge" which enables the student to play the "right moves"
in the game, which can persuade the teacher that the student has built the right knowledge. At the core of this
process, there is a fundamental condition: in order to be sure that A (The student) has really won, B (The
teacher) has to be reticent.
         Brousseau (1997) coined the "Topaze Effect" idea that emphasizes this peculiar point. In a dictation,
concerning the sentence "les moutons...", the teacher Topaze wants the students to accurately write down the
plural of  the noun   "mouton"    (sheep), which  is  marked  by   a final  "s" in   French. So   the teacher clearly
pronounces the "s" (moutonssse) at the end of the word "moutons" (in the normal French pronunciation, this
final "s" is not pronounced), and the students automatically write down the "s". One can argue that the teacher
cheated in this didactic game, and that the students did not really win the game of writing down the plural of the
noun "moutons" accurately. A fundamental rule of the didactic game has not been followed: the teacher has to
be tacit, reticent, in order to let the student build her proper knowledge. The student must act proprio motu, the
teacher's scaffolding must not enable the student to produce the `good behaviour' (i.e. to put an "s" at the end of
the word "mouton") without calling on the adequate knowledge (i.e. the rules of plural agreement). This proprio
motu clause is necessarily related to the reticence of the teacher. We argue that in all kinds of teaching (i.e.
direct instruction or inquiry-oriented teaching), the teacher has to be reticent in order to be sure that the proprio
motu   clause  is respected, that  the students' behaviors   are   grounded  on actual  knowledge,    the knowledge
involved in the teaching/learning process. Thus, we consider that the proprio motu clause and the teacher's
reticence compose the general pattern of didactic transactions and give them their strongly asymmetrical nature.
         In order to characterize the teaching-learning process more deeply, we use the notion of Learning
Game. A Learning Game is fundamentally a joint game, in that it refers to the teacher's game on the student's
game as it occurs in situ. In the following, we focus on some of the concepts we use to describe a Learning
Game and to better understand the instructional practice and the learning process in the same conceptualization.

The didactic contract and the milieu
In order to understand joint action in the didactic game, we have to identify the game thought style, which
functions as a background to the didactic transactions. Concerning the concept of thought style, we rely on
Fleck's contention (1979) according to which a thought style is viewed as "a readiness for directed perception".
In our  framework,   these   thought-style properties are  taken   into account in the notion    of didactic contract
(Brousseau,   1997), which   is a  system  of habits  between  the  teacher  and the  students.  These   habits entail
particular expectations (either from the teacher or the students), with each agent attributing some expectations to
the other(s).
         A  good   example   of the cognitive  strength   of the   didactic contract can be   found   in the research
paradigm   called  "the Captain's  age"  (Schubauer-Leoni    and   Perret-Clermont,  1997).  Researchers   submitted
"absurd problems" to students in primary education (i.e. a boat has 3 veils and 42 crew members, how old is the
captain?). Surprisingly  (at least for the  researchers), a  great proportion  (80­95  %)    of the students gave  an
answer (by using the numbers given in the problem) and only very few of them replied that it was impossible to
respond. This example makes us understand what a didactic contract is. Every time they had to solve a problem,
students had to use the same set of procedures. First, they had to give an answer. Second, in order to `produce'
this answer, they had to use the numbers provided in the particular problem. Third, these numbers had to be
`associated' thanks to the last `means of calculation' (addition, or subtraction etc.) they had learnt.
It is important to note that the didactic contract, as a system of expectations, is largely implicit: it functions as a
common background fostered in everyday didactic joint action, a thought style attached to the `problem solving'
game. In a didactic institution, such an institutional contract has to be modified all along the learning-teaching
process.
         We can theorize this change by introducing the notion of milieu (Brousseau, 1997), which can be
described as a system of physical and symbolic objects that is elaborated to constitute an antagonistic system to

© ISLS                                                                                                           217
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                          Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

the previously taught system. In that perspective, the didactic contract can be seen as a way of assimilating, in
the Piagetian sense (Piaget, 1975), the didactic experience. In our previous example (the Captain`s age), the
contract, as background knowledge, `enables' the students to answer the problem. But when new elements that
the joint action cannot directly assimilate are brought into the milieu, they bring a kind of resistance to the joint
action, which entails that the didactic contract has to be changed. In that case, the assimilation of the new milieu
requires the accommodation (Ibid.) of the contract.
        As can be understood from the previous description, the relationship between contract and milieu holds
a prominent position in JATD. Indeed, we argue that in order to characterize the didactic joint action, one has to
identify how the students orient themselves, either by enacting the didactic contract habits or by establishing
epistemic relations with the milieu. It means that empirical studies have to reveal what kind of dialectics is built
between the "contract-driven students' orientations" and "the milieu-driven students' orientations". We use the
expression didactic equilibration to designate the search for an adequate equilibrium between these two kinds of
orientations in the transactional didactic process, and we see the teacher's action as the production of such an
equilibration work.

The student's twofold semiosis process and the didactic equilibration
In JATD, the student's activity is mainly thought of as a semiosis process, of two kinds. First, the student has to
produce a first semiosis, which corresponds to the deciphering of the signs of the milieu that are non-intentional
signs. But this first kind of semiosis is enacted against the background of previously taught knowledge as it has
been structured in the preceding didactic joint action, the didactic contract background. However, in the joint
action, the teacher may orient the student's action in the milieu in a more or less reticent way. The signs
produced by the teacher to orient the student in the milieu refer to what we call the second semiosis. In the first
semiosis, the student has to decipher the non-intentional signs of the milieu. In the second semiosis, she has to
decipher the intentional signs that the teacher provides in order to orient her in the milieu.
        With respect to the didactic equilibration we refer to, we can therefore determine two main ideal-
typical relationships, which one can consider as two poles of a gradient.
        In the first typical relationship, the contract can be seen as an auxiliary to the milieu. For example, in a
reading session, the teacher may want the students to be able to read the text accurately, in a text-centered
process, in which the students discover the meanings of the text in a first-hand relationship. In order to foster
such an inquiry, the teacher can rely on the didactic contract, but as a kind of orientation through the milieu. In
this kind of relationship, the semiosis process is mainly of the first sort. The students have mostly to decipher
the non-intentional signs of the milieu.
        In the second typical relationship, the milieu can be seen as an auxiliary to the contract. For example,
in a reading session, the teacher may want the students to read a certain text, but this text, as a milieu, is merely
a way of presenting some meanings the teacher intends to make the students recognize. The core of the didactic
process does not lie in an inquiry concerning the text, but in a system of meanings that the teacher tries to
reinforce within   the   contract. The most   important  thing  in this learning-teaching  process   is the teacher's
discourse or conduct,    to the extent   that the text (milieu)  could  be removed    from the  transactions without
compromising the learning at stake. In a way, the milieu is a pretext. In this kind of relationship, the semiosis
process is mainly of the second sort. The students have mainly to decipher the teacher's intentional signs.
        An   actual  didactic process    generally mixes   these two   ideal-typical relationships, according to the
characteristics of   the knowledge    in question. But  it is  possible to draw  a   line between   contract-oriented
transactional systems and milieu-oriented transactional systems, and, in doing that, to acknowledge different
strategic systems in the teacher's action.

An outline of the methodological approach: Video Research
As we have seen, our theoretical viewpoint focused on the analysis of the joint action between the teacher and
the students gives a major importance to the production and the deciphering of signs, in the semiosis process,
which is partly a semiosis of others. The teacher has to identify the signs provided by the students, and, in what
we have called the second semiosis, students have to recognize the teacher's intentional signs. Moreover, the
knowledge involved is most of the time constituted by a symbolic system the students have to acknowledge and
practice. For these reasons, we ground our enquiries in the video recording of teaching/learning practices, and
we include our approach (Tiberghien & Sensevy, 2012) in the methodological paradigm of the Video Research
(Goldman et al., 2007). As we have argued elsewhere (Tiberghien & Sensevy, 2012), video recordings enable to
keep the analogical dimension of the situations with their specificities and their infinity of information (Dretske,
1981). Above    all, as  Goldman    &  McDermott    (2007)  state, it makes  communication     visible, and makes it
possible to account for embodied instructional communication.

An empirical study: comparing an ordinary situation to a situation involving
synchronous exchanges via videoconferencing

© ISLS                                                                                                           218
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                     Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

The empirical study provided here is based on the comparison of two episodes extracted from two different
corpuses used to analyze the way English as a Second Language (ESL) is taught and learnt in primary schools in
France. The first episode comes from a five-lesson teaching unit implemented in an ordinary class composed of
eighteen 5th graders. The second episode comes from a videoconferencing session during which four French
students interact with four English students at lunchtime under their teacher's supervision.
         In both situations, the students play a familiar game similar to the well-known "who is it" game. This
famous game is a two-player game in which each player secretly and simultaneously selects one character and
then tries to be the first to guess who her/his opponent picked. In both classes, this game has been turned into a
"what monster is it" game as the secret character to uncover is not a person but a monster. For the "monster"
game, each teacher has developed specific documents and slightly changed the original rules. However, beyond
these differences, the general knowledge involved is very similar in each class. It corresponds to the students'
ability to ask and answer questions so as to discover the secret monster, which is the monster chosen by another
student.
         In the ordinary class, the game is organized as follows: one student - here William - plays against the
whole class. It means that William chooses a monster his friends have to identify, asking him questions in
English he has to answer in English as well. In this class, the French students have to be able to produce and
understand questions and answers in the target language to play the game. In doing so they will respect an
overarching didactic contract that strongly characterizes ESL classes at primary level: the "use of the target
language" contract (Gruson, 2009), thus situating themselves in the communicative paradigm.
         For the videoconferencing session, the French and English students play against each other. In the
selected episode, one player, a French student called Emma, asks questions in French to Sophie, an English
student, who replies in English. In contrast with the ordinary class, we note that both French and English are
being used in the videoconferencing session. Indeed, one vital ingredient of the use of videoconferencing, which
transforms teaching and learning a foreign language, is that, during videoconferencing sessions, both French and
English students have to learn the target language. Consequently, these sessions are in essence bilingual sessions
during which both languages are supposed to be used equally to solve the problem in question ­ in this case to
guess the secret monster. These bilingual sessions are based on a fundamental principle that could be termed the
"equal benefit" principle meaning that both partners have to benefit equally from the exchanges (Gruson, 2010).
This principle, as we will show, has a strong impact on the teachers' and the students' actions: it not only
modifies the didactic milieu but also the type of didactic contracts that occur in the ESL class.
         To conclude the presentation of the two situations, we have to keep in mind that, for the selected
episodes, the language activities involved in each class are different. In the ordinary class, the students will have
to practice both receptive and productive activities in the target language whereas, during the videoconferencing
session, the main knowledge in question consists in understanding the target language. If both teachers agree on
focusing on a receptive activity in that episode, it is because they want to take advantage of the native speaker
students' "expertise" in their own language and "use" them as authentic references for the target language.

What happens in situ

In the ordinary class
This episode takes place at the beginning of the game just after William designated Linda to ask him a second
question.

Table 1: Transcripts and screen captures, episode 1.

Linda: how many nose      William: it's one             PT1: it has got            William: nose
PT1 (2): how many noses                                 William: it has got one    PT1: nose
has it got ? + how many                                                            William: nose
noses has it got?
Linda: how many noses
has it got?

© ISLS                                                                                                       219
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                         Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

The teacher makes a           William looks at the        The teacher provides          PT1 touches her nose to
gesture to encourage          document on the board to    William with the right        encourage William to
Linda to repeat the whole     check how many noses the    form, and makes a gesture     complete his sentence.
sentence and correct her      monster he has chosen       to encourage William to       PT1's gaze is directed
mistake. PT1's gaze is        has. He answers with an     correct his sentence. PT1's   towards William. William
directed towards Linda        incorrect sentence limited  gaze is directed towards      produces the word "nose",
(not visible on the           to the necessary            William. William repeats      which PT1 repeats to
photogram).                   information: the number.    the verbal expression and     produce a correct
                                                          the number.                   phonological model.
                                                                                        William reproduces PT1's
                                                                                        pronunciation.

        The way Linda and William produce their sentences clearly shows that they limit their productions to
signifying elements not bothering to utter complete sentences. In doing so, they comply with the milieu, which
doesn't make the production of complete sentences necessary. Indeed, in everyday life, youngsters playing the
same kind of game would most likely do the same: ask a three word questions "how many noses?" and answer
with a number: one. However, we observe that William tries to produce a longer answer "it's one". He does so
because he is     familiar with the expectations  of his teacher whose  gestures  and   reformulations remind   her
students twice that she wants them to produce long and correct sentences.
        In the current learning game, we observe that the teacher's reticence is quite low: PT1 provides her
students with the verbal expression "has got", which they repeat although she does not ask them to do so
explicitly. In fact, they repeat PT1's words or sentences as the result of the way they interpret the signs she
produces. As a consequence, the students do not act proprio motu: their oral productions are strongly oriented
by PT1's verbal and non-verbal actions; they are the result of the system of habits fostered previously. In that
episode, as we explained before, the milieu is not resistant enough: using "has got" is not necessary to play the
"what monster is it?" game. As PT1 has given the winning strategy directly, she cannot know if the students
have really understood the use of "has got". The milieu being too weak, the didactic contract allows the students
to assimilate it.
        Consequently, in this first episode, we can say that the milieu is first and foremost an auxiliary to the
contract and that the on-going semiosis process is mainly of the second sort. In order to win the learning game,
the students have to orient themselves mainly by deciphering the contract signs afforded by the teacher. In that
case, we can state that the teacher's equilibration work is contract-driven.

In the class using videoconferencing
This episode  takes   place  in the middle of  the   session. Emma  produces   her first question after   two  other
questions have been asked.

Table 2A: Transcripts and screen captures, episode 2.

Emma: est-ce que ton monstre a         PTE: cinq oreilles++ combien ça        Sophie: no our monster hasn't got
cinq oreilles ? (Does your monster     fait ? cinq oreilles ? (five ears++    five ears
have five ears?)                       how much is it? Five ears?)
                                       Sophie: does your monster have
                                       five ears?

Emma asks the next question. She       PTE repeats the sentence key-          Sophie then looks at the camera to
is looking straight at the camera so   elements, "five ears", twice to help   answer Emma's question. As
as to establish eye contact with her   her students understand. Sophie        Emma, she makes efforts to
English peers. She pronounces her      touches her ear and then produces      articulate and pronounce clearly to

© ISLS                                                                                                         220
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                           Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

question slowly and clearly.            the question, which she addresses      make sure Emma will understand
                                        to her teacher to check its validity.  her answer. Emma is concentrated
                                        Her gaze is directed towards PTE       on the document on her lap.
                                        whose knee is visible in the left side
                                        corner of the screen.

Table 2B: Transcripts and screen captures, episode 2.

Emma:    j'ai pas compris (I didn't                                       In spite of Sophie's efforts, Emma
understand)                                                               hasn't understood the answer, which
PTF: tu le dis (Say it)                                                   she first tells PTF. She turns towards
Emma: repeat please                                                       her teacher who is standing next to her
PTF: je crois qu'ils ont pas bien entendu                                 and whispers to him. The latter does
Emma vas-y (I think they haven't heard                                    not repeat the answer but tells her to
Emma go on)                                                               ask Sophie to repeat, which she does.

Sophie: no our monster hasn't got five                                    While Sophie repeats the answer for the
ears                                                                      second time, Emma is looking intensely
PTF: he hasn't got five ears +++ à vous                                   at the screen to make sure she will
! (your turn!)                                                            understand this time.

        In this episode, the on-going learning game is quite different. The milieu is much more complex as the
students have not only to interpret the signs produced by their teachers but also those produced by their peers in
the same room    and across     the Channel. However, as in    the first episode,  answering the  yes/no   question
formulated by Emma " Does your monster have five ears?" can be reduced to the production of one isolated
word, here, `yes' or `no'. Yet, if we examine the answer produced by Sophie, we observe that she utters a long
answer "no our monster hasn't got five ears" even if Emma only needs to understand the first word to get the
required information and make progress in solving the problem. In a very different way from what happens in
the ordinary class, the production of long and correct sentences is not enforced by the teachers' expectations but
by the English student's desire to provide the French students with a model on which they will be able to rely
when they have to produce their sentences in English.
        Concerning repetitions, we can observe that if the question is repeated here it is because Emma asks
Sophie to do so as she was unable to pick up the clues (no / hasn't) included in the milieu (the answer) to get the
sentence meaning. In videoconferencing sessions, repetitions are usually due to technical problems that often
disrupt virtual communication. This can also explain why both teachers, PTE at the beginning and PTF at the
end, repeat after the students.
        If we look closely at Emma and Sophie, we observe that they really enact a first-hand relationship to
the knowledge involved. First, as shown in the second picture, even if Sophie tries to find some support from
her teacher to make sure she understood the word "oreille" correctly, she produces it by herself. As for Emma,
pictures 1 and 5 clearly illustrate how concentrated she is and willing to decipher the signs of the milieu: the
words produced by Sophie. In this second episode, PTF's reticence is high when he encourages Emma to find in
her own linguistic resources the word to ask Sophie to repeat. In that case, the assimilation of the new milieu
requires the accommodation of previous knowledge: the contract has to be changed.
        To conclude, we can first put forward that, in this second episode, the students' actions are mainly
oriented by the milieu and by a semiosis process of the first sort. Secondly, we can argue that by providing
another kind of didactic game, videoconferencing sessions have a strong impact on the dialectics between the
"contract-driven students' orientations" and "the milieu-driven students' orientations". As a consequence, the
teachers' equilibration work is very specific. It consists mainly of enabling the student to confront the milieu,
within an appropriate guidance, which does not rest on the unveiling of the teachers' epistemic expectations.

Discussion
It seems to us that the case studies we theorize in this paper may lead to some exploratory conclusions and
implications.

The need for a theory of instructional practices
We argue that there is a need for a transactional theory that holds together teaching and learning. In our opinion,
such a theory cannot ontologically separate teaching from learning. If we describe the teaching/learning process

© ISLS                                                                                                           221
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                             Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

as a way of building a common background, relating to the piece of knowledge involved, between the teacher
and the students, and renewing it as this process unfolds, we have to see learning and teaching in transactions.
That is to say that, if there is a fundamental asymmetry between the teacher and the students, due to their
different relationship to  the  subject  matter,  the  way students   learn fundamentally    depends    on  the teacher's
instructional moves.   In  what  we  termed    "Equilibration  work"    a teacher   may  obtain dramatically      different
learning depending on whether she carries on a "contract-driven" teaching process or a "milieu-driven" teaching
process. Thus a theory of instructional practices has to account for these differences, and show how a "milieu-
driven" instructional practice may enact a kind of Deweyan inquiry (Dewey, 1938/2008), in which students'
certainty will be based on a first-hand relationship to the milieu and the knowledge in question. In that way, we
agree with Koschmann's contention according to which "Deweyan inquiry, when successfully carried out not
only effects  a  change   in the  problem   solver  (what  psychologists    treat  as "learning")  but  also   leads to   a
reconstruction of the problematic situation that led to the inquiry in the first place" (Koschmann, 2011, p. 12).
We argue that we can see such "a reconstruction of the problematic situation" in our videoconferencing case
study, in which the teachers' equilibration work allows the students to deal with the foreign language in a way
they would not be able to achieve in the initial problematic situation. We account for this reconstruction by
using our concept of learning game, which makes us see learning as the consequence of the teacher's game on
the student's game in the milieu.
          In that way, JATD, by considering learning and teaching as the process and the outcome of a joint
action, does not ontologically separate the transactional process that occurs between the teacher and the students
from the  epistemic   process   within   which  the   knowledge   involved  is made     available. Knowledge      itself is
provided in a transactional way. It seems to us that such a conception could meet the distinction operated by
Greeno (2001, 2011) between the systemic and semantic aspects of interaction. Systemic principles "involve
ways  in  which  students  are   positioned in  interaction"  and semantic    principles   "involve ways    of  achieving
coherence of information, including alignment of the situation with the goal of the task (Greeno, 2011, p. 48).
As Greeno put it, "these two kinds of principles are inherently interactive" (2011, p. 49). It seems to us that
inquiring how the teacher's work (in particular what we refer to as "equilibration work") may enact a relevant
relationship between systemic and semantic aspects in learning could be a promising avenue of research. It
could be one of the goals of JATD, within a transactional perspective.

Technology-enhanced learning environment and JATD
We   argue  that technology-enhanced       learning   environment   such   as  videoconferencing    may    offer   regular
opportunities to modify the very logic of teaching/learning practices. The reconstructed situation allows the
students to position themselves as knowledgeable persons, entitled to produce relevant sentences in their mother
tongue. We hypothesize that this positioning (Greeno, 2001, 2011; Harré & Van Langenhove, 1998) has a
strong influence on the students' epistemic conduct.
          One could assert that it has been done by augmenting the "degree of authenticity"of the situations. But
the question is not so much that of the degree of authenticity as that of the nature of this authenticity. According
to us, the empirical case study we provided in this paper is instructive from this point of view. By uttering
complete sentences in their mother tongue, students do not meet the features of an "everyday situation", in
which only some words could be sufficient to win the "monster game". But winning the "monster game" does
not mean winning the didactic learning game, in that it does not afford relevant opportunities to learn. In the
case study in question, as each student is entitled to provide other "foreign" students with accurate linguistic
forms, the  completeness     of  these   forms can  be  seen  as  a warrant    for  better learning.   In  that way,  the
"authenticity" of the learning game is not an everyday life authenticity, it's a didactic authenticity ­ that one
could see as the most rewarding authenticity in a learning situation.
          Consequently, we argue, on the one hand, that technology-enhanced instructional practices have to
enact counterfactual learning games, as we have seen in our case study, in which the logic of the situation itself
puts the students in didactically authentic and relevant situations, that the teacher's equilibration work may
concretize. On   the other   hand, our   second  case  study  clearly illustrates  that videoconferencing    can   greatly
enhance the transactional possibilities of the learning situations. Obviously this small-scale study represents a
modest    contribution  to   the  debate   about   CALL    research   and   the    question  of    the  effectiveness    of
videoconferencing.   Multiple    factors such  as  the learners' level, the  teachers'  expertise,  the   setting and the
communicative    situations  have  a   significant effect  on students'   learning.   Consequently,    more research     on
videoconferencing and language learning in primary education needs to be conducted so as to investigate the
specificity of the primary context and identify examples of good practice. Whatever could be the results of these
investigations, we strongly believe that studying technology enhanced learning will lead us to reconsider the
potentialities of JATD.
     Finally, as we argued at the beginning of this paper, JATD stems from French Didactics and relies on it for
its main concepts. But it seems to us that JATD represents an emerging paradigm for the educational sciences
that could contribute to current research in the Learning Sciences Community, and more particularly with this

© ISLS                                                                                                                222
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                            Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

research, to CSCL. This research, according to us, leads to a new vision of the relationship between teaching
and learning,    a new  vision   of  what  could  be  a   science   of instructional  practices grounded      in a deep
understanding of what learning is.

Endnotes
(1) In our work, we use the word "transaction" as Dewey elaborated it in his late work with Bentley (Knowing and the
    Known),   in which  they explain that the notion of transaction differs from the notion of interaction in the  way it
    emphasizes the fundamental dynamics of activity.
(2) In the transcriptions, PT1 designates the teacher in the first episode, PTF the French teacher and PTE the English teacher
    in the second episode.

References
Brousseau, G. (1997). The theory of didactic situations in mathematics. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Chevallard,  Y.  (2007).   Readjusting  didactics to  a changing    epistemology.    European   Educational   Research
         Journal, 6(2), 131­134.
Clark, H. (1996). Using Language. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Dewey,   J. (1916/1985).    Democracy     and Education.   In  J. A.   Boydston   (ed.), The  Middle   Works,    Vol.  9.
         Carbondale: University of Southern Illinois Press.
Dewey,   J. (1938/2008).    John  Dewey   The  Later    Works, 1925-1953:      1938: Logic:   The Theory    of   Inquiry.
         Chicago: Southern Illinois University Press.
Dewey, J. & Bentley, A. (1949). Knowing and the known. Boston: Beacon Press.
Dretske, F. (1981). Knowledge and the flow of information. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Fleck, L. (1979). Genesis and development of a scientific fact. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Goldman, R., Pea, R., Barron, B., & Derry, S. J. (2007). Video Research in the Learning Sciences. Mahwah, NJ:
         Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Inc.
Goldman, S., & McDermott, R. (2007). Staying the course with video analysis. In R. Goldman & R. Pea & B.
         Barron & S. Derry (Eds.), Video research in the learning sciences (pp. 101-113). Mahwah New Jersey:
         Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Greeno, J.G. (2001). Students with competence, authority and accountability: affording intellective identities in
         classroom. New York: The College Board
Greeno, J. G. (2011). A Situative Perspective on Cognition and Learning in Interaction. In T. D. Koschmann
         (Ed.), Theories of Learning and Studies of Instructional Practice (pp. 41-72). New York: Springer.
Gruson, B. (2009). Etude de la dialectique contrat-milieu dans l'enseignement-apprentissage de l'anglais en
         CM2 et en 6è. Revue Suisse Des Sciences De l'Éducation, 31, 641-659.
Gruson, B. (2010). Analyse comparative d'une situation de communication orale en classe ordinaire et lors
         d'une séance en visioconférence. Distances et Savoirs. 3, 8, 395-423.
Harré, R., & Langenhove, L. van. (1998). Positioning Theory: Moral Contexts of Intentional Action. Oxford:
         Blackwell.
Koschmann, T. D. (2011). Theories of Learning and Studies of Instructional Practice. New York: Springer.
Laborde, C., Perrin-Glorian, M.-J., & Sierpinska, A. (2005). Beyond the Apparent Banality of the Mathematics
         Classroom. New York: Springer.
Mead, H. G. (1934). Mind, Self, and Society. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Piaget, J. (1975). L'équilibration des structures cognitives : Problème central du développement. Paris : PUF.
Schubauer-Leoni, M.-L., & Perret-Clermont, A.-N. (1997). Social interactions and mathematics learning. In T.
       Nunes & P. Bryant (Eds.), Learning and teaching mathematics. An international perspective (pp. 265­
       283). London: Psychology Press.
Sebanz, N., Bekkering, H., & Knoblich, G. (2006). Joint action: bodies and minds moving together. Trends in
         Cognitive Sciences, 10(2), 70-76.
Sensevy, G. & Mercier, A. (2007) Agir ensemble. L'action conjointe du professeur et des élèves dans le système
         didactique. Rennes : PUR.
Sensevy, G.   (2011a).   Sensevy,    G. (2011). Overcoming     fragmentation :    Towards   a  joint action   theory   in
         didactics.  In  B.  Hudson     &  M. Meyer     (Eds.), Beyond   Fragmentation :    Didactics, Learning     and
         Teaching in Europe (pp. 60-76). Opladen and Farmington Hills : Barbara Budrich.
Sensevy, G.   (2011b).  Le   Sens du    Savoir. Eléments  pour    une  théorie de l'action  conjointe  en  didactique.
         Bruxelles : De Boeck.
Tiberghien, A., & Sensevy, G. (2012). Video studies : Time and duration in the teaching-learning processes In J.
         Dillon    & D. Jorde  (Eds.), Handbook      "The World    of  Science  Education"   volume   4(pp.   141-179).
         Rotterdam/Boston/Taipei : Sense Publishers.
Wittgenstein, L. (1997). Philosophical Investigations. Oxford: Blackwell.

© ISLS                                                                                                              223
