CSCL 2013 Proceedings                     Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

          A Simulation-Based Approach for Increasing Women in
                                                 Engineering
   Golnaz Arastoopour, Naomi Chesler, David Williamson Shaffer, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 1025 W
                                            Johnson St Madison, WI 53703
                Email: arastoopour@wisc.edu, chesler@engr.wisc.edu, dws@education.wisc.edu

         Abstract: Institutions have historically struggled with retaining women in engineering. Using
         epistemic frames as a theoretical framework, we propose that more women would remain in
         the   field if they   had   authentic  engineering    experiences. To     test this  hypothesis,   we
         implemented     an    epistemic  game,   Nephrotex.   Our   controlled    study  indicated   that  (1)
         Nephrotex women developed positive associations and (2) focused on engineering design.
         Further study is needed to determine if this positive design experience leads to persistence in
         engineering.

Introduction/Theory
Educational  institutions   at all levels have   historically struggled with  motivating     and  retaining  women   in
engineering. The single biggest drop in engineering enrollment occurs between the freshmen and sophomore
year (Atkinson & Mayo, 2011). First year undergraduate courses thus play a pivotal role in a student's decision
to major  in engineering,    but   these courses  aren't retaining  women.   Recent     studies show  that  women    are
generally more interested in STEM when it involves teamwork, collaboration, and professionalism, and social
impact (Thom, Pickering, & Thompson, 2002; Zastavker, Y Ong & Page, 2006).
         An alternative hypothesis is that some students opt out of engineering because of the basic math and
science courses that are the focus of the first year curriculum (Lumsdaine & Lumsdaine, 1995). In this view,
more  first year   students  would   remain  in  the field if  they had  authentic   experiences   of  the  engineering
profession such as engineering design--the most central aspect of the profession (Dym, Agogino, Eris, Frey, &
Leifer, 2005) in the form of a professional practicum.
         Shaffer   (Shaffer,   2007) has  characterized  the  learning that takes   place in  practica in  terms  of an
epistemic   frame.   Epistemic  frame    theory suggests  that every   profession  has   unique  collections of   skills,
knowledge, identities, values, and epistemology that construct an epistemic frame. Developing an epistemic
frame means making connections between these elements. Thus, the goal of a professional practicum is to build
a professional epistemic frame--to develop the ability to think like a professional. However, first year students
do not have many opportunities to participate in practica.
         One approach to this problem are epistemic games--computer simulations of professional workplaces
where  novices   can  solve    real-world problems   without   needing  to  first master  basic  domain    content. The
complex knowledge and skills that students do not yet have are embedded in the tools that novices use in the
simulation (Bagley & Shaffer, 2009). In this study, we designed and tested an epistemic game for engineering
called Nephrotex. This study asks: Did attitudes towards engineering careers change more positively among
women  who     played   Nephrotex?   Were   students who   made  more   connections     with engineering   design  more
motivated   to continue   in   engineering   than  those   who  made    more  connections     with   collaboration  and
professionalism?

Methods
In Fall 2010, 120 students enrolled in an introductory engineering course.        In total, 45 students (13 female, 32
male; treatment  group)   participated   in Nephrotex.   The  remaining  75  students   (24  female,  51 male;   control
group) participated in team-based research projects.
         Two sources of data were collected for this analysis of Nephrotex: (1) students' pre and post survey
responses and (2) students' discourse in the chat program. We conducted a PCA on survey responses. The mean
scores on the significant component for women and men students were calculated, and t-tests were used to
compare the percentage of students that had positive gains from pre to post survey.
         We coded the discourse using codes using epistemic frame theory as a guide for professional practices.
We used Epistemic Discourse Coding, an automated coding process that has been validated by comparing hand-
coded utterances by human coders to the automated coding system. Cohen's kappa scores were between .80 and
.98 between the automated system and human coders (D'Angelo et al., 2011). We used Epistemic Network
Analysis (ENA) on the coded discourse. This analysis tool measures relationships between epistemic frame
elements by quantifying the co-occurrences of those elements in discourse (Shaffer & Chesler, 2009). Here we
used ENA to measure students' development of connections made between skills, knowledge, identity, values,
and epistemology.

© ISLS                                                                                                              217
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                 Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

Results
       The percentage of women in Nephrotex that had a positive change in mean scores (M = 72%, SD=
19%) were significantly larger than the percentage of women in the control group that had a positive change in
mean scores (M = 35%, SD = 22%, p < .05) (figure 1).

                                                 *

                                  *

Figure 1. Percentage of students that had a positive increase in mean scores from pre to post on positive view of
                            engineering careers.    (Mean ± Standard Error, * p<.05)

       ENA    component    1 (ENA1)   and  ENA      component   2  (ENA2)  were  significant. Items that loaded
negatively on ENA 2 are related to data analysis and professionalism, and items that loaded positively on ENA
2 are related to engineering design. Students in Nephrotex who made more connections between the skills,
knowledge, and epistemology of engineering design and other engineering frame elements showed positive
change in  positive view  of engineering  careers    from   pre to post survey. In other words,   ENA2   scores
significantly predicted positive view of engineering post scores when controlling for pre scores ( = 1.789, p <
.05, R2 = .411). Thus, results from this study show that women who participated in Nephrotex viewed a career
in engineering more positively than women in the control group, and these changes were associated with
engineering design activities in the internship.

Discussion
The question we address in this study is whether these women showed an increase in their positive associations
with engineering after engaging in authentic engineering design, developing an engineering epistemic frame,
and as a result having a positive view of engineering. This is in contrast with a more traditional hypothesis,
enacted in this study's control condition and in many current first year undergraduate courses of collaboration
and social value leading to a positive view of engineering.
       The results above suggest that women in the Nephrotex condition who focused on design had a more
positive view of engineering than women in the control group. We therefore propose the epistemic persistence
hypothesis (figure  2). Further study is needed     to test the epistemic persistence hypothesis  for first year
undergraduate women.

                                  Figure 2. Epistemic persistence hypothesis.

References
Atkinson, R. D., & Mayo, M. J. (2011). Refueling the US Innovation Economy: Fresh Approaches to Science,
    Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) Education.
Bagley, E. A., & Shaffer, D. W. (2009). When people get in the way: Promoting civic thinking through
    epistemic game play. International Journal of Gaming and Computer-Mediated SimulationsBagley, E. A.
    S., & Shaffer, D. W. (2009). When people get in the way: Promoting civic thinking through epistemic
    gameplay. International Journal of Gaming and Computer-Mediated Simulations,, 1(1), 36­52.
D'Angelo, C. M., Arastoopour, G., Lepak, C., Flores-Lorca, I., Breck, E., Witherspoon-Johnson, A., Burkett,
    C., et al. (2011). Epistemic discourse coding. Epistemic Games Group, University of Wisconsin-Madison.
Dym, C. L., Agogino, A., Eris, O., Frey, D., & Leifer, L. (2005). Engineering design thinking, teaching and
    learning. Journal of Engineering Education, 94(1), 103­120.
Lumsdaine, M., & Lumsdaine, E. (1995). Thinking preferences of engineering students: Implications for
    curriculum restructuring. JOURNAL OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION-WASHINGTON-, 84, 193­204.
Shaffer, D. W. (2007). How Computer Games Help Children Learn. New York: Palgrave.
Shaffer, D. W., & Chesler, N. (2009). Professional Practice Simulations for Engaging, Educating and Assessing
    Undergradute Engineers. National Science Foundation.
Thom, M., Pickering, M., & Thompson, R. E. (2002). Understanding the barriers to recruiting women in
    engineering and technology programs (Vol. 2, pp. F4C­1­F4C­6 vol. 2). IEEE.
Zastavker, Y Ong, M., & Page, L. (2006). Women in engineering: Exploring the effects of project-based
    learning in a first-year undergraduate engineering program (pp. 1­6). IEEE.

© ISLS                                                                                                      218
