CSCL 2013 Proceedings                  Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

       Teenagers re-design a collaborative mobile app to kindle
                 motivation for learning about energy consumption

                               Katerina Avramides, Brock Craft and Rosemary Luckin
           London Knowledge Lab, Institute of Education, 23-29 Emerald Street, London WC1N 3QS
                     Email: K.Avramides@ioe.ac.uk, B.Craft@ioe.ac.uk, R.Luckin@ioe.ac.uk

        Abstract: Previous work informed the design of a collaborative mobile application to support
        learning about personal energy consumption. In this study teenagers used and re-designed the
        application. Collaboration with other members of society emerged as a potentially significant
        motivating factor. Findings also indicate participants were not clear how energy issues will
        affect   them,   which  might  impact   on motivation to  learn.  The  work  contributes  to our
        understanding of how to design collaborative learning technologies about energy consumption
        that are motivating to teenagers.

Introduction
Little is known about teenagers' conceptions of the issues around energy consumption. Some evidence suggests
that, although teenagers show awareness of energy problems and report concerns about the future, they lack
awareness of their personal energy consumption and also lack motivation to learn how it contributes to global
issues (Avramides, Craft, Luckin and Read, 2012). Studies with adults also suggest there is a lack of awareness
regarding  the   connection between  environmental   issues that arise  from energy  consumption   and  individual
consumer choices (Lorenzoni, Nicholson-Cole and Whitmarsh, 2007). It is, therefore, important to highlight to
teenagers how individual choices form a pattern of personal energy consumption over time, and relate to larger
scale energy issues. Collaborative learning experiences might be effective in drawing this connection between
individual  and   global,  and support learners in  understanding  how   their individual behaviour  is part of a
collective pattern of behaviour. Technology can effectively support collaborative learning, particularly when the
collaborative element is embedded in the design (Lewis, Pea and Rosen, 2010). Building on previous findings
(Avramides, Craft, Luckin and Read, 2012), we designed a prototype mobile application to support teenagers
learn about their personal energy consumption. The application was designed to support a collaborative learning
experience. The focus of the present study was on motivation: what design would motivate teenagers to learn
about energy.

Framework for Learner Centred Design
A methodology that identifies the multiple influences upon teenage decisions and behaviours, and that draws
connections between their circumstances, motivations, attitudes and knowledge is required for the design and
use of technology to support learning about energy. This methodology needs to be participatory in order to
ensure that a    clear and accurate understanding  of the complex   influences  within  their personal contexts is
integrated within any resultant design. The Ecology of Resources design framework (EoR, Luckin, 2010) offers
a process for working with participants that models and takes account of their context.
        The EoR provides a method through which we first identify the world resources available to the learner
and the processes and relationships that shape the learner's access to these. We also build an understanding of
the learner and what they bring to the learning experience: their personal resources. The EoR also introduces the
notion of filters to describe the artefacts that constrain a learner's access to resources, such as rules, regulations
or physical boundaries. Having mapped out the learner's context we begin an iterative participatory process of
design with the aim of developing technology that facilitates access to appropriate resources at appropriate times
during the learning process. The EoR design process offers a 3 Phase structure through which educators and
technologists    can develop   technologies and technology-rich  learning activities that take  a learner's  wider
context into account (see Luckin, 2010 for framework detail).

Study Aims and Research Questions
In this study we focussed on Phase 3 of the EoR (development of scaffolds to support learning). Based on our
findings from Phases 1 and 2 we developed a prototype mobile application, as a prompt to engage teenagers in
the design  process.    The  participants used  and  then   re-designed  the app. The   research  questions  were
exploratory. We examined both (1) the participants' use of the prototype application we gave them, and (2) their
ideas for re-designing it. The focus of the re-design was on motivation. The lack of motivation to learn about
personal energy consumption was a key issue we identified in previous studies. Specifically, we explored what
would motivate teenagers to engage in terms of (a) the type of activity, and (b) the type of reward for engaging
in the activity.

© ISLS                                                                                                       219
CSCL 2013 Proceedings              Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

Participants and procedure
We engaged with two UK schools. In group 1 there were 7 students (aged 14 years old; 4 male) who had
recently finished a school project on citizenship and energy consumption. In group 2 there were 6 students (aged
14 years old; all male) who were attending a school that is part of the national Eco school network (www.eco-
schools.org.uk/), and taking a class on environmental education. We intentionally recruited participants with
awareness of energy issues, as they would be better able to contribute to the design of a learning experience.
         We  engaged  with the participants over 2 sessions  one week     apart. A questionnaire  was given     to
participants before the first session. Session 1 lasted about 1 hour and introduced the study and app. Session 2
lasted about 2 hours and involved giving feedback on and re-designing the application to make it more engaging
for teenagers to use. The teachers were present in both groups and contributed to prompting the discussion.

App functionality and design
The user can send and receive challenges. In response to a received challenge the user can create a pledge, and
specify a date until which the pledge is active. Sent and received challenges, active and expired pledges can be
shared with others. The design of the initial mobile application was based on previous research in Phase 1 of the
EoR that led to an initial EoR model. The key findings that shaped the design were: a) Most participants did not
think about their personal energy consumption, even though they were aware of energy issues at an abstract
level. Therefore, we designed the app to prompt them to focus on personal energy consumption, b) There was
lack of awareness around indirect energy consumption, and the relative energy used by different devices. We
also identified the energy consumption that  appeared  to be the most     relevant to teenagers. Therefore,    the
challenges are created based on a template that targets these specific issues, c) Participants mainly thought of
their contribution to saving energy in terms of using less rather than finding alternatives or persuading others.
We, therefore, prompted them to consider other options by embedding them in the challenges template, d) The
Internet was listed as a main source of information on energy, even though participants appeared to lack the
skills and background   knowledge  to  search  online for information     on energy.  We,  therefore, added      a
placeholder for adding a hyperlink for additional information on the challenge.

Findings
We analysed the data in relation to: a) the participants' attitudes and knowledge about energy as expressed in
the questionnaire, b) use of the application, and c) ideas on how to re-design the application, including feedback
on the prototype app we gave the participants. Due to space limitations, we highlight some findings. As in our
previous work, we found that teenagers are not particularly motivated to learn about their energy consumption,
even though they report high concern about energy issues. In particular, we found that teenagers do not have a
clear idea of how they might be affected. Regarding the use of the prototype application, findings are consistent
with our previous work that suggests teenagers lack the skills to find information about energy, even though
they are confident that there are sources available to them online. In terms of re-designing the phone application,
participants insisted that it must be a game. This is not surprising, but it is interesting to examine their analysis
of what elements a game would need to have to make it engaging. A promising idea to motivate teenagers to
engage was that of their school benefitting through sponsorship from the effort they put into learning about
energy. This also links to their comments about energy saving not being something that is visibly done by
others. Connecting teenagers' effort to learn with effort from other people might provide an incentive for them
to engage, and a more tangible and immediate result of their actions.

References
Avramides, K., Craft, B., Luckin, R. and Read, J.C. (2012). Working with teenagers to design technology that
         supports learning about energy in informal contexts. Proceedings of the International Conference of the
         Learning Sciences ­ Volume 1, Full papers, Sydney, Australia, pp 151 - 158.
Lewis, S., Pea, R., and Rosen, J. (2010). Collaboration with mobile media -- Shifting from 'participation' to 'co-
         creation'. Proceedings of the 6th International IEEE Conference on Wireless, Mobile, and Ubiquitous
         Technologies in Education (WMUTE), Kaohsiung, Taiwan, pp 112 - 116.
Lorenzoni, I., Nicholsoncole, S., and Whitmarsh, L. (2007). Barriers perceived to engaging with climate change
         among the UK public and their policy implications. Global Environmental Change, 17(3-4), 445-459.
Luckin, R. (2010). Re-designing Learning Contexts: Technology-Rich, Learner-Centred Ecologies. London and
         New York: Routledge.

Acknowledgments
We thank the students and staff who have worked with us on the Taking in the Teenagers project funded by the
Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council in the UK: Grant reference number EP/I000550/1

© ISLS                                                                                                         220
