CSCL 2013 Proceedings                    Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

       PROSPECTIVE MATHEMATICS TEACHERS INTERACTING IN
 ONLINE CHAT CONCERNING THE DEFINITION OF POLYHEDRON
               Marcelo A. Bairral, UFRRJ, BR465 km7, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, mbairral@ufrrj.br

         Abstract: Research that analyze the construction of geometric concepts through interactions
         on   online are  scarce. This   study focuses    on  pre-service    mathematics  teachers  (PSMTs)
         discussing about the definition of polyhedrons. One case study will be discussed. The chat
         proved to be a scenario that improved reflecting about the definition in three scopes: one in the
         context of solids, one focused on its elements (faces, vertices and edges) and still another one
         centered in the number of dimensions.

Introduction
VEL    are mediated   by  different  technologies.  In  VEL   individuals    can exchange    ideas and   develop their
mathematics concepts, without hierarchy or domination from one participant on another (Çakir et al., 2009). In
our VEL one way to exchange ideas is through the use of writing, and learning is understood as forms of
participation  and changing   in discourse  (Sfard, 2008).    In our   study we  focus on  written  online  interaction
regarding  the definition of  polyhedrons1.  Writing    about mathematical    ideas allows   individuals to review, at
different moments, their understanding concerning some concepts. Practices that allow PSMTs to develop an
understanding about the nature and function of definitions contribute to improve their professional knowledge
(e.g., Zazkiz    &   Leikin, 2008).   Assuming    defining    and  conceptualization   are   important   processes  in
mathematical   thinking,  we  believe  that those  processes     could be  improved   even   in virtual  environments,
because in VEL reflections could be interchanged in different discursive ways and moments.

Research Context and Data Source
The Gepeticem environment (http://www.gepeticem.ufrrj.br/cursos.php) is structured around a vision of work
that breaks with the axiomatic approach and the memorization of formulae in geometry classes. Although we
agree  with Tanguay   and    Grenier (2010) about   the  importance    of the proof in the   geometry   classroom, we
decide, at this moment of our study, to construct our VEL based on a situation related to the activities of
defining, exploring and experimenting via different sources. The chat proposal was: See below how four future
teachers characterize polyhedron: PSMT 1 (A polyhedron is a three-dimensional geometrical solid, the faces of
which are polygons), 2 (A figure of 3 dimensions formed by polygons), 3 (A polyhedron is made of polygonal
regions and the space limited by them), and 4 (It is a solid, the surface of which is a finite number of faces
(polygons)). Analyze and discuss with your partners the definition of polyhedron expressed by each one. The
proposal was sent to them, by e-mail, 10 minutes before the online chat. The chat takes about 120 minutes (two
regular classes of 60 minute each). We used the following procedures for data reduction: chat transcription (a
file provided by the platform itself), numbering (in lines) of interactions, removal of lines which contained no
ideas related to the concepts we were intent on focusing, re-reading interactions and organizations in turns.

Results
We found    that PSMTs    interacted  in three scopes   regarding  polyhedron    definition: aspects  associated with
geometric solids in general; aspects focused on the elements (faces, vertices and edges), and reflected focusing
on the number of dimensions. At the first moment, we observed the development of the whole interactive
process, as is shown in the following sequence over the first 4 minutes of the debate.

Figure 1. Part of the transcription of the online chat.
 fmagalhaes (10:18:30) : my answer was incomplete
 mary (10:18:59) : taking into account it's a first contact with the concept of polyhedrons I guess the ideas 3
 and 4 were the simplest to understand
 fmagalhaes (10:19:13) : ... they are too formal for the pupils' understanding
 thiago (10:19:33) : I've already got 4
 erj (10:21:12) : I found the definitions 3 and 4 are more understandable.
 thiago (10:21:21) : I guess 3 was a bit complicated
 researcher (10:22:06) : what's making 3 more complicated?
 rschiaro (10:22:10) : It's a solid, the surface of which is a finite number of faces
At this first moment, we tried to have an overview of interactions, the subjects' motivations, their curiosity and
the elements that appeared to have caused them some cognitive unbalance. For example, the perceptions about
the answers that had initially been presented, familiarity (or lack of it) with the subject, doubts or questioning
addressed to the group, and agreements. That is why we consider important to get to know the cognitive group

© ISLS                                                                                                           221
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                       Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

as it constitutes itself in the first place (Stahl, 2006), and, from there, later develop an analysis oriented toward
one of the participants. So, at a second moment, we randomly chose one PSMT, the first one who entered the
chat to interact: erj.

Figure 2: Focus on a single student.
 erj (10:23:13) : I guess when the definition talks about a number of dimensions it gets difficult for the pupils
 to learn. That's why I like 3 and 4 better
 erj (10:24:52) : The problem in 1 is the "three-dimensional"
 erj (10:28:50) : I think a solid, kids already understand better what it is    without a definition that's too formal
 erj (10:36:06) : One more thing, ... I think we should define a polyhedron without prior citing its elements
 (faces, vertices and edges) and then identify them later
 erj (10:45:23) : How about: "A polyhedron is a geometric solid, formed by a finite number of polygonal
 regions (polygons)
At  this analytical   moment,   what    interests us mainly    is to identify the  movement     from   individual ideas  to
collective thinking (but, wait a minute, hey you guys) and backwards, as all the participants have a possibility to
think and talk, without asking for permission. It is also important to highlight that even selecting just one
interlocutor,  it  is  visible that  his/her   thinking  process     is constituted  and   takes  into  consideration   the
contributions  from    his/her pairs.   The  contribution from    erj   (10:45:23) shows   that  the PSMT     considered  a
definition for a polyhedron. Nevertheless, as the chat encourages the collective reflection and a belonging to the
group,   then  he/she  has the  possibility  to analyze  the   idea  together with  the  group.  At  a  third moment,   we
analyzed PSMT (erj) in the constituted collective group.

Figure 3: Focus on the students as a collective unit.
 fmagalhaes (10:19:13) : ...    they are too formal for the pupils' understanding
 thiago (10:19:33) : I got 4
 erj (10:21:12) : I found the definitions 3 and 4 are more understandable
 thiago (10:21:21) : I found 3 a bit complicated
 erj (10:28:50) : I think a solid, kids already understand better what it is without a definition that's too formal
The above interactive process shows us how the answers can be revised (10:18:30), challenged (10:31:05) and
caused (10:36:41) within the collective group. Besides, examples are requested (10:37:04) and relations with the
PSMT's    practice    (10:28:50). This   individual/collective    back  and forth  movement     has  to  be  valued  in the
processes   of initial training   of teachers.  Finally, at  a fourth    moment,   we  highlighted   words   related to the
definition of a polyhedron.

Concluding Remarks
We analyzed online PSMT interactions that focused on ways to define polyhedrons. Participants showed they
deepened conceptual aspects in three scopes. These approaches are not sequential, hierarchical, nor individual.
In order to identify the three scopes, our analysis switched from a global look on the interactions to a focus
where we tried to highlight the mathematical ideas that were most explicit in their interactions. Based on the
implemented analysis strategies, we verified that the online chat can be an educational space where the ideas of
the PSMTs      can be  challenged    and  reviewed   by  the individual    within  the collective  group.   Perceptions  of
previously given answers, familiarity with the subject under discussion, doubts or questionings addressed to the
collective  group,    among  others,    can be  observed  in   the  interactive dynamics.   Examples     are  continuously
required and relations with the teacher-to-be practices may emerge.

Endnote
1Research supported by CNPq and Faperj.

References
Çakir, M. P., Zemel, A. M., & Stahl, G. (2009) The joint organization of interaction within a multimodal CSCL
         medium. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 4(2), 115-149.
Sfard,   A.   (2008).  Thinking      as  communicating:     Human       development,   the  growth    of  discourses    and
         mathematizing. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Stahl, G. (2006). Group cognition: Computer support for building collaborative knowledge. Cambridge: MIT.
Tanguay, D., & Grenier, D. (2010). Experimentation and proof in a solid geometry teaching situation. For the
         Learning of Mathematics, 30 (3), 36-42.
Zazkiz,  R.,   &   Leikin, R.   (2008).   Exemplifying    definitions:   a case  of  a  square.  Educational    Studies  in
         Mathematics, 69 (2), 131-148.

© ISLS                                                                                                                  222
