CSCL 2013 Proceedings                  Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

Enhancing Engagement and Collaborative Learning Skills in Multi-
                         touch Software for UML Diagramming
  Mohammed Basheri, Liz Burd, Malcolm Munro, School of Engineering and Computing Sciences, Durham
          University Durham, United Kingdom, {m.basheri, liz.burd, malcolm.munro@durham.ac.uk}
                    Nilufar Baghaei, Department of Computing, Unitec Institute of Technology
                             Auckland 1142, New Zealand, nbaghaei@unitec.ac.nz

          Abstract: The use of Multi-touch interfaces for collaborative learning has received significant
          attention. Their ability to synchronously accommodate multiple users is an advantage in co-
          located collaborative design tasks. This paper explores the potential of Multi-touch interfaces in
          collaborative Unified Modeling Language (UML) diagramming by comparing them to a PC-
          based tool and evaluating the collaborative learning skills and level of physical interaction in
          both conditions. The results indicate that even though participants conversed more in the PC-
          based condition, the use of the Multi-touch table increased the level of physical interaction and
          encouraged "creative conflict" skills amongst the team members.

Introduction
The   use of Multi-touch  interfaces for  collaborative  learning has   received significant attention, as   they can
accommodate more than one user at a time. This is particularly useful for learning through large, shared display
systems, such as tabletops (Han 2005). Furthermore, the Multi-touch environment provides new opportunities
for interaction between humans and computers. This area has been investigated by researchers from several
different educational backgrounds, and they have found Multi-touch environments to be useful, as interaction
through touch is both intuitive and natural (Ciocca, Olivo et al. 2012; Kolb, Rudner et al. 2012).
           To the best of our knowledge, there has been little research to determine the potential of using Multi-
touch tables to enhance co-located collaboration in software design using Unified Modeling Language (UML).
Object-oriented analysis and design can be a very complex task, as it requires knowledge of requirements
analysis, design,   and UML.   The   problem    statement is often  vague   and  incomplete,  and  students   require
significant experience in order to be successful in analysis. UML is a complex modeling language, and students
are commonly confronted by many problems before becoming skilled in it. Furthermore, UML modeling, like
other design tasks, is not a well-defined process. There is no single best solution for a problem, and often there
are several possible solutions to the same problem. The level of collaboration in Futura (Antle, Bevans et al.
2010) and WebSurface (Tuddenham, Davies et al. 2009) is limited and restricted to simple actions performed by
users, such  as putting  words into  the  right context,  arranging items  over  tables, and simple click-and-drag
actions. However, UML design involves advanced design issues that highlight the need for new methods of
collaboration, such as linking nodes and annotation. In this study, the potential of using Multi-touch technology
for software design using UML is explored by comparing it with PC-based collaborative software design and
examining the collaborative learning skills and physical interaction in both conditions.

The Experiment
Using Multi-touch table for collaborative UML diagramming has not been widely researched. To the best of our
knowledge, there is no Multi-touch table based editor for UML diagramming available. Therefore, we have
developed a     Multi-touch collaborative UML editor named "MT-CollabUML" (Basheri and Burd 2012) to
encourage face-to-face collaborative software design. In order to keep a same variable in both Multi-touch table
and PC-based conditions, MT-CollabUML tool was used in both settings.
           For  the purposes of the  research   sixteen  master program    students who   were  studying  "Software
Engineering for the Internet" were selected. The participants were all familiar with collaboratively designing
software using UML and had completed the course. The participants formed eight groups, each consisted of two
people. A within-subject experiment was conducted to compare how the participants used PC with how they
used Multi-touch table in terms of collaborative design.
           Two separate tasks were implemented, each of which involved the creation of UML-State diagrams
through a process of planning, discussion, decision making, drawing and reflection. In order to ensure that the
tasks  were  of the same  complexity  and  required  the  same    level of skills, the course tutor was  consulted.
Counterbalanced measures design was conducted in this experiment to help keep the variability low. For every
pair of groups, we gave one group a UML design task and asked them to complete it using the MT-CollabUML
tool in PC-based condition (Figure 1). The other group was asked to complete the same task using the MT-
CollabUML    tool   on  Multi-touch table condition  (Figure  2). Then   the groups    switched and were     asked to

© ISLS                                                                                                            223
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                   Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

complete  the  second    task using PC   and    Multi-touch  conditions.   Group    member's   learning experience and
success  are   influenced by   the quality   of communication    in    team discussion   (Jarboe 1996).   Collaborative
learning  Skills includes   Active  Learning,   Creative   Conflict   and Conversation   (McManus    and  Aiken 1995;
Jarboe 1996). According to Soller (2001) using Collaborative learning Skills promotes effective collaboration
learning. Therefore, the verbal communication among each pair in both conditions were recorded and analyzed
to find out if there were differences between conditions in term of type of verbal contribution. Baghaei (2007)
and Soller (2001)'s verbal communication categories were used in this study. They include: "Request, Inform,
Maintain, Acknowledge, Motivate, Argue, Introduce & Plan, Disagree, Task and Off-Task".

               Figure 1: PC-based condition                             Figure 2: Multi-touch based condition

Conclusion
In this study, the differences in collaborative software design amongst groups of students working in PC-based
vs. Multi-touch conditions were investigated. We hypothesised that the Multi-touch table would increase the
effectiveness of the collaborative process by enhancing collaboration learning skills and increasing physical
interactions amongst team members. The results indicate the benefit of using the Multi-touch MT-CollabUML
tool as   opposed    to the   PC-based  version   in enhancing        collaborative software design. The   Multi-touch
environment increases the amount of physical interactions and subjects' engagements in the design activities.
MT-CollabUML tool in the Multi-touch setting encouraged subjects to be engaged in a discursive conversation
using "Creative Conflict" skills. More research needs be done in this area to fully explore the advantages and
disadvantages of using Multi-touch tables in professional software design.

References
Antle, A. N., A. Bevans, et al. (2010). Futura: design for collaborative learning and game play on a multi-touch digital
          tabletop. Proceedings of the fifth international conference  on Tangible,  embedded, and embodied  interaction.
          Funchal, Portugal, ACM.
Baghaei, N., A. Mitrovic, et al. (2007). "Supporting collaborative learning and problem-solving in a constraint-based CSCL
          environment for UML class diagrams." International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning 2(2):
          159-190.
Basheri, M. and L. Burd (2012). Exploring the Significance of Multi-touch Tables in Enhancing Collaborative Software
          Design using UML. Frontiers in Education Conference, Seattle, Washington, USA (in press).
Ciocca, G., P. Olivo, et al. (2012). "Browsing museum image collections on a multi-touch table." Information Systems
          37(2): 169-182.
Han, J. (2005). Low-cost multi-touch sensing through frustrated total internal reflection. Proceedings of the 18th Annual
          ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology, Seattle, WA, USA ACM.
Jarboe, S. (1996). "Procedures for enhancing group decision making." Communication and Group Decision Making: 345-
          383.
Kolb, J., B. Rudner, et al. (2012). Towards Gesture-Based Process Modeling on Multi-touch Devices Advanced Information
          Systems Engineering Workshops. W. Aalst, J. Mylopoulos, M. Rosemann, M. J. Shaw and C. Szyperski, Springer
          Berlin Heidelberg. 112: 280-293.
McManus, M. and R. Aiken (1995). "Monitoring computer-based problem solving." Journal of Artificial Intelligence in
          Education 6(4): 307-336.
Soller, A. (2001). "Supporting social interaction in an intelligent collaborative learning system." International Journal of
          Artificial Intelligence in Education (IJAIED) 12(1): 40-62.
Tuddenham, P., I. Davies, et al. (2009). WebSurface: an Interface for Co-located Collaborative Information Gathering.
          Proceedings of the ACM International Conference on Interactive Tabletops and Surfaces. Banff, Alberta, Canada,
          ACM: 181-188

© ISLS                                                                                                             224
