CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                          Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

Inter-Personal Browsing: Supporting cooperative web searching by
                         face-to-face sharing of browser pages

  Tomoko Hashida, The Univ. of Tokyo, 7-3-1, Bunkyo-ku, Hongo, Tokyo, 113-0033, hashida@nae-lab.org
          Koki Nomura, Domus Academy, Via Mario Pichi, 18, 20143 Milano, nomura@nae-lab.org
       Makoto Iida, The Univ. of Tokyo, 7-3-1, Bunkyo-ku, Hongo, Tokyo, 113-0033, iida@nae-lab.org
 Takeshi Naemura, The Univ. of Tokyo, 7-3-1, Bunkyo-ku, Hongo, Tokyo, 113-0033, naemura@nae-lab.org

        Abstract:  We    are  studying   a framework    that  facilitates the  gathering   and  sharing  of
        information   in group  work   situations where  several  people   are  working    on  multifaceted
        problem-solving or emergent tasks by cooperating and sharing the workload. In particular, we
        are developing a framework for the smooth sharing of public information to stimulate debate
        while maintaining the focus of the group's web searching activities and confining private
        information   on  the  PC screens     of  individual users.  In   this paper,   we report   on  the
        implementation of Inter-Personal Browsing - a framework where each user has a small shared
        display in addition to the PC display, and can use this to share web browser screens with other
        users. Having introduced this system into a mechanism for practical learning of group work
        methodology, we introduce the results of studying its effectiveness from the viewpoint of
        information sharing and communication.

(a) A user's iPad automatically displays the window      (b) A user can receive pages by touching other's iPad.
   of the web browser running on the user's own PC.      
                                 Figure 1 Concept of Inter-Personal Browsing

Introduction
In the fields of education and business, there has been renewed recognition of the importance of group work,
where several people work on multifaceted problem-solving or emergent tasks by cooperating and sharing the
workload. Recently, there have also been greater opportunities for people to bring laptops or PCs into group
work situations, but in this case the attention of users is drawn towards their individual computer screens, thus
depriving them of the communication opportunities that group work is supposed to provide. One possible reason
for this is that the screens of other people's laptops and PCs are highly likely to show private information, which
can make people feel apprehensive about perusing someone else's screen. However, having people direct their
attention entirely toward their own computer screens is undesirable with regard to facilitating the exchange of
information in group work situations. We have therefore been looking into ways of addressing this situation by
using  such means  as projector displays   to produce   large-screen public    displays that  are shared by  all the
members of a group, or by using terminal displays whose orientation can be changed, such as iPads. However,
this sort of approach can lead to problems such as private information being displayed on a large screen, or
information only being publicized to a subset of the group members, or to users having to go to the trouble of
changing the orientation of their terminal screens.
        Against this background, we considered that a new framework is needed to facilitate the sharing of
public information that  can   stimulate debate   in group   work situations   while  keeping  private  information
confined to the computer screens of individual users, without the need for intentional operations to be performed
by the users. In particular, we focused on web browser windows as a source of information to be made public in
group  work  performed   using PCs.  Recently,   web   searches have  been     often used  in group  work   on PCs,
especially at the investigatory stages. According to Morris (2008), 97.1% of people have taken part in joint web

© ISLS                                                                                                           224
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                         Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

searches, but over 80% of them used inefficient methods for sharing their search results, such as looking at the
screen over the other person's shoulder, sending search results by email, or sharing the screen display by turning
it towards the other person. We therefore used iPads and browser extensions to implement a mechanism that
satisfies three conditions: (i) only the browser window is made public as shown in Figure 1(a), (ii) it is easy for
users to access the search results of other users in their own PC as shown in Figure 1(b), and (iii) this framework
can  be set up  instantly without   having to introduce any    special equipment. Since   this framework    supports
website browsing between multiple individuals, we called the proposed system Inter-Personal Browsing.
         In this paper, we first present a detailed introduction to the Inter-Personal Browsing system that we
implemented   from   this viewpoint. Then,  by   using this system   in a  group  work    situation, we   compare  its
performance with group work performed using existing information sharing tools such as notes written on paper
and Google Documents shared via PCs, and we study how this system changes the nature of the group work,
such as the ease with which information can be shared, and the degree to which it stimulates communication.
We conducted verification trials to test these effects in a practical work group lecture.

Related Works
Systems that support joint web searching have mainly used either a shared display such as a computer screen, or
a tabletop device.
         Systems implemented using a shared display include SearchTogether (Morris & Horvitz, 2007) and
CoSearch (Amershi & Morris, 2008). SearchTogether is software that allows multiple users in remote locations
to use a single shared display to perform searches, and includes features such as a text chat function, individual
user search  history  displays,  and a  search results  display window.    CoSearch   is  an   enhanced   version  of
SearchTogether, but unlike SearchTogether it assumes that the users are all situated around a single computer.
Although shared display systems make it easy to share information and provide information with better clarity,
they have drawbacks such as being unable to secure adequate workspace for each user, resulting in poorer
individual work efficiency.
         Tabletop systems include WeSearch (Morris et al., 2010) and WebSurface (Tuddenham et al., 2009).
These   systems exploit   the space and interactivity  offered by  a tabletop workspace.    An  experimental    study
comparing the execution of collaborative tasks on personal devices and on a tabletop device (Heilig et al., 2011)
has also confirmed that people are more likely to interrupt and engage in the actions of other users' actions
when using a tabletop device. Tabletop systems eliminate the drawbacks of shared displays, but their high cost
and lack of portability have impeded the introduction of these systems.
         New trends have also emerged recently. These include frameworks that facilitate the integrated use of
heterogeneous devices, and PCs equipped with double-sided displays. The former approach makes it easier for
individuals to obtain the information they need in a system where it is possible to use tabletop displays and
mobile displays in combination with each other (Doring et al., 2010; Seifert et al., 2012). However, it fails to
address issues such as the drawbacks and high cost of tabletop displays. On the other hand, the Asus Taichi (a
laptop PC that went on sale recently) is equipped with a double-sided full HD IPS display. This offers an
inexpensive way of displaying information on the front (facing the user) and back surfaces of a display, but does
not allow the user to select specific information on the screen and have just this information displayed on the
back surface. This makes it difficult to share information safely.
         The  Inter-Personal   Browsing  system  proposed   in  this paper  tackles these  issues    from a different
viewpoint by employing a simple configuration whereby users install a browser extension on the PCs they use
every day, and they each have their own iPad for use as a public display.

Inter-Personal Browsing
This paper summarizes the Inter-Personal Browsing framework, where private information is kept on the user's
individual PC, while public information that can stimulate discussions in the group work is displayed on a
separate web browser screen. First, after describing the concept of an individualized public display, we present a
detailed discussion of Inter-Personal Browsing.

Individualized public display
When a projector or the like is connected to a PC's external display terminals, it is generally operated either in a
"mirror" mode where the PC's screen (main display) and the shared screen (external sub display) display the
same  content,  of an  "extension"  mode   where they  each  provide   separate displays.  For  example,    if private
information is shown in a mail application and public information is shown in a browser application, then the
content of the mail application would be displayed to others on the shared screen in the mirror mode. Also, in
the extension mode, when a browser is displayed on the shared screen, the user is forced to constantly work
while looking   at the  shared  screen. Instead, this  paper   proposes  a method   where   the mail    and    browser
applications continue to be displayed on the PC screen in the normal way, while a mirror of just the browser
window is displayed on the shared screen. These relationships are summarized in Table 1.

© ISLS                                                                                                           225
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                      Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

                     Table 1 Information presentation concepts in the proposed method

                                         PC screen                                   Shared screen
                                       (Main display)                           (External sub Display)
  Mirror                               Mail, Browser                                 Mail, Browser
  Extension                                Mail                                        Browser
  Proposed method                      Mail, Browser                                   Browser

        In this paper, a shared screen is owned by each individual user. This is called an individualized public
display. By using the individualized public display to show only a mirror of the browser window, users can
check each others work status without having to exercise    restraint, resulting  in group work with   smoother
communication.

System overview
In this paper, we used iPads to implement the individualized public displays discussed above. Figure 2 shows
the configuration of the Inter-Personal Browsing system.
        A user's iPad automatically displays the window of the web browser running on the user's own PC,
and is automatically made available for sharing at the location of the group work. However, as shown in Figure
2(a), this is not implemented as a simple screen copy, but by running a separate browser in the iPad to show the
content of the same URL. Next, as shown in Figure 2(b), an iPad is placed beside each user in addition to the
user's own individual PC so that it can be seen by other users. After making it possible for users to keep track of
each other in this way, the next important requirement is to make it possible for users to interact with the system
in order to transfer information from another user's public display to their own PCs. To allow group work to
proceed smoothly while sharing information, it is important to make it easy for users to transfer pages to their
own PCs where they can view them in more detail without interrupting the work of other users. For this purpose,
we implemented a mechanism whereby a user can use the iPad's touch input functions to receive pages without
anyone else's involvement. Specifically, as shown in Figure 2(c), this is done by touching the other user's
public screen (iPad) while holding down a control key. To implement this function, we require a framework for
specifying the PC of a specific user out of multiple other users. It is also essential that it is implemented in a
way that does not require users to use a specific platform or operating system.

(a) Sharing a URL on an individualized public display           (b) System arrangement

                                      (c)Turning pages by touch input
                        Figure 2 System Configuration of Inter-Personal Browsing

© ISLS                                                                                                     226
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                           Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

System implementation
In this system, mirror displays on iPads and the transfer of information to other users is achieved by transmitting
URLs between the iPads and web browsers. We used browser extensions to allow the system to be used in a
wide range of PCs and operating systems, and we also implemented an iPad application to work with these
extensions. We set up a server to centrally manage the flow of information between PCs and iPads to facilitate
many-to-many communication, and the communication was all routed via this server. The display of web pages
on the iPads was implemented by transmitting a URL to the iPad every time the browser loads a new page. With
a browser extension API, we capture an event whenever a new page is loaded in the browser, whereupon the
URL of the new page is transferred to the iPad. Communication is implemented by HTTP between the browser
and server, and by socket communication (TCP) between the server and iPad. The procedure is as follows.
  (1) Fetch the URL of the web page displayed by the browser.
  (2) This URL is sent to the server, and is transferred from the server to the iPad.
  (3) The same page is then displayed on the iPad.
          The web page transfer function is implemented so that when the receiving user touches the iPad, the
URL displayed by the iPad is transferred to the user's PC. For this to happen, it is necessary to identify which
user touched the iPad. In this paper, as an interaction method for implementing this, we provided a framework
whereby the user holds down the Ctrl key while touching the iPad in order to designate himself or herself as the
receiving party. In this way, it is possible for multiple users to receive information simultaneously with a single
touch operation. The processing procedure is as follows.
  (1) The browser extension is used to report to the server when a Ctrl key is pressed.
  (2) When an iPad is touched, its URL is transmitted to the server.
  (3) The server identifies the users that are pressing their Ctrl keys.
  (4) The URL information is sent from the server to the browsers running on the individual PCs of these users.
  (5) On receiving this URL information, the browsers open the URL in a new tab.
          The browser keypress events are implemented using the browser extension API, and the iPad touch
events are implemented using the iOS API. For the communication of URLs, it is necessary for them to be
transmitted from the server to the clients. In the communication systems currently available in web browsers,
support for server-to-client communication is provided by Comet and WebSocket web technologies. Comet uses
HTTP   communication    to  achieve artificial bidirectional  communication.    Although   WebSocket    is faster and
generates lower server loads, it is still relatively new and its specifications are not yet fixed. We therefore
decided to use Comet in this system.

Verification of concept
To examine    how   the quality of  group   work  is changed   by     using Inter-Personal Browsing    proposed   and
implemented in the above way, we performed group work tests using Inter-Personal Browsing in a lecture
course that we are currently teaching. This lecture course is called "Groupwork of the future - future classroom
technology", and is being taught as part of the 2012­3 masters course at Tokyo University. Its aim is to provide
practical education  in the use of  digital tools and group    work   methodologies,   and  it comprises   13 lessons
targeting 9 undergraduate students.
          The specific  aim of  practical research through    this course   is to use Inter-Personal  Browsing    in a
comparative study to see if it changes the quality of group work with regard to communication and the sharing
of information. For comparison, we also provided group work based on notes written on paper (paper-based
group  work)   and  group   work   using  existing   digital information-sharing    tools  like Google     Documents
(https://www.google.com/intl/en/drive/start/index.html) and Dropbox (https://www.dropbox.com/home) running
on PCs (PC-based group work). The PC-based group work differed from paper-based group work in that it was
able to handle larger quantities of information and made it easier to share resources such as the results of the
group work. However, it also resulted in less communication because the users' attention was directed toward
their computer screens, and it was difficult for them to share work processes. Our study focused mainly on the
issue of whether the introduction of Inter-Personal Browsing, where information can be shared easily with the
browser   window,   causes  any  changes    in  communication      or information   sharing (especially    during the
investigation process). The details of these discussions and our findings are summarized below.

Overview of the proof-of-concept experiment
In this experiment, group work was performed using three different tools, and a combination of behavioral
observation and questionnaires was used to clarify the level of communication activity and the ease with which
information   could be  shared  during the  examination  phase     of the   group work. Since   this experiment   was
performed in tandem with lectures, it was difficult to maintain absolute control over the tasks, and the tasks
performed using each tool were also different. This approach was adopted because our purpose here is to clarify

© ISLS                                                                                                            227
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                     Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

the general feasibility of Inter-Personal Browsing (IPB) through practical experience. The first tool was paper,
and users were given the task of creating a billboard for the Nikkei newspaper. In this task, the users had to
decide which articles were worthy of inclusion, summarize these articles, and create the final layout. This is
called method 1. The second tool was a combination of paper and PCs, and users were given the task of creating
a time-line of a celebrity's career. In this task, it was necessary to determine which aspects of the celebrity's
career should be included in the time-line (e.g., awards won by the celebrity), gather data on the celebrity's
name and active time period, and then assemble this information in a time-line where it can be easily understood.
Here, the PCs were used to access Google Documents as an online document creation tool and Dropbox as an
online storage tool. This is called method 2. The third tool was a combination of paper, PCs and IPB, and users
were given the task of designing the interior of a shared house for female college students. In this task, the users
had to clarify their target residents (which area they live in, what their interests are, etc.), put forward concepts
that these residents might like, create a collection of interior furnishings needed to realize these concepts, and
produce summaries of these concepts together with costs and images. This is called method 3. In each system,
the group work was performed over three sessions of approximately 90 minutes, including time for practice,
presentation, review and so on. The nine students were split into two groups, and the members of these groups
were replaced for each method.
        To  perform   a comparative study  of  the quality of group work  in each of these  methods, we   first
observed  the state of  communication  in each  group  by  having on average  about two  observers  constantly
watching each group. The observers concentrated on group characteristics such as the amount of conversation,
lines of sight and seating arrangements (the students were instructed to arrange the desks and chairs and move
around as much as they wanted in order to facilitate communication). The last ten minutes of the lecture was
designated as a review period in which the students were asked to complete questionnaires. As shown in Table 2,
the questionnaire included two questions where students were asked to reflect on the level of activity in the
discussions. Next, in methods 2 and 3, we used the separate questionnaire shown in Table 3 to compare the ease
of sharing information during the examination phase with and without Inter-Personal Browsing.

Results and discussion

Communication
To examine the effectiveness of communication in the group work, the students in methods 1, 2 and 3 were
asked to complete the two questions shown in Table 2.
        First, with regard to the all questionnaire of Table 2, in methods 1 and 3 the students responded that
they had all actively participated in the group work and that the group itself facilitated active discussions,
suggesting that active communication had taken place. On the other hand, in method 2 where group work was
performed using PCs, some students responded that they had been unable to participate actively in the group
work or play an active role in discussions (38% answered "No" to Q1-1 "Did you actively participate in the
group work?" and 63% answered "No" to Q1-2 "Were there active discussions in your group?"). There were
students who gave this response in each group.
        From photographs of the discussions, we can see that in method 1 (Figure 3(a)), the students took steps
such as moving the desks around so they could speak more easily with the other students, and in method 3:IPB
(Figure 3(c)) they were also seen to lean across the desk while in conversation. The amount of conversation
itself was found to be large. However, in method 2 (Figure 3(b)), the students continued to direct their gaze at
their computer screens even when carrying out the actual work itself, and there was less conversation than in
methods 1 and 3.
          These findings suggest that the use of Inter-Personal Browsing allows for more communication than
existing PC-based group work, and a high level of activity close to that of traditional paper-based group work.

Sharing of information
For a more detailed consideration of the sharing of information in the examination phase of the group work, the
students in methods 2 and 3 were asked to complete the three questions shown in Table 3.
        First, in method 2, most of the students were concerned about what the other students were examining
during the task  (88%   answered "yes" to  Q2-1    "Were  you concerned  about what  the  other students were
examining?"). On the other hand, in the question relating to how students ascertained what the other students
were doing (Q2-2), we received a number of similar responses such as "I just looked at the comments on shared
sheets in Google    Document". Moreover,   in  the question about issues experienced when   sharing  what the
students had examined (Q2-3), we received responses such as: "It was difficult to find out what the other
members were studying, or how much, so I didn't know how far I should go with my own study", "We were all
working at the same time, and ended up studying the same things", "It took longer than I expected to share
things, and it was hard to ascertain straight away what the others were doing". That is, in group work conducted
as in method 2 where information is shared via services such as Google Documents and Dropbox, it is difficult

© ISLS                                                                                                    228
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                  Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

for people to share what they are studying in real time, so people do not know how much progress the others are
making, it is difficult to split tasks up because people are unaware of how much progress the others are making,
and a number of the students felt that the task took longer than it should have. A possible explanation of how
this situation arose is that when people used Google Documents, they were focused on the screen so much that
they did not notice what the others were doing. This would have made it harder to know who had provided each
bit of information, thereby depriving the users of opportunities to talk to each other.
         In method 3, as in method 2, most of the students were concerned about what was being studied by the
other students during the task (88% answered "yes" to Q2-1"Were you concerned about what the other students
were examining?"). In the question relating to how students ascertained what the other students were doing (Q2-
2), we received a number of similar responses, including "When someone found an interesting site, they said so,
and the other members used their iPads to display and assess this site on their own computer screens". Moreover,
in the question about issues experienced when sharing what the students had examined (Q2-3), we received
many responses such as "No, nothing in particular", but there was also a response that pointed out a problem
with the system: "The page sharing sometimes didn't work properly". Consequently, in group work using Inter-
Personal Browsing as    in  method  3, users can share information indirectly  with         one another, and can
communicate verbally if there is something they want to convey to the others or something important they need
to know. It is thus inferred that the students themselves were able to figure out a way of actively participating in
the group work while switching between different channels of communication.

              (a) Method 1: paper                             (b) Method 2: paper & pc           

                                             cMethod 3: IPB
                            Figure 3 The appearance of group work in each method

Table 2 Results from questionnaire 1 (average ratio of participating students who answered affirmatively)
                                        Method 1               Method 2                          Method 3
 Q1-1 Did you activelyparticipate in the group work?100%           63%                            100%
 Q1-2 Were there activediscussions in your group?100%              44%                            100%

© ISLS                                                                                                       229
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                          Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

Table 3 Results from questionnaire 2
                                         Method 1                  Method 2                      Method 3
 Q2-1    Were    you   concerned
 about what the other studentswere examining? --          88% answered "yes".            88% answered "yes".

 Q2-2    How   did you   ascertain                        75%    just  looked   at  the  88%   used   Inter-Personal
 what    the other students were              --          comments on shared sheets      Browsing and taught each
 examining?                                               in Google Documents            other orally.
 Q2-3    Did    you   have    anydifficultysharingwhatyouhad examined?--50% had difficulty findingoutwhattheothermembers were studying.63%didnothavenodifficulty in particular.

Conclusion
We have proposed a framework called Inter-Personal Browsing that facilitates the sharing of information by
displaying a web browser window on an individualized public display, and we have performed a proof-of-
concept test as part of a practical lecture course in group work, in which we performed a comparative study of
group work using this framework and other tools. Our results suggest that the proposed Inter-Personal Browsing
facilitates more active communication than group work using ordinary PCs alone, and allows task processes to
be mutually shared more smoothly. However, the proposed Inter-Personal Browsing still has several issues. For
example, its framework currently only allows web pages to be shown to other users. On the other hand, when
diverse tasks are performed by a group, there may be many other different combinations of applications that
users want to keep private and applications that users would want to show to other people. In the future, we
intend to provide greater freedom in the choice of applications and introduce a framework where users can take
part in group work while diversely switching between information they want to show (public information) and
information they want to keep to themselves (private information).

References
Morris, M. R. (2008). A survey of collaborative web search practices, In Proceeding of the twenty-sixth annual
         CHI conference on Human factors in computing sys- CHI '08, pp1657-1660, Italy
Morris,  M.R.   and   Horvitz, E.   (2007). SearchTogether:    An  Interface   for Collaborative    Web   Search,  In
         Proceedings   of  the 20th    annual ACM     symposium   on   User  interface  software and   technology   -
         UIST '07, pp.3-12, USA
Amershi,   S.  and Morris,  M.R.   (2008).  CoSearch:   A System   for Co-located   Collaborative   Web   Search,  In
         Proceeding   of the  twenty-sixth  annual  CHI   conference  on   Human   factors in  computing  systems   -
         CHI '08, New York, pp.1647-1656, Italy
Morris,   M.R.,  Lombardo,     J.  and  Wigdor,   D.   (2010). WeSearch:     supporting  collaborative   search    and
         sensemaking    on  a  tabletop display,   In Proceedings  of  the  2010   ACM   conference    on Computer
         supported cooperative work - CSCW '10, pp.401-410, USA
Tuddenham, P., Davies, I. and Robinson, P. (2009). WebSurface: An interface for co-located collaborative
         information gathering, Proceedings of the ACM International Conference on Interactive Tabletops and
         Surfaces - ITS '09, pp. 181-188, Canada
Heilig, M., Huber, S., Gerken, J., Demarmels, M., Allmendinger, K., and Reiterer, H. (2011). Hidden details of
         negotiation: the mechanics of reality-based collaboration in information seeking. In INTERACT'11,
         Springer-Verlag, pp.622­639, Berlin
Doring, T., Shirazi, A. S., and Schmidt, A. (2010). Exploring gesture-based interaction techniques in multi-
         display environments with mobile phones and a multi-touch table. In AVI '10, ACM, pp.419­419,
         New York
Seifert, J., Simeone,  A.L.,  Schmidt,  D.,   Reinartz, C., Holleis,  P., Wagner,  M.,   Gellersen, H. and  Rukzio,
         E.MobiSurf    (2012).    Mobi-surf:Improving    Co-located   Collaboration    through Integrating  Mobile
         Devices   and Interactive  Surfaces, In  Proceedings  of  ACM     International Conference   on  Interactive
         Tabletops and Surfaces, pp.51-60, Boston
ASUS  TAICHITM      http://taichi.asus.com/jp/#TEXTURE

© ISLS                                                                                                          230
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                  Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

Acknowledgments
This project is supported by JST  (Japan     Science  and Technology Agency)-CREST      (Core Research   for
Evolutionary Science and  Technology)     project "Harmonized Inter-Personal Display Based on  Position and
Direction Control". We would like to thank Shohei Takei, Tomoko Ohtani, Motohide Hatanak and Yasuaki
Kakehi for helping out with the lectures.

© ISLS                                                                                                  231
