CSCL 2013 Proceedings                  Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

  Individual Grade Allocation in CSCL Writing Tasks: a Case Study
  Buis, S.C.A., J.I. Schoonenboom, and J.J. Beishuizen, VU University Amsterdam, Prof. E.M. Meijerslaan 2,
                                      1183AV Amstelveen, The Netherlands
                    Email: s.buis@vu.nl, judith.schoonenboom@vu.nl, j.j.beishuizen@vu.nl

         Abstract:  The  research  question   of this  case study was:   how    does a teacher take  semi-
         automatically generated   information    on  individual  contributions  to  CL  into  account   in
         grading? To answer this question a teacher assessed students' collaboratively written answers
         to essay questions and allocated grades based on information on individual contributions. The
         study shows that these data affect a teacher's grade allocation, and that they are imperative for
         individual grade allocation.

Introduction
In the assessment of collaborative learning (CL) products, allocating individual grades can be a problematic job
for teachers. The problem is often caused by the fact that teachers have no proper indication of what each
individual student contributed. In many cases the only solution for teachers is to assign group grades. Group
grades however are not the proper answer to this problem. Group grades are not fair, undermine motivation, and
violate individual  accountability (Kagan,    1995).  CSCL   allows   tracking  individual students'  contributions
through log files. This results in information on exactly what each student contributed to CL. Providing this
information to teachers offers a possibility to grade individual students, and avoid group grades. Trentin (2009)
and Khandaker and Soh (2010) both used log files from Wiki's to assess individual contributions to written CL
products, mainly based on the amount of contributions made.
         The focus of the present case study is on how a teacher takes semi-automatically generated information
on the quantity and quality of individual contributions to written CL products into account when allocating
individual grades. By providing the teacher with different levels of information (a summary of quantitative data,
a summary   of  quantitative and  qualitative data, and the  entire  log files) the  following research  question is
answered: How does a teacher take semi-automatically generated information on individual contributions to CL
into account in grading?

Method
Procedure: generation of semi-automated data: The data collection was prepared by collecting collaborative
answers to essay questions and information on individual contributions from 22 students at Applied Psychology
at the Amsterdam University of Applied Sciences (AUAS). The students were randomly assigned to six groups
of either three or four students. Etherpads (web-based collaborative real-time text editors with chat function and
a possibility to produce log files) were used in all groups for CSCL. Data on what each student contributed to
both chat  and  the collaborative  answer   were  automatically   generated  in  the  Etherpad  log  files. Students
communicated through their Etherpads only, so that all communication was monitored. To encourage students'
effort, gift certificates of 7.50 euro for each student in the best group and a single gift certificate of 20 euro for
the best individual student were awarded. The student data was then analyzed and prepared manually.
         A teacher had composed the essay questions and a scoring scheme for students' answers, and was
asked to score each collaborative answer (CA score) to the essay questions for all the groups with this scheme
on a 10-point scale. In this assessment the teacher was not aware of the log files, and therefore did not have any
information on individual contributions. The teacher also marked in the collaborative answer which text parts
she considered insufficient (I), moderate (M), sufficient (S) or good (G).
         Charts on  individual   data  were   prepared by   the researcher. One   chart  displayed   the number   of
contributions to the chat and the collaborative answer per student, and the amount of words contributed to the
chat and the collaborative answer. A second chart displayed which amount of contributions to the chat the
researcher had  classified as  either: `content  related'   (dealing with  the  question's subject), `coordinative'
(contributing to the answering process), or `remaining' (not contributing to either content or coordination). A
third chart displayed per student: the number of times text is deleted and the number of words deleted; and the
number of words in the collaborative answer. Data on the quality of individual contributions was presented in
two more charts. For this, the data of each student's contributions to the collaborative answer from the log files
were matched with the teacher's mark per student (I/M/S/G). This resulted in charts indicating the scored quality
of each student's contributions.
         Procedure: assessment by the teacher: In three rounds the teacher (35 yrs, female), who had been
teaching  for 5  years at  AUAS,      was provided    with  the  collaborative  answers,   and data  on   individual
contributions. She was asked to allocate grades to individual students when she thought suitable. The three
rounds consisted of: 1. assessment based on charts with data on the quantity of contributions per student; 2.

© ISLS                                                                                                          225
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                  Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

assessment   based on   the entire collaborative process  through   viewing the   log  files  and  the chat; and  3.
assessment based on charts with data on the quality of the individual contributions. In all rounds data of the
previous rounds were available.

Data collection: Data was collected in semi structured interviews with the teacher. After each round allocated
grades were registered and the teacher was asked to explain how she had derived grades based on the sets of
semi-automatically generated data on individual contributions, whether the information provided was adequate
for allocating individual grades,  and whether   she could  justify the grades   to students.  The  interviews were
videotaped, and participation was voluntary.

Data analysis: Changes in grades given by the teacher were analyzed. Her justification of individual grade
allocation was analyzed qualitatively.

Results
The teacher adjusted grades from 14 out of 22 students in the final round compared to the CA scores. For 6
students she adjusted grades from six or higher to lower than six. In a real exam this would be the difference
between passing or failing a course. The grades allocated by the teacher are found in table 1.

Table 1: Scores on a 10-point scale per student.

                   Group 1          Group 2           Group 3       Group 4         Group 5            Group 6
 Student           A   B    C  D    E   F    G   H    I   J   K     L    M     N    O  P     Q    R    S  T    U  V
 CA score                6                3               7              5               7                   7
 Quantity          2   4    6  4    3   3    3   3    7   7   7     5    3     3    7  6     6    6    6  6    9  9
 Log files andchat 2   3    6  4    3   3    3   3    7   7   7     5    3     2    7  5     7    6    6  5    7  9
 Quality           2   3    6  4    3   3    2   1    5   7   6     5    3     2    7  5     7    6    6  5    7  9

          In the grading process the teacher was convinced that individual students could not score higher than
the CA score. She also stated that individual grades were derived by subtracting points from the grade for the
CA score when students obviously contributed less then peers, or when a good deal of the contributions were
rated insufficient. She said she thought information adequate for individual grade allocation and that grades
were justifiable. It should be noted that in groups 5 and 6 the teacher received the information on the quality of
the individual contributions before she received information from the log files and chat. The teacher stated that
viewing the log files and the chats did not give her reasons to allocate new grades compared to the grades based
on the information about the quality of the individual contributions. The information on the quantity and quality
of the individual contributions, however, she found imperative. The teacher also stated that the plain text round
is necessary for assessing the collaborative answer, and determine the quality of text parts.

Discussion and Conclusion
The teacher did take semi-automatically generated information on individual contributions to CL into account in
her grade allocation. The teacher did prove to be able to allocate individual grades and felt grades could be
justified to students. Whether  other  teachers  can use information  on   the quantity and    quality of individual
contributions for individual grade allocation should be studied in future research.

References
Khandaker, N., Soh, L.-K. (2010). ClassroomWiki: A Collaborative Wiki for Instructional Use with Multiagent
          Group Formation. IEEE Transactions on Learning Technologies, 3 (3), 190-202.
Slavin, R.E. (1980). Cooperative learning. Review of Educational Research, 50(2), 315-42.
S. Kagan, "Group Grades Miss the Mark," Educational Leadership, vol. 52, no. 8, pp. 68-71, 1995.
Trentin, G. (2009). Using a wiki to evaluate individual contribution to a collaborative learning project. Journal
          of Computer Assisted Learning, 25 (1), 43-55.

© ISLS                                                                                                          226
