CSCL 2013 Proceedings                      Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

Towards Group Cognitive Analysis of Collaborative Learning with
                    Eye-Tracking and Brain Imaging Technologies
        Murat Perit Çakir, METU Informatics Institute, Department of Cognitive Science, Ankara, Turkey
                                                     perit@metu.edu.tr

         Abstract:    This  paper   aims   to motivate   the  need   for  a  group   cognitive approach      for the
         multimodal    analysis   of   learning   to  better  account    for   neural   and  ocular   correlates  of
         collaborative   learning.  In reference     to related work    in  the emerging     fields  of two-person
         neuroscience and dual-eye tracking, the paper argues for the need for moving from a single-
         mind perspective to a group cognitive perspective where neural and ocular correlates of joint
         meaning making are investigated in the context of sequentially unfolding social interaction.

Learning spans a continuum across individual and social scales. At the individual level, learning encompasses
cognitive and behavioral changes exhibited by an individual as well as neurobiological changes triggered within
an organism. At the social level, learning is encapsulated in the dynamics of interaction among collectivities,
and embodied in the practices and knowledge artifacts of a community. Such levels of analysis have been of
interest to   multiple   disciplines   including  cognitive     neuroscience,      cognitive  science,   learning    sciences,
psychology, sociolinguistics and cultural anthropology. However, differences among the conceptual frameworks
employed by these disciplines make connecting levels of analysis a challenging task.
         CSCL is a growing discipline within learning sciences that treats learning as a fundamentally social
phenomenon. A distinctive aspect of the CSCL community is its collective interest in designing and analyzing
technologies for supporting learning at both small group and communal levels. Therefore, CSCL environments
are perspicuous settings to capture and analyze learning interactions at multiple temporal and social scales
(Dyke et al., 2011). The discussions for connecting levels of analysis in CSCL naturally revolve around how
one can coordinate findings across the individual, small group and community levels. One particular proposal in
that regard  involves  focusing     on the  small    group   unit of  analysis  as   a  mediator    between   individual  and
communal levels of analysis, which requires close attention to the social mechanisms through which participants
organize their interaction by coordinating bodily, representational and linguistic resources (Stahl, 2010).
         Recent advances in technology have led to the development of more portable and affordable brain
imaging and eye tracking tools, which offer new opportunities to observe the coordination among brain and eye-
gaze activity of dyads during joint action. However, with the exception of a few cases, both eye tracking and
neuro-imaging    studies have   traditionally  focused    on  the  individual   unit   of  analysis,  which   often  makes it
challenging to make sense of the neural and ocular patterns observed during learning experiments. This paper
provides  a brief   overview  of  some     of the key    findings  of   such   studies  to illustrate how    learning related
phenomena is studied with the help of these modalities. Then, based on a discussion of some of the limitations
of the individualistic approach, the paper argues for the need to move from a single-mind perspective to a group
cognitive perspective to better capture and make sense of ocular and neural correlates of learning.
         Existing brain imaging methods allow the monitoring of the human brain through changes in electrical
potentials (EEG), magnetic fields (MEG) and cerebral blood oxygenation (fMRI, PET, DTI, fNIRS) induced by
neural activity. Each imaging modality has pros and cons in terms of the temporal and spatial resolution of the
images obtained, the need for invasive interventions, sources of artifacts that hinder the detection of cognitive
effects, portability, equipment     cost  and  ecological   validity  of  the  circumstances   where     the  images  can  be
obtained.  Due   to such   factors,  neuro-imaging      modalities have    been    predominantly     deployed  in   controlled
experimental settings to investigate neural correlates of learning at the individual level (Haier et al., 2009). Such
studies  typically  involve  longitudinal     designs   where   improved    behavioral     performance   is  correlated  with
functional and anatomical changes observed in the individual's brain. The results point out that the human brain
is extremely good at adapting itself in response to cognitive demands originated from the task environment by
utilizing its neural resources in an increasingly efficient way as a consequence of learning. Despite individual
differences, cortical areas that respond to specific cognitive processes are distributed in a fairly uniform way. In
addition to areas that selectively respond to specific kinds of cognitive processes, some brain regions can be
shared among multiple types of cognitive tasks. Such empirical insights allow us to develop better theories
regarding the functional organization of the brain and the nature of the cognitive processes realized by it.
         Individual   level  analysis  in  controlled   labs has  contributed   to   our   understanding  of  the   functional
organization of the brain as well as the nature and the limits of its plasticity in important ways. However, some
of the   most important     influences   that the brain    adapts  itself   to  are  of  socio-cultural  nature,  which   are
systematically eliminated    in the    lab setting.  For  instance,   acquiring    a  language  and     engaging  with  other
individuals fundamentally    shape    not  only  the    way  we   think and    act in  the  world,  but  also the   functional
organization  of  the  brain (Dehaene,     2009). Such    factors  have    motivated    the need    for moving   beyond   the

© ISLS                                                                                                                   227
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                    Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

individual  unit of  analysis in  cognitive   neuroscience.   Hasson   et  al.'s (2012) fMRI    study   on brain-to-brain
coupling exemplifies this recent analytical shift in the field, where they compared asynchronous scans of a
speaker telling an unscripted story and speakers listening to the same story. Hasson et al. found that even though
dyads were not engaged in simultaneous conversation, the speaker's and the listeners' brain activities at their
language centers got in synch when the listener genuinely followed what had been said in the recorded speech.
Recent work    employed   simultaneous     scans of  two  interlocutors   with   portable  imaging  tools  such   as EEG
(Dumas et al., 2012) and fNIRS (Cui et al., 2012), where increasing levels of neural coupling were observed at
pre-motor and pre-frontal areas during collaborative tasks such as imitating hand gestures and finger tapping
rhythms. Coupling measures such as Granger causality, wavelet coherence and Kuramoto's synchronization
model of complex oscillators are used to detect the strength and the temporal course of coupling among dyads
induced by collaborative action, albeit in relatively simple tasks due to analytic challenges.
         Similar to most brain imaging studies, eye-tracking research has also considered the individual as the
primary unit of analysis. In the context of learning sciences, multimedia learning has been one of the most
important   applications of eye-tracking   research.   Such   studies often control    for the  content  and  the pace  of
instructional materials, measure    eye   fixations to identify  what   parts  of  the interface learners  allocate  their
attention to, and finally relate these measures to learning outcomes to identify which presentation strategies
work better. Since fixation sequences by themselves do not reveal what subjects are thinking or whether they
are  really paying   attention, think-aloud   protocols   are often   employed    to  interpret the fixation   sequences.
However,    learning  to see    relevant visual  structures   at a   scene and    to  associate  them    with  appropriate
terminology are also socially shaped processes (Goodwin, 1994), so think-aloud alone is not sufficient to study
the relation between learning and eye-fixations. Therefore, a similar argument for switching to the small group
unit of analysis can be made for the eye-tracking paradigm as well. The decreasing cost of desktop and mobile
eye-trackers have made it practical to track the eye gaze of multiple subjects simultaneously while they are
collaborating  on a  shared   task (Nussli  &   Jermann,  2012).     The  degree  of   cross-recurrence   among   fixation
sequences of interlocutors provides researchers useful information regarding to what extent the participants can
mutually orient to each other and to the objects in their shared scene.
         The  review  of  recent   studies in brain  imaging     and  eye  tracking  research   indicate that  there is an
increasing interest in transcending the individual unit of analysis in an effort to better make sense of neural and
ocular correlates of learning. Existing studies that employ the dual brain imaging and eye tracking paradigms
focus on devising quantitative metrics that reveal the degree of coupling among dyads to predict the quality or
effectiveness  of collaboration,   without    necessarily focusing    on   the   micro-level   details of  the sequential
organization of actions/utterances through which dyads achieve joint attention, coordinated action and shared
understanding.   Employing    a  group   cognitive  perspective    is necessary    to  build a  unified   account  of   the
interrelationships among the socio-cultural, ocular and neural aspects of collaborative learning. Because the
participants naturally articulate their reasoning and respond to each other in collaborative settings, small group
level of analysis provides a perspicuous setting to investigate the relationship between what participants do
together, where they allocate their attention and how their brains respond to the socio-cultural influences. On the
one hand, by focusing on the organization of the interaction, one can better make sense of how brain-to-brain
coupling is modulated while peers coordinate their actions to achieve shared understanding. On the other hand,
insights obtained from eye-tracking and neuro-imaging modalities can shed further light into how collaborative
learning shapes an individual's cognitive processes.

References
Cui, X., Bryant,   D. M.  &     Reiss, A.  L. (2012).  NIRS-based     hyperscanning     reveals  increased  interpersonal
         coherence in superior frontal cortex during cooperation. Neuroimage 59, 2430-2437.
Dehaene, S. (2009). Reading in the brain: The new science of how we read. New York, NY: Pengiun.
Dumas, G., Chavez, M., Nadel, J. & Martinerie, J. (2012). Anatomical connectivity influences both intra- and
         inter- brain synchronizations. PLoS ONE, 7(5) e36414.
Dyke, G., Lund, K., Jeong, H., et al. (2011). Technological affordances for productive multivocality in analysis.
         Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on CSCL (pp. 454-461). Hong Kong: ISLS.
Goodwin, C. (1994). Professional Vision. American Anthropologist, 96(3), 606-633.
Haier, R. J., Karama, S., et al. (2009). MRI assessment of cortical thickness and functional activity changes in
         adolescent girls following 3 months of practice on a visual-spatial task. BMC Research Notes, 2(174).
Hasson, U., Ghazanfar, A. A., Galantucci, B., Garrod, S., & Keysers, C. (2012). Brain-to-brain coupling: A
         mechanism for creating and sharing a social world. Trends in Cognitive Science, 16(2), 114-121.
Nüssli, M., & Jermann, P. (2012). Effects of sharing text selections on gaze cross-recurrence and interaction
         quality in a pair programming task Proceedings of the CSCW 2012 (pp. 1125-1134). New York: ACM.
Stahl, G. (2010). Group Cognition as a Foundation for the New Science of Learning. In M. S. Khine & I. M.
         Saleh (Eds.), New Science of Learning (pp. 23-44). New York, NY: Springer.

© ISLS                                                                                                                228
