CSCL 2013 Proceedings              Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

                  DALITE: Bringing "peer-instruction" online
Elizabeth S. Charles, Chris Whittaker, Sameer Bhatnagar, Dawson College, 3040 de Maisonneuve W., Canada,
   Email: echarles@dawsoncollege.qc.ca, cwhittaker@dawsoncollege.ca, sbhatnagar@dawsoncollege.qc.ca
           Michael Dugdale, Nathaniel Lasry, John Abbot College, 21275 Rue Lakeshore, Canada,
                     Email: michael.dugdale@johnabbott.qc.ca; lasry@johnabbott.qc.ca
                  Kevin Lenton, Vanier College, 821 Sainte-Croix, Montreal, QC H4L 3X9
                                   Email: lentonk@vaniercollege.qc.ca>

       Abstract: Approaches such as Peer Instruction (PI) have resulted in improved conceptual
       understanding. PI engages students in discussion at the conceptual level and focuses their
       attention  on explanation and reflection.  The Distributed  Active    Learning  and Interactive
       Technology    Environment  (DALITE)     is a virtual  learning environment,    conceived  from
       principles of PI. We report on this design-experiment and the ongoing efforts to improve
       DALITE's functionality for instructors as well as its impact on student's conceptual learning.

Introduction
Approaches such as Peer Instruction (PI; Mazur, 1997) have resulted in improved conceptual understanding of
physics (Crouch & Mazur, 2001). PI engages students in discussion at the conceptual level and focuses on
student's deep understanding by requiring them to engage in a form of reciprocal teaching (Palincsar  & Brown,
1984) and by explaining and reflecting on their understanding. Specifically, those conceptual understandings
that require restructuring of certain beliefs and ideas because they are not consistent with the canonical (i.e.,
normative) explanations of   phenomena ­ i.e.,    conceptual change   (e.g., diSessa,  2006). Such   intentional
reflection is believed to facilitate conceptual change (Sinatra & Pintrich, 2003). In doing so, at the deepest
levels, PI requires students to compare their understanding to the explanation and arguments put forward by
other students. Additionally, it distributes to students the responsibility of arriving at criteria and standards for
what is a good explanation or argument, compared to normative ways of thinking within the discipline.
     PI has a history of being used extensively in post-secondary lecture halls with hundreds of students and
dozens of teaching assistants who facilitate the types of discussions that can arise from diverse answers and
points of view. When there is less support, as is the case in smaller classrooms or when students are at home, PI
has not been seen as an option. Starting with the premise that the strength of PI, as an instructional approach, is
the intellectual engagement described above, the challenge was to recreate these benefits for instances outside of
the typical large classroom scenarios. Our solution was to design an online asynchronous system modeled on the
PI approach, which also draws on what we know about conceptual change. We call this system the Distributed
Active Learning and Interactive Technology Environment (DALITE). In this poster we will address what was
learned from the first full implementation of the system, the data collected and how they are guiding the next
design iteration. The overarching question guiding this design-experiment (Brown, 1992) is how do we design a
system to engage students in meaningful reflection and understanding of the principles and the networks of
concepts that are fundamental to understanding science at the post-secondary level.

What is DALITE?
DALITE is an asynchronous virtual environment that engages students in thinking and producing deeper levels
of understanding in science. It maintains a social context while scaffolding a variety of cognitive processes
including, categorization or sorting, comparison and evaluation, and linking of concepts and principles through
knowledge mapping. Throughout, students are encouraged to engage in reflective and metacognitive processes
that involve writing their explanations, reviewing their work as well as that of others, and exploring links and
connections between concepts. Additionally, it provides support for motivational processes through the feature
of showing the work of peers and asking for students to actively contribute to the database. A typical DALITE
script can be summarized by the following TARR flow:
   ·   (T)ag question
   ·   (A)nswer question
   ·   (R)ationalize answer
   ·   (R)ethink answer in light of competing answer/rationale combinations

     Specifically, students are presented with a multiple-choice question; before answering the questions,
students are asked first to choose appropriate concept (T)ags that help to categorize the question. They then
proceed to the selection of an (A)nswer and asked to provide a (R)ationale for their answer. At that point they
are presented with their answer choice, their rationale, and other possible rationales for this answer choice. This
is all juxtaposed with another answer choice, and rationales for that other answer choice for the (R)ethink stage.

© ISLS                                                                                                    229
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                  Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

If their answer is incorrect, they are presented with rationales for the correct answer as well as their incorrect
answer; the aim of this comparison is to present the contrast and cognitive dissonance of traditional PI. If their
answer is correct, they are presented with rationales for the correct and the most popular wrong answer; the aim
of this comparison is to test for fragile understanding or lucky guessing. Students are then asked to re-choose an
answer for the original question: either their original answer, or the other answer that was just presented to them,
based on the reading of these rationales. Lastly, they are presented with a normative rationale of an expert, but
are not given "the" answer; the aim of this decision being to delay feedback and increase self-regulation of
criteria and standards.

Methods
This study uses a design-experiment methodology. In this particular instantiation, DALITE was implemented as
a tool to deliver  homework      assignments  (pre-instruction and post-instruction).  Participants were    first year
science majors, ages 17-19, enrolled in one of five sections of an introductory physics course at one of three
Anglophone colleges in Quebec. The pretest scores on the standardized physics concept questionnaire, the Force
Concept Inventory (FCI), were used to compare between sections. There were five teachers, each taught a
different section. All sections used DALITE in addition to regular course homework assignments. Efforts made
to maintain equivalences across pedagogical approaches included weekly group meetings between researchers
and teachers. The FCI posttests, along with other qualitative measures, were also collected. The process of
reiterative improvement is based on the data collected by DALITE's database ­ answers, rationales and tags.

Results
General  results and  student feedback  are   encouraging.  However,  to   address our research   question  we    look
closely at three data sets: (1) the frequency and nature of students' change from incorrect to correct answers, (2)
the quality of their rationales and peers' rationales, and, (3) the degree to which the selected tags were able to
discriminate between correct and incorrect answers. Data set one: shows that when used as a pre-instruction the
students  were  more  likely  to gain positively from  the  exercise of  reading   rationales. When    used as    post-
instruction, there was a smaller impact. Implications for the next iteration: the difficulty level of the questions
needs to be more carefully tailored to the timing of the assignment; and, when used as post-instruction students
are less willing  to change   to the  correct answers after  reading correct  rationales. The   latter needs further
investigation. Data  set two:  we  have begun    a content  analysis of  the rationales,  identifying  five different
categories. Design implications are to sort rationales into categories and build a heuristic that identifies when
and if they are used as part of the database. Data set three: the analysis of tags show they are not discriminating
sufficiently between correct and incorrect answers. Design implications: involve greater emphasis on the in-
class working with the tags including their use in concept mapping activities. This modification is currently
being implemented.

Discussion
Overall the PI features of DALITE are promising. However, the data from the first implication have pointed to
several important changes for the next iteration. Most important among these related to the tags. Currently the
tags reflect concepts and essential features of the problem. Future work will examine the levels of granularity
and a possible reconceptualization with a focus on tags representing "interactions" ­ e.g., elements of a System
Interaction Models (SIM) approach (see the work of David E. Pritchard at MIT).

References
Brown,   A.L.  (1992).  Design   experiments:  Theoretical  and  methodological    challenges  in creating  complex
       interventions in classroom settings. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 2(2), 141-178.
Crouch, C., & Mazur, E. (2001). Peer Instruction: Ten years of experience and results. American Journal of
       Physics, 69(9), 970-977.
diSessa, A. A. (2006). A history of conceptual change research: Threads and fault lines. In R. K. Sawyer (Ed.),
       Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences (pp. 265-282). New York: Cambridge.
Mazur, E. (1997). Peer instruction: a user's manual. Upper Saddle River, N.J.: Prentice Hall.
Palincsar, A.S. & Brown, A.L. (1984). Reciprocal teaching of comprehension monitoring activities. Cognition
       and Instruction, 1, 117-175.
Sinatra, G. M., & Pintrich, P. R. (2003). The role of intentions in conceptual change learning. In G. M. Sinatra
       & P. R. Pintrich (Eds.), Intentional conceptual change (pp. 1-18). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.

Aknowledgements
We  thank  the  software  designers  <Edu.8.ca>  for  their contributions. Funding   provided   by  grants  from   the
Ministere de l'Education (MELS & MESRST), Quebec; (Chantier 3/SALTISE ; PAREA PA2011-06).

© ISLS                                                                                                            230
