CSCL 2013 Proceedings                  Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

 Promisingness Judgments as Facilitators of Knowledge Building
              Bodong Chen, Marlene Scardamalia, Alisa Acosta, Monica Resendes, Derya Kici
                   OISE/University of Toronto, 252 Bloor Street West, Toronto, ON, Canada
        Email: bodong.chen@utoronto.ca, marlene.scardamalia@utoronto.ca, alisa_acosta@yahoo.ca,
                          monica.resendes@utoronto.ca, deryakici@mail.utoronto.ca

        Abstract:   Knowledge    creation  depends  on  pursuit of   promising  possibilities.  This  paper
        reports a case study of a graduate-level course, with promisingness judgments incorporated as
        an explicit goal of course work. The top-level goal for the course was to have students take
        collective  responsibility for  "the creation  of   an assessment  of   collaborative    knowledge
        creation." This paper presents the pedagogical design of the course, describes technological
        affordances to support promisingness judgments, and discusses preliminary findings.

Promisingness Judgments in Knowledge Building
Whether it is industrial designers  working   on a  new    product, scientists planning   th e next experiment in a
research program, or policy-makers planning social legislation, decisions must be made about the investment of
resources and effort in further development of ideas. "Ideas are the easy part," says a high-profile design group
(Fahrenheit 212, 2010), noting that ideas are usually in abundant supply. Going from an initial idea to an
innovation, however, requires time and effort, and calls for evaluation about the potential fruitfulness of ideas in
an uncertain future. Bereiter and Scardamalia (1993) refer to such evaluations as "promisingness judgments"
and have argued that they play an essential role in creative expertise. In explaining creative processes, Gardner
(1994) also describes the process of identifying promising ideas as bringing out "discrepant elements" and
making the richness of select ideas evident. According to prior research, judgments of promisingness pervade
creativity and decision-making of all kinds (e.g., de Groot, 1978; Dunbar, 1995).
        Knowledge-building     communities   are  characterized  by  a  focus   on  problem    solving that  requires
knowledge advancement through dynamic intellectual collaboration among community members (Scardamalia
& Bereiter, 2003). Community members work within a framework of shared goals where contributions to the
community knowledge space produce idea diversity and consequent need to select promising ideas and solution
paths. The shared goals that frame the work are themselves emergents of the process, with effectiveness of the
chosen solution path dependent on ongoing evaluation of new information and possibilities. Previous research
has found  promisingness  judgments    contributing to knowledge     advancement    in a  Grade   3 science  context
(Chen, Scardamalia, Resendes, Chuy & Bereiter, 2012). This study explores pedagogical and technological
designs to support work in a graduate-level knowledge-building course and investigates how promisingness
judgments might be incorporated more explicitly to enhance knowledge-building processes.

Method
The  study reported is part of a   larger program  of design   research  (Collins, Joseph  &    Bielaczyc, 2004) on
promisingness  judgments    with   the goal  of  developing    pedagogical     and technological    "promisingness"
innovations to facilitate Knowledge Building. The goal of this particular case study (Yin, 2011) was to gain
greater understanding of the dynamics of promisingness by making the process more explicit to participants and
engaging them in a knowledge building enterprise in which the shared goal represented a significant knowledge
building challenge for all--including the instructor. The case was a 12-week graduate seminar at the University
of Toronto--one professor, 15 graduate students from the faculty of education. Students were from diverse
academic and cultural backgrounds, with varied experience and expertise in education.

Design of the Learning Environment
The knowledge-building goal for the course was "the creation of an assessment of collaborative knowledge
creation." Achieving this goal required students to understand relevant literature and generate novel solutions.
Reading and discussion were not focused on individual comprehension of articles but on collective advances in
understanding the literature and generating novel solutions.
        To facilitate this process the instructor and students subdivided their community knowledge space into
seven interlinked  areas of specialization:  "Intellectual engagement,"   "Sustained   creative  work  with  ideas,"
"Concept development," "Social dynamics," "Explanatory coherence," "Reflection, metacognition, collective
responsibility," and "Epistemic agency." These were further linked to the top-level community space titled
"assessment of collaborative knowledge creation." Students worked in a select area of specialization; they and
the professor were  all  responsible   for reviewing   contributions  to each   area   of specialization,  achieving
coherence, and advancing top-level goals throughout the 12 weeks of the course.
        The   pedagogical   and  technological   design    incorporated  promisingness    judgments    as  a central

© ISLS                                                                                                         231
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                  Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

component.   The  technology, Knowledge     Forum (KF,   Scardamalia,  2004)    was   used to support knowledge-
building discourse surrounding readings and to enter ideas generated during class discussion. In both the face-
to-face and online discussions, an explicit effort was made to connect ideas from the literature, from students'
areas of specialization, and to reflect on how advances in areas of specialization contributed to breakthroughs
with respect to the top-level goal of creating an assessment of collaborative knowledge creation. To further
promote  idea improvement,    students were  encouraged  to  use a   list of expert   vocabulary to  monitor  their
understanding  of key  concepts  and   to provide constructive criticism     of each  other's contributions. Most
significantly with respect to the current research, a "Promising Ideas" tool was integrated into KF (see Chen, et
al., 2012). Students used this to highlight promising ideas in their notes and, if they wished, send them to one of
the seven areas of specialization. In this manner, connections were constantly made between the literature, areas
of specialization, and the top-level goal, with focus on identifying and refining most promising ideas.
         Data were collected over the 12-week term of the course (total 606 KF notes written, 209 promising
ideas selected). In this article we focus on promisingness judgments integral to course work and the extent to
which they represented quality judgments, as assessed through independent assessments of promising ideas.

Results and Future Work
Temporal analysis showed consistent occurrences of promisingness judgments throughout the course. While
some students endeavored to identify promising ideas on a regular basis, others did so during select, intensive
periods of work.
         To investigate whether judgments of promisingness made by students were of high quality, we rated all
notes contributed by  students  using  four different rating scales: idea    development,   constructive criticism,
authoritative source information, and promisingness. We compared quality ratings of "promisingness" between
two groups of notes: (a) notes containing no idea selected as promising versus (b) notes with at least one idea
selected as promising. An independent sample t-test indicated a significant difference between these two groups
of notes, t(109) = -2.48, p = .01. Mean promisingness scores of notes with promising ideas (M = 4.70, SD =
1.68) was about 0.6 higher than those without promising ideas identified within (M = 4.11, SD = 1.69). Similar
comparisons were conducted on the other three quality ratings. Significant difference for idea development was
found (t(114) = -2.73, p < .01), but not for constructive criticism or authoritative source information. These
results indicated that students' promisingness judgments made throughout their work in the course served to
focus on ideas independently judged as more promising and with greater idea development.
         Future work will focus on tracing the growth of ideas in notes rated as "promising" versus those not
selected. We will (a) analyze user actions with the notes (e.g., build on, reference, export to new context); (b)
study the evolution of ideas selected as promising compared to a randomly sampled subset not selected, and (c)
tell the story of expansion, redirection, and spread of ideas in these different sets. We will further enhance the
Promising Ideas tool to keep ideas on a promising course, as well as foster community knowledge--a principle
underlying Knowledge Building. This study contributes to a broader program of research of understanding
creative processes and exploring possibilities for schools to operate as knowledge-creating organizations.

References
Bereiter, C., & Scardamalia, M. (1993). Surpassing ourselves: an inquiry into the nature and implications of
         expertise. Open Court.
Chen, B., Scardamalia, M., Resendes, M., Chuy, M., & Bereiter, C. (2012). Students' intuitive understanding of
         promisingness and promisingness judgments to facilitate knowledge advancement. In J. van Aalst, K.
         Thompson, M. J. Jacobson, & P. Reimann (Eds.), The future of learning: Proceedings of the 10th
         international conference of the learning sciences (ICLS 2012) -- Volume 1, Full Papers (pp. 111­118).
         Sydney, Australia: ISLS.
Collins, A., Joseph, D.,  & Bielaczyc,  K.  (2004). Design   Research:    Theoretical and  Methodological  Issues.
         Journal of the Learning Sciences, 13(1), 15­42.
Dunbar, K. N. (1995). How scientists really reason: Scientific reasoning in real-world laboratories. In R. J.
         Sternberg & J. Davidson (Eds.), The Nature of Insight (pp. 365­395). MIT Press.
Fahrenheit 212. (2010, February). Ideas Are the Easy Part. Retrieved from http://www.fahrenheit-212.com/
Gardner, H. (1994). More on private intuitions and public symbol systems. Creativity Research Journal, 7(3-4),
         265­275. doi:10.1080/10400419409534534
Policastro, E. (1995). Creative Intuition: An Integrative Review. Creativity Research Journal, 8(2), 99­113.
Scardamalia,  M.  (2004). CSILE/Knowledge    Forum.   In A.  Kovalchick    &    K. Dawson   (Eds.), Education and
         technology: An encyclopedia (pp. 183­192). Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO.
Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (2003). Knowledge building. In J. W. Guthrie (Ed.), Encyclopedia of education
         (2nd ed., Vol. 17, pp. 1370­1373). New York, NY: Macmillan Reference.
Yin, R. K. (2011). Applications of case study research (Vol. 34). Sage Publications, Incorporated.
de Groot, A. (1978). Thought and Choice in Chess (2nd ed.). The Hague, The Netherlands: Mouton De Gruyter.

© ISLS                                                                                                        232
