CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                               Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

   Learner-Support Agents for Collaborative Interaction: A Study on
                            Affect and Communication Channels
    Yugo Hayashi, University of Tsukuba, Faculty of Library, Information and Media Science, 1-2, Kasuga,
                       Tsukuba, Ibaraki, 305-8550, Japan, hayashi.yugo.gp@u.tsukuba.ac.jp

           Abstract:   This study   investigated   if and  how    a   conversational   agent   facilitates better
           explanations from   students   in a   computer-based   collaborative     activity. Pairs   of students
           enrolled in a psychology course performed a task where they attempted to explain to their
           partners the meanings of technical psychological terms. During the task, they interacted with
           an affect-based  conversational    agent,  which     was   programmed    to  provide   back-channel
           feedback  and   metacognitive   suggestions    through   visual and/or   audio     output. The   study
           compared students' performance after using this agent with their performance after using an
           agent without audio output or affective expressions. Our findings suggested that the use of
           multiple   communication       channels    for  feedback     facilitates    collaborative     learners'
           understanding of concepts. This provides implications for designing pedagogical agents for
           effective collaboration.

Introduction
Past studies on collaborative problem solving in cognitive science have revealed how concepts are understood
or  learned   through  interaction. Researchers  have   shown    that asking  reflective   questions  for  clarification  to
conversational partners is an effective interactional strategy to better understand a problem or concept (e.g., Chi,
Bassok, Lewis, Reimann, & Glaser, 1989; Miyake, 1986; Okada & Simon, 1997; Salomon, 2001). The use of
strategic  utterances  such as  asking   for explanations   or  providing  suggestions     has  been  found   to  stimulate
reflective thinking and metacognition involved in understanding concepts. Playing different roles during an
explanation could also help problem solvers construct external representations and develop their understanding
of concepts (Shirouzu, Miyake, & Masukawa, 2002). These studies suggest that one's ability to explain is key to
understanding and learning concepts. However, effective explanation often fails if retrieving and associating
relevant   knowledge   required for  the  explanation  is  difficult. These   difficulties typically  rise among     novice
problem    solvers  (Coleman,  1998;  King,   1994).  Additionally,   people    cannot learn   effectively if they   cannot
communicate fluently with each other, such as when they have little conversation experience or have conflicting
perspectives (Hayashi & Miwa, 2009).
           One way to help collaborative problem solvers could be introducing a third-party facilitator who could
provide    suggestions  or  back-channels.    An  important     breakthrough    has been   the  use   of   computer-based
technology, such as pedagogical conversational agents, for this purpose. Pedagogical agents can serve not only
as multimedia extensions, but also as social entities that become learning companions (Moreno & Mayer, 2002).
The  present   study  investigated  the  use  of pedagogical    conversational   agents  that  could   facilitate   effective
explanations.

Pedagogical conversational agents as learning advisers

The effects of affective feedback
Recently,   studies have   shown    that conversational   agents that  act as   educational   companions    or tutors   can
facilitate learning   (Baylor  &    Kim,   2005;   Holmes,   2007).    Many     computer-based    tutoring    systems   use
conversational agents (Graesser & McNamara, 2010), but it is not fully understood what kinds of support from
such agents could improve collaborative learners' performance. Collaborative activities are difficult, especially
for new    learners who  are  not   used  to expressing   their thoughts   or understanding    others'   viewpoints.   It is
assumed that learners would have high cognitive loads during explanation, and paying attention to both their
partners and third parties (computer agent) could be too difficult. Holmes (2007) indicated that learning pairs
ignored the presence of an agent and conducted the learning activities on their own. Therefore, investigating
how  to    design  and  use pedagogical    agents  for  effective   enhancement     of collaborative     activities is very
important. These agents should be designed using concepts based on human collaborative activities. One point
that must be considered in studies of human performance is emotion. Emotions affect individuals' performance
in both negative and positive ways and these effects are especially important for learning activities (Baylor &
Kim,  2005).   For   example,  Bower     and  Forgas   (2001)   revealed   that positive   mood  can     increase   memory
performance. Mayer (2001) also demonstrated that a positive state of mind can improve text comprehension.
Moods may also affect people's verbal and non-verbal performance on activities. Kim, Baylor, and Shen (2007)
examined how positive and negative comments from conversational agents can affect learning performance.
They programmed a pictorial image of an agent to project a textual message to the participant; in the positive

© ISLS                                                                                                                 232
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                              Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

condition, a visual avatar produced a short comment such as "This task looks fun." In the negative condition, it
produced a comment such as "I don't feel like doing this, but we have to anyway." The results showed that the
conversational agents that provided comments in a positive mood increased participants' motivation to learn. In
addition, it is important that students acquire confidence, even if it is only the "illusion of knowing." This
phenomenon describes how students sometimes do not accurately acquire knowledge, but still become confident
that they have learned something. This confidence is important for facilitating students' motivation towards
learning.
          Hayashi (2012) examined how the expressions of positive and negative pedagogical conversational
agents could facilitate explanations between collaborative pairs. Participants were required to explain a concept
taught in  a university   psychology   course   to  others  through    a computer  chat system.  During     the task,  they
interacted   with  a   conversational  agent,   which    was  programmed     to  provide   back-channel     feedback   and
metacognitive suggestions to encourage and facilitate conversational interaction. Their results suggested that
positive affective feedback from these conversational agents facilitates explanation and better learning. Thus,
conversational agents can play a role in pedagogical tutoring and may help trigger deeper understanding of a
concept that students are trying to explain. The above studies have suggested that explanation performance will
also be enhanced      if suggestions  are given    in  a positive  mood   either verbally  or through  visual   feedback.
Unfortunately, further analysis of the dialogue process shows that learners sometimes do not listen to agents'
comments or suggestions. This indicates a need to further investigate how to provide such affective feedback
more   effectively.   However,   there are several    difficulties in  providing  feedback during    interactions   among
learners, such as (1) timing of feedback, (2) quantity/quality of information, and (3) communication channels.
Appropriate communication channels are especially important for new learners, as it helps them avoid cognitive
overload from the information provided by both agents and learners. In the next section, discuss are made on
such communication channels.

Communication channels during pedagogy in online tasks
While  the   issue  discussed above    concerns    the nature of   the   information in collaborative tasks,    it is more
concerned    with   identifying  the  communication      channels   that  could  improve   learners' comprehension      of
unfamiliar concepts when affective feedback is presented
          A related issue is how information is processed (and how it is processed in the most efficient manner),
which  has   been   a  long-considered  topic   in psychology.     For example,  Baddeley  and  Hitch  (1974),     in their
"working memory" model, argued that there are two subcomponents of information processing that handle
different types of information (visual and verbal). Thus, human cognition comprises different components or
modules for different kinds of information, allowing us to predict that people perform better when information
is presented more efficiently and economically. That is, when people perform two kinds of activities at the same
time, they may do better if information is presented through different communication channels rather than a
single channel. Moreover, previous research has suggested that information in working memory may overload
processing when the same modality is used for various types of information, thus making it harder for learners
to understand (Chandler & Sweller, 1991; Mousavi, Low, & Sweller, 1995; Sweller, Chandler, Tierney, &
Cooper,   1990).   Mayer   (2001), who    extended    this view to  multimedia   learning, reported   that  students  who
viewed an animation depicting the formation of lightning while listening to a narration explaining this process
generated more useful solutions on a subsequent problem solving transfer test than did students who viewed the
animation    with  the narration as  subtitles. In  the  case of   collaborative problem   solving   tasks, learners  may
perform better if agent feedback is provided through voice messages (i.e., auditorily) than by text message,
since they are already engaged in reading a description through a computer monitor (i.e., visually).
          Another important point to consider in relation to communication channels is the problem of attention
during tasks, which is related to the efficiency problem discussed above. This is generally referred to as the
"split attention effect," which is often observed in poorly designed instructional materials where, for example,
the same modality (e.g., visual) is used for different types of information within the same display. In such cases,
learners' attention may be split between different materials, making it difficult to use the materials effectively.
When individuals are engaged in a challenging task, they may be preoccupied with information that is more
directly related to the task and pay less attention to information, which although useful, is only indirectly related
to the task.
          For collaborative learning via online communication, possible ways to communicate with one another
include using text chats (visual) and/or voice messages (auditory). Unlike recent web-based tutoring and e-
learning systems, the most widely used technology is text-based communication (e.g., Hayashi, 2012; Holmes,
2007). In this case, attention may be paid primarily to the exchange of textual information on the computer
display, since explanation is performed via online visual communication, with students describing concepts by
typing. It is likely that learners, especially novice learners, are able to pay sufficient attention to affective
feedback from a computer agent, even if this feedback is given in the same modality (visually). However,

© ISLS                                                                                                                 233
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                         Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

collaborative learners may be able to pay more attention if they are given the feedback in a different modality
(auditorily).

Research Goal and hypothesis
The goal of this study was to experimentally investigate if and how conversational agents facilitate students'
understanding and learning of concepts. It was hypothesized that the use of affective feedback could facilitate
collaborative learners' understanding of concepts. In addition, explanation performance would be enhanced if
positive feedback from computer agents were given through multiple communication channels (i.e., visual or
auditory modalities).   This paper  analyzes  the performance  of student   pairs who  performed   an   explanation
activity on two types of technical terms.

Method
Experimental task and procedure
The experiment was conducted in a room where the computers were all connected by a local area network.
Participants  were given   two technical  terms  presented on the screen.   They  were  "schema"  and    "long-term
memory,"    and  had been  previously  introduced  in the  psychology class.  Along   with the key terms,  a   brief
explanation of the concept was provided. Participants were asked to describe these concepts in their own words.
After this pretest, participants logged into computers and used the chat program installed from a USB flash
drive (see the next section for details). Pairs of participants then communicated through this program, with one
participant  explaining to another  the meaning   of  each word  presented   on their computer   screen. After  one
concept had been explained, the partners switched roles and the other partner explained the remaining concept.
This was then repeated, so that both students had a chance to explain both terms. All participants received the
same suggestions from the agent on how explanations should be given and how questions should be asked about
the concepts.  They  then  took a  posttest, which  consisted of the same    material as the  pretest. Participants'
descriptions  of the concepts   in the  posttest were compared   with those   of  the pretest to determine   if the
participants had gained a deeper understanding of the concepts after the collaborative activity.

Experimental system
In the experiments, a computer-mediated chat system was set up through computer terminals connected via a
local area network and the participants' interactions during the activity were monitored. The system used in the
experiments was programmed in Java (Hayashi, 2012 a).

                                          Figure 1. Interface of the task.
         The system consisted of three program modules, including: (1) server, (2) client, and (3) agent, all of
which were simultaneously activated. The server controlled all communication traffic during the task, and the
client programs were installed in the students' computers to activate the graphical user interface (GUI) for
communication (Figure 1). Multithreads were used so that the server program could send all messages to the
clients' chat systems and the agent simultaneously.
         The pedagogical agent used in this study was a simple rule-based production system composed of the
following three different modules: (1) semantic analyzer, (2) generator, and (3) motion handler. First, the textual
input of all of the participants' conversational exchanges was sent to the semantic analyzer in the agent. The
agent monitored all the chat dialogues and messages were analyzed according to a list of keywords via the "bag
of words" method (e.g., "I think that a schema is some kind of knowledge that is used based on one's own

© ISLS                                                                                                          234
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                       Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

experience" (detected keywords are shown in bold italics). The list of keywords was stored in a database (the
"Dictionary Database") in the semantic analyzer. Thirty different keywords were registered in the database.
These keywords were selected according to a past study (Hayashi, 2012 a). Next, the extracted keywords were
sent to the "working memory" in the generator and processed by a rule base, where various types of rule-based
statements such as "if X then Y" were stored to generate prompt messages (if there are several matching
statements for the input keywords, a simple conflict resolution strategy is utilized). When the matching process
was completed, prompt messages were selected and sent back to the working memory in the generator. The
messages  consisted  of  information  about  the goals   and  the achievements    of the   task, and some   initial
suggestions on how to give good explanations to others. This point was designed according to the method used
in Holmes (2007). The basic response rule was that if too many keywords were detected in the system, then
prompts were generated asking students to use different words. For example, if the learner simply copied and
pasted the words used by the system, it would provide messages such as "You should use more original words
in your explanations." When the system detected some keywords such as technical words, it generated messages
such as "Good! You are explaining the concept with some unique words. Keep on going!" When the system
detected  combinations   of technical   keywords   and   questions,   it provided    messages    addressing  those
combinations. For example, "It seems you have difficulty answering this. But you use good keywords!" Each
output message was presented in text on the computer display.
         The messages generated by the rule base were also sent to the motion handler module to activate an
embodied conversation agent, a computer-generated virtual character that produced human-like behaviors such
as blinking  and  head-shaking.  The  types of affective expressions  used  were   based   on an  affective model
developed    in a  preliminary  study (Hayashi,  2012    b). These   expressions   were  created   using the   3D-
image/animation-design tool Poser 8 (www.e-frontier.com).

Participants and conditions
In this study, 58 participants (23 men and 35 women; mean age = 19.78) participated in pairs. Participants were
all undergraduate students taking a psychology course, who participated as a part of coursework. They were
randomly assigned to three conditions, which varied according to how the suggestion prompts were presented
and how   the   conversational agents were  used  (see the   section below  for  details). In all  conditions, the
participants were  given positive suggestions,   which were   synchronized   with  the facial expressions   of the
embodied agent. The messages were given through chat dialogue and the virtual character moved its hands and
lips while the participants chatted on the computer. Furthermore, in one condition, a male voice was generated
using the Microsoft speech platform while the agents produced facial expressions.
         Three conditions were used to test our hypothesis (see Figure 2). In the "no suggestion" condition
(Group SSA, n = 18), participants were given no suggestions without any affective expressions. In the text
suggestion condition (Group SSA+T, n = 20), participants were given suggestions via textual prompts with
affective feedback according to the affective model. In the text and voice suggestion condition (Group SSA+TV,
n = 20), participants were given no suggestions via textual prompts but rather via audio output. In the SSA+TV
condition, participants wore headphones to listen to the responses from the agent.
         In the pretest and posttest, participants were asked to describe the meaning of the same technical words.
As in Hayashi (2012 a), the results of the pretest and posttest were then compared to find out how the different
conditions facilitated participants' learning of the concepts. In the comparison, descriptions were scored in the
following ways: one point was awarded for a wrong description or no description, two points for a nearly
correct description, three points for a fairly correct description, four points for an excellent description, and five
points for an excellent description with concrete examples. It was judged that the greater the difference in scores
between the two tests, the greater the effect of the explanation activity. Two coders then coded the results, and
their correlations were 0.67. The coders discussed their results before making any final decisions. The pretest
and posttest scores were used to assess the degree of learning performance.

© ISLS                                                                                                         235
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                           Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

                                         Figure 2. Experimental Conditions.

Results
Figure 3 shows the results of the pretest and posttest for the term "schema." The vertical axis represents the
average scores  of the    tests for the  three groups  at  the two  different test times.  A  statistical analysis was
performed using a 2 (evaluation test: pretest vs. posttest) × 3 (conversational agent condition: SSA vs. SSA+T
vs. SSA+TV) mixed-factor analysis of variance (ANOVA).
There was a significant interaction between the two factors (F(2, 55) = 12.457, p < .01). First, an analysis of the
simple  main  effects was   done    on each  level  of the conversational  agent   factor. In  the SSA,   SSA+T,   and
SSA+TV conditions, average scores on the posttest were higher than on the pretest (F(1, 55) = 99.604, p < .01;
F(1, 55) = 53.616, p < .01; F(1, 55) = 8.899, p < .01, respectively). These results showed that the explanation
activity had an effect on learning.
        Next, simple main effects were analyzed according to evaluation test time. In the pretest, there were no
differences between conditions (F(2, 110) = 0.48, p = .95), indicating no differences between participants before
conducting the experiment. On the other hand, differences between conditions were found in the posttest (F(2,
110) =  23.599,  p <  .01).  Post-hoc    analysis on  the posttest  was conducted  through    Ryan's method.    Results
indicated that the average      score of the SSA+TV       condition was  higher than  that  of the  SSA+T    and   SSA
conditions (p < .01 for both), and the average score of SSA+T was higher than that of the SSA (p < .01). The
difference in scores between the SSA+TV and SSA+T conditions in the posttest indicated that using different
communication channels to explain a concept to a partner and receiving learning prompts from a PCA are useful
to facilitate participants'  understanding     of the  concepts,   compared   with using   the same   communication
channels.

                                            Figure 3. Results of `schema'.
        Figure 4 presents the results of the pretest and posttest for the term "long-term memory." The vertical
axis represents the average scores of the pretest and posttest for the three conditions. The same type of statistical
analysis was performed as above.
        There was a significant interaction between the two factors (F(2, 55) = 10.143, p < .01). First, simple
main effects were analyzed according to conversational agent. In the SSA+T and SSA+TV conditions, the
average scores on the posttest were higher than on the pretest (F(1, 55) = 62.662, p < .01; F(1, 55) = 23.673, p <
.01, respectively). In the SSA condition, the average scores did not differ (F(1, 55) = 0.127, p < .01). The
increases shown in the SSA+T and SSA+TV conditions show that the explanation activities produced a learning
effect related to affect.
        Next, simple main effects were analyzed according to evaluation test. In the pretest, no differences
were found between conditions (F(2, 110) = 0.022, p = .97), indicating no differences between participants
before conducting  the    experiment.   There  were   differences  between conditions  in  the posttest   (F(2, 110) =
16.535, p < .01). Post-hoc analysis on the posttest was conducted using Ryan's method. The results indicated
that the average score of the SSA+TV condition was higher than that of the SSA+T and SSA conditions (p < .01
for both), and the average score of SSA+T was higher than that of the SSA (p < .01). This result was consistent
with the results of the analysis of "schema."

© ISLS                                                                                                             236
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                             Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

                                      Figure 4. Results of `long-term memory'.

Discussion

Affective factors and communication channels
The results of this study have several implications on the advantages of using pedagogical agents and providing
feedback through different communication channels. First, the SSA+TV and SSA+T conditions had greater
influences on students' performance than the SSA condition. This indicates that the use of an affective model
has a   strong effect  on the  performance   of learning  activities. This result is  consistent with the  results of a
previous study by Hayashi (2012 a). In that study, agents with positive expressions had greater influences on
performance compared with agents with no expression. However, because Hayashi (2012 a) did not conduct a
direct comparison between positive affective agents and text-only prompts, the present study shows results that
are more   reliable   on  the  advantages  of   using  affective conversational   agents   during  learning  activities.
Furthermore, the present study used more sophisticated affective models in the conversational agents. Although
pedagogical agents have great potential, they should be modeled with parameters that are more detailed and
based on human cognition.
         The experimental results also showed that participants performed better in the SSA+TV condition
(receiving verbal comments from the agent) compared with the other two conditions. According to the split
attention method and the multimedia design model, using different communication channels for the learner's
conversations and the suggestions from the agent is a good pedagogical method. Our results supported the
notion  that   using   different communication    channels  enables    learners   to pay   more  attention  to  agents'
suggestions, and encourages them to consider the terms according to its comments. Post-hoc analyses showed
that agents' comments facilitated students' use of related conceptual terms, and allowed them to understand the
target keyword from a different perspective (see Table 1 for an example). Furthermore, learners--especially
those not trained to give effective explanations--confronted their difficulties in giving explanations by asking
appropriate questions. Therefore, they were concentrated on their partner's text messages, which occupied their
visual  attention. Table  2 shows     some examples    of participants' dialogue,    where one   student failed to pay
attention to the pedagogical conversational agent.
         In  previous    pedagogical   agent  studies, some   attempts   have   been   made  to   understand   how  an
environment rich with multiple communication channels could facilitate the learning process. Unfortunately,
some of these investigations showed that pedagogical agents had no significant learning effects. Moreno and
Mayer (2002) conducted an experiment using a pedagogical agent named "Herman the bug," and presented
information to learners via a desktop computer or head-mounted display. The head-mounted display condition
was used to examine whether virtual reality could lead to better learning results, as it may encourage learners to
engage in more active cognitive processing. However, the results yielded no difference between the virtual
reality conditions (using a head-mounted display while walking or sitting) and the desktop computer condition
in performance on retention or transfer tasks (Moreno & Mayer, 2002). These results are likely because virtual
reality distracts  the learner   from the learning task.  Therefore,   additional features such   as more   technically
complex learning environments do not necessarily facilitate learning. Another explanation is that the way the
information was presented resulted in cognitive overflow. The present results indicated that if information is
provided  in   a cognitively   economical  way,  such   as using  multiple  communication      channels  and   splitting
attention, computer-based learning with agents can be a powerful learning tool.

© ISLS                                                                                                             237
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                         Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

Table 1: Example dialogue of participants interacting frequently in SSA+TV condition.

           Speaker                                                   Dialogue
Participant A                     "In the case of short term memory, the amount of the information affects
                                  memory, right?"
Conversational Agent              "Good! You're using important keywords such as `short-term memory'!"
Participant B                     "Oh. So, long-term memory is the opposite and we can remember more."
Participant A                     "I'm not sure, but I think so..."
Conversational Agent              "Nice, keep on it guys! Our goal in this activity is to reach a better
                                  understanding of this term by explaining it to each other."
Participant B                     "Then how about length of time...by using long-term memory, can we
                                  remember information for longer?"

Table 2: Example dialogue of participants not paying attention to the agent in SSA+T condition.

           Speaker                                                   Dialogue
Participant B                     "Okay, so please continue explaining the term `schema'."
Participant A                     "They influence what we look for in a situation."
Conversational Agent              "Good job! However, a couple of times you used the same words that were
                                  written in the example. Try to use your own words!"
Participant A                     "We are inclined to place people who do not fit our schema in a special or
                                  different category...."
Participant B                     "I think it's better to not copy the sentences from the examples."
Participant A                     "Oh, I missed the instructions."
Participant B                     "The computer agent said that."
Participant A                     "I wasn't paying attention to it at all. Oops..."

Conclusion and future work
The present study investigated the effectiveness of a conversational agent in a collaborative activity, where
paired  students explained  to    each other   the meaning   of  several   psychological  terms to   improve  their
understanding. The agents were used to encourage and facilitate students' interactions through both verbal and
visual  output.  The  experimental   results   suggested  that   affective conversational agents   using   multiple
communication channels can help trigger a deeper understanding of a concept when attempting to explain that
concept. This gives us a new perspective on how to design pedagogical agents for collaborative activities such
as giving explanations to others.
         The present study used conversational agents that exhibited only positive affective expressions; future
studies could   use expressions that   are more  specific or according   to personal  preferences. Those   personal
preferences may be based on social constructions such as gender and culture. In future studies, these preferences
for affective expression should be investigated and implemented into the system to produce more effective
learning. For example, Kim, Baylor, and Shen (2007) found that learners had positive impressions of male
agents with positive expressions than of female agents. This indicates that social stereotypes in the real world
are applied to the agent-learner relationship.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported,(in part) by 2012 KDDI Foundation Research Grant Program and the Grant-in-Aid for
Scientific Research (KAKENHI), The Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, Japan
(MEXTGrant), Grant No. 25870910

References
Baddeley, A. D., & Hitch, G.J. (1974). Working memory. In G. H. Bower (Ed.), The psychology of learning and
         motivation, Vol. 8. London: Academic Press.
Baylor, A. L.,   &  Kim, Y. (2005).    Simulating  instructional roles through  pedagogical agents.  International
         Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education, 15(1), 95­115.

© ISLS                                                                                                         238
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                           Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

Bower, H. G., Forgas, P. J. (2001). Mood and social memory. In J. P. Forgas (Ed). Handbook of affect and
         social cognition (pp. 95­120). New Jersey: LEA.
Brown,   A.   (1992). Design    experiments:    Theoretical and methodological     challenges  in  creating complex
         interventions in classroom settings. The Journal of Learning Sciences, 2(2), 141­178.
Bruner, J. (1999). Postscript: Some reflections on education research. In E. C. Lagemann & L. S. Shulman
         (Eds.), Issues in education research: Problems and possibilities (pp. 399­409). San Francisco: Jossey-
         Bass Publishers.
Chandler, P. & Sweller, J. (1991). Cognitive load theory and the format of instruction.       Cognition           and
         Instruction, 8(4), 293­332.
Chi, M. T. H., Bassok, M., Lewis, M. W., Reimann, P., & Glaser, R. (1989). Self-explanations: How students
         study and use examples in learning to solve problems. Cognitive Science, 13, 145­182.
Coleman,  E.   B.  (1998). Using  explanatory   knowledge    during collaborative  problem  solving  in  science. The
         Journal of Learning Sciences, 7(3 & 4), 387­427.
Graesser, A.,  &   McNamara,     D. (2010).   Self-regulated learning in learning   environments   with   pedagogical
         agents that interact in natural language. Educational Psychologist, 45(4), 234­244.
Hawkins, J., & Pea, R. D. (1987). Tools for bridging the cultures of everyday and scientific thinking. Journal
         for Research in Science Teaching, 24, 291­307.
Hayashi, Y., & Miwa, K. (2009). Prior experience and communication media in establishing                common
         ground during collaboration. In Proceedings of the 31th Annual Conference            of     the    Cognitive
         Science Society, 528­531.
Hayashi Y. (2012 a). On pedagogical effects of learner-support agents in collaborative interaction. In S.A. Cerri
         & B. Clancey (Eds.): Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on Intelligent Tutoring Systems
         (ITS2012), Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 7315, 22­32.
Hayashi   Y.  (2012   b). Designing   affective pedagogical  agents:  How     learners' and agents'  gender and   age
         influence emotion in an online tutoring task. In Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on
         Computers in Education (ICCE2012), 46­50.
Holmes, J. (2007). Designing agents to support learning by explaining. Computers & Education, 48(4), 523­
         547.
Kim, Y., Baylor, A. L., & Shen, E. (2007). Pedagogical agents as learning companions: The impact of agent
         emotion and gender. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 23(3), 220­234.
King, A. (1994). Guiding knowledge construction in the classroom: Effects of teaching children how to question
         and how to explain. American Educational Research Journal, 30, 338­368.
Lave, J. (1987). Cognition in practice. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Mayer, R. E. (2001). Multimedia learning. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Moreno, R., & Mayer, R. E. (2002). Learning science in virtual reality multimedia learning environments: Role
         of methods and media. Journal of Educational Psychology, 94(3), 598­610.
Miyake, N. (1986) Constructive interaction and the interactive process of understanding. Cognitive Science,
         10(2), 151­177.
Mousavi,  S.   Y., Low,    R.  & Sweller,  J. (1995). Reducing      cognitive load  by  mixing   auditory and visual
         presentation modes. Journal of Educational Psychology, 87(2), 319­334.
Okada, T., & Simon, H. (1997). Collaborative discovery in a scientific domain. Cognitive Science, 21(2), 109­
         146.
Salomon,  G.    (2001).   Distributed  cognition:  Psychological    and  educational    considerations.  New  York:
         Cambridge University Press.
Shirouzu, H., Miyake, N., & Masukawa, H. (2002). Cognitively active externalization for situated reflection.
         Cognitive Science, 26(4), 469­501.
Sweller,  J., Chandler,   P., Tierney, P. &   Cooper, M.    (1990). Cognitive  load as   a factor in the  structure of
         technical material. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 119(2), 176­192.

© ISLS                                                                                                            239
