CSCL 2013 Proceedings              Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

  Levels of Articulated Reasoning In Spontaneous Face-To-Face
 Collaborations and Online Forum Postings Surrounding a Single-
       Player Physics Game in Public Middle School Classrooms

            Clark, D. B., Smith, B., Zuckerman, S., Wilson, S. C., Ssebikindu, J., & van Eaton, G.
                Vanderbilt University, 1930 S Drive, Wyatt 240, Nashville TN 37212, USA
        doug.clark@vanderbilt.edu, blaine.smith@vanderbilt.edu, stephanie.zuckerman@gmail.com,
       sara.c.wilson@vanderbilt.edu, joy.l.ssebikindu@vanderbilt.edu, grant.vaneaton@vanderbilt.edu

       Abstract: This poster explores the levels of reasoning articulated in (a) the spontaneous face-
       to-face collaborations that naturally occurred in classrooms where students were all playing a
       single-player game designed to support learning of Newtonian mechanics and (b) in online
       forums that were created for the students to share hints and strategies about each level in the
       game. Interestingly, levels of articulated reasoning were very low in face-to-face interactions
       but much higher in the online forums.

Introduction
James Gee distinguishes between the "game" and the "Game" in terms of the "game" involving the piece of
software itself and the "Game" involving all of the interactions, collaboration, community, and cognition that
surrounds the "game". He and others underscore the affordances for learning in these "Game" communities
through both face-to-face as well virtual interactions. Research illustrates, for example, how the collaborative
nature of games serves as fertile ground for problem solving (Gee, 2006) and motivating students (Trespalacios,
Chamberlin, & Gallagher, 2011), as well as   how language amongst players online         serves as a conduit  for
understanding the nature of game activity in online environments (Steinkuehler, 2006) and developing scientific
habits of mind in online forums (Steinkuehler & Duncan, 2008). However, less attention has been given to
understanding the role of collaboration during game play in schools. Bluemink (2011) explained that two levels
of interaction occurred simultaneously during game collaboration: a relational level (e.g., social interactions)
and a content level, as well as that the main content of students' discussion during games involve asking,
making content statements, and instructing others. Similarly, Hamalainen (2011) identified various types of
interaction during game-play, with providing information (e.g., giving advice, reasoning), asking questions, and
managing interactions (e.g., planning upcoming game activity) as respectively the three most prevalent. The
purpose of the current study involved exploring the levels of reasoning articulated in (a) the spontaneous face-
to-face collaborations that naturally occurred in classrooms where students were all playing a single-player
game designed to support learning of Newtonian mechanics and (b) in online forums that were created to allow
students in each classroom to share hints and strategies about each level in the game.

Methods
Four classes of public middle school students (N=101) played a version of the SURGE game for three class
periods each. Every student had an individual laptop. Students chose their own tables and groups on the first
day. Up to four students could sit at any one of the square tables arranged around the classroom. The game was
introduced on the first day. Students were told that they were welcome to collaborate and that they could also
post hints and strategies about each level for other members of their class (or read the hints and strategies about
each level posted by member of their class) in online discussion boards that were created for each class.

Each class period, three researchers with video cameras moved throughout the classroom to capture episodes of
collaboration that naturally occurred between students. The video of student interaction across three days of
game play in four classes were analyzed, along with transcripts of students' online collaborations on the game's
forum. Data analysis involved qualitative coding procedures informed by Grounded Theory (Glaser & Strauss,
1967; Strauss & Corbin, 1998). Through open coding, codes for types of collaborations and conceptual level of
physics discourse were developed and refined. In the axial-coding stage, all of the class videos and forum
transcripts were examined for the codes developed in the first phase and illustrative examples were identified
and transcribed. Throughout this iterative process, codes and emergent findings were reviewed in consultation
with members of the research team (Charmaz, 2000).

Results
Interestingly, while students collaborated face-to-face constantly, this collaboration generally took the form of
requesting or specifying very concrete solutions to individual levels. As the first pie chart to the right shows,
69% of the 251 videotaped collaboration episodes involved this concrete specification as the highest level of

© ISLS                                                                                                       235
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                            Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

articulated reasoning in the episodes (and 2% of episodes were entirely non-verbal but focused on this concrete
specification of solutions in the form of either pointing to places on the screen or physically taking over the
other    student's   keyboard       without     discussion).     Concrete     reasoning,       which  involved     discussing     or sharing
reasoning      for solving    the    level   without     any   overt   connection      to   physics   ideas,   was  the   highest    level of
articulated reasoning for 8% of the episodes. Formal reasoning that included some formal physics ideas or
terminology (accurate or not) accounted for 6% of the episodes. Formal reasoning that included some reference
to Newton's laws (accurate or not) accounted for only 1% of the episodes. As researchers, we were interested in
levels of articulated reasoning, but were disappointed by the low levels observed in face-to-face collaborations.

                                                 Figure 1. Distribution of Contributions
Students' posts in the online forums, however, displayed much higher levels of articulated reasoning (as shown
in the   pie   chart   to the   right),   which     displays   the   highest   level   of   reasoning    in each   of the   316   individual
comments that articulated a solution or reasoning (out of 682 total comments posted in the online forums). Note
that these are individual comments in the online forums whereas the face-to-face episodes included extended
exchanges. An important and encouraging discovery was that a broad percentage of the participants contributed
these comments (rather than the very small percentage of participants who typically account for most of the high
level reasoning in online forums on the Internet, where the vast majority of participants are "lurkers" who do not
post at all in comparison to the very tiny percentage of "super users" who account for the vast majority of high
quality posts). In our study, we discovered that 87% of the students posted at least one comment in the forums
that articulated some reasoning or solution, and that the comments articulating higher levels of reasoning were
distributed across students. Even the 8% of comments articulating reasoning in terms of Newton's laws were all
posted by different users with no user posting more than one.

We considered this relatively democratic level of contribution in the forums encouraging specifically because it
occurred without explicit scaffolding or prompting. We hypothesize that this broad participation may have been
facilitated by each class having its own forums such that face-to-face relationships and feedback supported and
encouraged       forum    posting.   We      are hopeful     that   through   future   iterations     we can   explore    the relationships
between     the   comments      that  articulated    reasoning      as  well   as  between      the   comments     that did   not  articulate
reasoning or solutions (which are overviewed in the graph above). Between now and the CSCL conference, we
intend to conduct pattern analyses of the constellations of comments surrounding comments that articulate high
levels of reasoning as well as the constellations of comments that appear to progress less productively. By
understanding how the articulation of higher levels of reasoning might be scaffolded in the virtual collaborative
space    around    games      for   learning     in the   classroom,     we    are  hoping     to learn     more   about    how   we    might
simultaneously       support    more    productive       natural    face-to-face     collaboration      without    suffering  the    costs of
overscaffolding highlighted in the CSCL literature.

References
Bluemink, J.   (2011). Elements of collaborative discussion and shared problem solving in a voice-enhanced multiplayer game. Journal of
            Interactive Learning Research 22(1). Pp. 23-50.
Charmaz,    K. (2000). Grounded   Theory.    Objectivist and  constructivist methods. In  N. K.  Denzin  &  Y. S. Lincoln (Eds.), Handbook  of
            qualitative research (2nd ed., pp. 509-535). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Gee, J. P. (2006). Why game studies now? Video games: A new art form. Games and Culture, 1, 58-61.
Glaser,  B. G.,  & Strauss,  A. L.   (1967). The  Discovery   of Grounded    Theory:  Strategies for  Qualitative Research. New   York: Aldine
            Publishing Company.
Hamalainen,    R. (2011). Using   a  game environment     to foster collaborative learning:  a design based study.  Technology, Pedagogy   and
            Education, 20(1), 61-78.
Steinkuehler, C., & Duncan, S. (2008). Scientific habits of mind in virtual worlds. Journal of Science Education and Technology, 17, 530-
            543.
Strauss, A., &   Corbin,  J. (1998). Basics  of  qualitative research. Techniques  and procedures   for developing  grounded  theory (2nd ed.).
            Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Trespalacios, J., Chamberlin, B., & Gallagher, R. R. (2011). Collaboration, engagement& fun: How youth preferences in video gaming can
            inform 21st century education. TechTrends, 55(6), 49-54.

© ISLS                                                                                                                                    236
