CSCL 2013 Proceedings                     Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

       Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of STEM Simulations
                              Cynthia D'Angelo, Christopher Harris, Daisy Rutstein
                           SRI International, 333 Ravenswood Ave. Menlo Park, CA 94025
               Email: cynthia.dangelo@sri.com, christopher.harris@sri.com, daisy.rutstein@sri.com

         Abstract:   This   paper   describes  the initial findings  of  a systematic     meta-analysis   of  the
         literature  of    computer  simulations    related  to   science,   technology,       engineering,  and
         mathematics (STEM) learning. Features of the simulations, quality of the research design, and
         the assessments/instruments used to measure learning are the primary moderating variables of
         interest. A meta-analysis of 55 research studies of K-12 science education, published between
         1991   and  2012,   found   that   on  average    simulations   had  a   positive  effect  on  science
         achievement.

Study Overview
This paper presents an overview of the process and initial findings of a systematic review and meta-analysis of
the literature of  computer   simulations   related to  K-12    science,  technology,  engineering,    and   mathematics
(STEM)   learning   topics.  Both   quantitative   and qualitative  research   studies    that examined     the effects of
simulation in STEM in the K-12 grade range were included in the study. Of these studies, those that reported
effect size  measures   (or the data  to  calculate  effect  sizes) were   included    in the  meta-analysis.   Important
moderating factors related to simulation design, assessment, implementation, and study quality were coded,
categorized and analyzed for all of the included articles.
         The   simulation   meta-analysis   and  review    take a   systematic    look at  the   research   and   evidence
surrounding learning STEM topics through computer simulations. We are primarily focused on answering three
research questions:
         (1) What are the advantages of using simulations compared to not using simulations in STEM
         learning contexts?
         (2) What are the advantages of using simulations alongside real-world laboratory or classroom
         activities compared to using simulations alone?
         (3) What types of features or modifications to simulations are most beneficial for learning?
         We documented a variety of dependent variables related to these questions, including content-related
learning goals, 21st century skill learning goals, and engagement/motivation-related learning goals. Additionally,
moderating variables and assessments used to determine learning outcomes were coded and analyzed.

Initial Literature Search
This study focused on computer-based simulations that are neither simple visualizations nor games. Some of
these  simulations  simulated   a   virtual lab  environment    (such   as a  virtual  frog    dissection),  while  others
represented  a more   abstract  scientific  phenomenon     (such  as  structure   at the  molecular   level).   All of  the
simulations had some level of user interactivity, usually in the form of specific inputs that could be changed.
         Three    databases   that  were    selected:   the  Education     Resources      Information   Center      (ERIC)
(http://www.eric.ed.gov/),   PsycINFO     (http://www.apa.org/psycinfo/),     and    Scopus    (http://www.scopus.com/).
These  databases   were    searched for only   peer-reviewed    journal  articles published    between  1991    and   2012
(inclusive). The   initial search   terms included  the    STEM   domains    (science,    technology,  engineering,    and
mathematics and their subtopics ­ such as biology and chemistry) and "simulation" or "computer simulation" as
primary search terms.
         From   the database   search   2392  abstracts were    collected  and  reviewed    by  the research    team.  The
abstracts were screened for suitability and exclusion criteria. Most abstracts were excluded for focusing outside
of the K-12 grade range, for not including a research study (quantitative, qualitative, or mixed methods), for not
being related to STEM content, or for the simulation not being used in a instructional setting. This screening
resulted in full-text retrieval of about 200 primary research studies potentially suitable for the analysis.

Article Review and Coding
Through a thorough review of full-text documents, 133 studies were retained for further analysis. Of these, 49
were determined to be research articles including either an experimental or quasi-experimental design. Of those,
9 were determined to contain incomplete or repeated data for this current analysis. The remaining 40 studies
yielded 104 effect sizes, 67 of which were in the achievement outcome category, 11 were in the attitudes
category, and the remaining 26 that fell into other categories (such as inquiry skills).
         The research team coded the articles, with each article being coded by two researchers. The article
codes fall into six broad categories: demographic information (location of study, ages of participants, language
of  instruction); study information   (research    question, STEM     topic);  methodological     information    (research

© ISLS                                                                                                                 239
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                  Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

design, group   equivalency, attrition);  assessment    information  (source   of assessment,  type of  measures);
simulation  information  (type, collaboration,   flexibility, platform); and  implementation  information   (setting,
curriculum, time/duration/frequency).

Meta-Analysis Results
Many descriptive characteristics of the comparisons can be reported at this time. Most of the studies were in the
domain of science and a few were in mathematics. Follow-up and cross-checking is currently underway to
increase the number of mathematics studies. Most of the studies were conducted in either North America or
Europe. About 60% of the participants were in high school, while most of the remaining participants were in
middle school. Nearly all of the studies were conducted in classrooms. Nearly all of the simulations were either
embedded in the classroom curriculum or used as related stand-alone instruction. Most of the simulations could
be used collaboratively among students (but not all were implemented this way) and had some structured use
(i.e., they were not totally open sandbox environments or highly structured). Assessments used in measuring
student outcomes were by and large not technology-based and the vast majority of assessment instruments were
researcher-designed.
         Seven methodological characteristics were identified, coded and tested to determine if the collection of
studies contained systematic    bias  due to methods    employed    by   primary  researchers that might  alter the
interpretation of results. We concluded that there is no severe bias due to the research practices contained in the
collection.
         These initial findings indicate that simulations have promise for improving students' learning outcomes
in STEM topics. While further analysis needs to be done both with this corpus of studies and the qualitative and
pre-experimental  studies  identified in the literature search,  there   are many  high level findings that can  be
discussed at this time.
         The meta-analysis found, based on 33 science education research studies, that when computer-based
interactive simulations were compared to similar instruction without simulations there was a moderate to strong
effect in favor of simulations (g+ = 0.67, z = 10.07, p < .000).
         The  meta-analysis  of  22   additional studies, where    simulations  were modified   to  include further
enhancements, showed that the enhanced simulations had a moderate effect on student learning when compared
to the simulations alone (g+ = 0.43, z = 4.39, p < .000). These enhancements included modifications such as
additional scaffolding, feedback, and changing group structures. Scaffolding can be thought of as systematic
supports for learners. As this project continues we are examining the details of these learner supports, among
other things.

Next Steps and Implications
There is ongoing work on this project to broaden the search criteria in order to ensure that math simulations are
included (we only had a handful of math-related studies using the initial search terms). We are also going back
and hand checking other review articles to look for important and "landmark" articles that might have been
missed. Additionally, we will be coding and reviewing the qualitative studies that met our initial search criteria,
in order to help understand why and under what conditions and contexts these learning gains are occurring.
         These preliminary results have many implications for science education. They show that simulations
can have a significant impact on student learning and are promising tools for improving student achievement in
science. Simulations are a key way that students interact with models (an important focus in the new science
Framework), especially models based on phenomena that are difficult to observe in the typical classroom setting
(due to reasons such as scale, time, safety, or budget limitations). The new K-12 Science Framework (National
Research Council, 2012) and the resulting Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS) will be framing the
discussion about science education research (and STEM education research more broadly) in the near future.
         There are sufficient numbers of studies in this area to allow for detailed further analyses relating to the
mechanisms and features that allow for improved learning through simulations. Continued efforts in this area
will reveal more information about the assessments used to measure learning. Findings relating to attitudes,
inquiry, and reasoning skills are less clear at the moment, due to the low number of studies focusing on these
outcomes.

References
National Research Council. (2012). A framework for K-12 science education: Practices, crosscutting concepts,
         and core ideas. Committee on a Conceptual Framework for New K-12 Science Education Standards.
         Board on Science Education, Division of Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education. Washington,
         DC: The National Academies Press.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by a grant from the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation.

© ISLS                                                                                                          240
