CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                                  Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

                     An Adapted Group Psychotherapy Framework
                         for Teaching and Learning About CSCL
                               Yotam Hod, Dr. Dani Ben-Zvi, University of Haifa, Israel
                        Email: yotamhod@edtech.haifa.ac.il, dani.benzvi@edtech.haifa.ac.il

          Abstract:     This  theoretical paper   presents    a framework     adapted  from   group  psychotherapy
          (GP) for teaching and learning about computer-supported collaborative learning (CSCL). The
          framework is used both in the design of a learning community and to explain how aspects of
          learning occur within it. The design, which we enacted in a graduate level course that taught
          about   CSCL,    is based on    content-process     integration,   group cohesion,    and  reflection. The
          learning   is based  on   transference    into a    microcosm      and developing   the   intentionality to
          change. We use narrative illustrations from moderators' and students' discourse to show how
          this framework impacts teaching and learning about CSCL.

Introduction
Since its inception, the scientific CSCL community has shown substantial interest in implementing its ideas in
practical settings, particularly in higher education (Strijbos, Kirschner, & Martens, 2004). A great deal has been
published about various educational designs that employ CSCL, with the goal of getting learners to collaborate
in ways that are supported by technology (e.g., De Graaf, De Laat, & Scheltinga, 2004). In most of these cases,
the content that is collaborated upon is external to the field, such as in mathematics, and the learning process is
through CSCL. While such research is certainly important, more can be done to build upon existing research in
teaching and learning about CSCL (e.g., Ronen-Fuhrmann, Kali, & Hoadley, 2008), as opposed to through it.
          Further researching this particular niche in CSCL involves examining what material should be studied
during graduate courses about CSCL as well as the appropriate pedagogical design to foster learning. Regarding
the content, the big ideas of CSCL have to do with metaphors or conceptions of learning such as participation
(Sfard, 1998), knowledge-building (Scardamalia & Bereiter, 1994) and collaboration (Stahl, Koschmann, &
Suthers, 2006). Likewise, developing expertise in CSCL involves studying rich academic literature on a range of
topics that include learning, research methods, and technology, just to name a few. While the learning material
is not the prime focus of this paper, the epicenter upon which to base it ostensibly should start with academic
material    published from    the CSCL    community.     From    there,   it can  span   out in  nearly endless  directions to
include more peripheral ideas.
          Regarding the process of teaching and learning about CSCL, there are good pedagogical reasons to
integrate the process with the content. In approaches that aim for students to learn through CSCL, the content
can   be in  any  discipline  so  long  as   the  learning process    is  collaborative  and    supported by  technology.   In
approaches that aim for learning about CSCL, an inverse of this content-process relationship exists. The content,
however     debatable,  must   be  about     CSCL   and    is   therefore fixed;   the   pedagogical    approach   is variable.
Nevertheless, research into teaching programs show that methods are too often disconnected with what they are
trying   to teach (Bransford,     2000)   and there  is  growing    evidence     that they   should  be integrated    (Darling-
Hammond, 2000). Therefore, there are good reasons for those seeking to teach about CSCL to integrate content
and   process. In  this  way,   students   simultaneously       study CSCL       content and  develop   a rich   repertoire of
experiences about it.

Relations to Group Psychotherapy
Much like in teaching and learning about CSCL, the field of group psychotherapy (GP) also deals with the
integration of content and process. In GP that takes a here-and-now approach, there are two tiers that are critical
for the therapy to occur. The first tier has to do with taking an interest in the here-and-now events of a group, or
the present process the participants engage in. This process, in effect, becomes part of the content of the second
tier, which    deals  with   illuminating    this process  together   with    the  group.    The content  is integrated  with
substantive issues in GP, such as power and dominance or psychic functions, that have to do with interpersonal
relationships of the participants (Yalom, 2005). Thus, while the external content of GP and CSCL are different,
both  have   a shared   characteristic    of integrating   their  respective   content   with   the process  of  interpersonal
learning.
          There are many implications of the shared content-process integration found in GP and teaching and
learning about CSCL. These seem to hinge on the idea of reflection. While reflection is a fundamental concept
and practice in both, the separation of the fields leads them to use different jargon to explain its role, and
research upon which to base findings. Yet, they have a strikingly great deal in common.
          In CSCL, reflection is based on literature with a long and well-established history (e.g.,               ch n
Yost, Sentner, & Forlenza-Bailey, 2000). Developing reflective students is associated with ideas that have to do

© ISLS                                                                                                                    240
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                               Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

with taking responsibility over one's learning      such as meta-cognition (e.g., Brown          & Campione, 1994) and
intentional learning (Scardamalia & Bereiter, 1994). Indeed, these have been cornerstones in CSCL research
(Stahl, Koschmann, & Suthers, 2006). In more contemporary CSCL studies, reflection has been used to develop
group  members'     awareness    of their   individual and   group   behavior   creating   a bridge    between   social and
cognitive processes in collaborative learning (Phielix, Prins, & Kirschner, 2010). In all cases, the primary idea
has to do     with organizing  instruction,  through   reflective   discourse, so that  learning   can  be  controlled  and
intentionally changed.
           In GP,  reflection is essential  to the  therapeutic   process.  The  group   setting serves  as   a microcosm,
whereby each participant transfers (1) their own attitudes, understandings, and behavior in their ordinary life to
the group situation. Participants are guided to speak about their feelings and experiences as they relate to the
ongoing events during meetings. This is referred to as the here-and-now focus. Reflection on the process helps
the participants recognize their own attitudes, understandings, and behavior, in relation to others and their lives
in general. This allows them to decide if they are satisfied with what they bring to the microcosm, and if not,
empowers them to exercise the will to change it (Yalom, 2005). Thus, despite the different jargon, the similarity
between the two fields is evident. In both cases, deep learning is based upon the intentionality of the learner to
make changes, which occurs as a result of a reflective process that they engage in.
           In addition to the content-process integration as well as the role of reflection, one final similarity rests
with group cohesion, or generally the sense of membership in the group (Yalom, 2005). In GP, this has been
identified as an elemental therapeutic factor. In CSCL, it is possible to find some corollaries to this, such as with
the study of the design of social infrastructure for effective collaboration (Bielaczyc, 2006). Still, there have
been calls in CSCL to further examine "the social (psychological) dimension of social interaction for group
forming    group structure and group dynamics" (Kreijns, Kirschner, & Jochems,            2003, p. 343). While GP deals
with group cohesion more directly as part of its theory and practice, it is clear that it is important to both fields.
           While   the similarities between    GP  and  teaching    and  learning   about  CSCL     are striking, there  are
important   differences  too. As    mentioned   already, the     content of GP   and   CSCL   differ,   each  with its  own
interests. Other   key  differences    have to do  with  the goals,   participants, and   settings  of  each. Even   though
contemporary GP has moved away from curative goals and today aims for learning and growth like in teaching
and learning about CSCL (Yalom, 2005), the goals are therapeutic. In comparison, participants in courses about
CSCL are typically in graduate institutions who aim to develop their professional interests and skills. As such,
the terms of the agreement and expectations between therapist-client versus teacher-student are different.
           Taking these differences into account, we adapted a theoretical framework from GP and applied it to
teaching   and  learning  about  CSCL.      The design   based    on  the   adapted framework      had  three   inter-related
components: (a) content-process integration, (b) promoting group cohesion, and (c) reflection. We applied this
to a blended learning community as part of a graduate-level course. We focus on describing this "grain of sand"
seeking to illustrate the learning that emerged about CSCL as a consequence.

Implementation of the Framework
In this paper, we illustrate our preliminary findings in a case study of a blended graduate course as part of the
Educational    Technologies   Graduate      Program at   the  University    of Haifa   (UH),  Israel.   The   course,  titled
"Challenges    and  Approaches      to Technology-Enhanced       Teaching    and  Learning"   (CATELT)        served  as an
introductory requirement for all students in the multi-year program. CATELT's primary goal was to teach the
basics of  the  learning  sciences,    with a  special  focus    on CSCL.    Originally  enacted    during the   2006-2007
academic year, five previous annual iterations were progressively refined to form the version (2011-2012) that is
presented in this paper.
           CATELT 2011/2 included 14 students, aged 23-54, who had no prior relationship and were selected
based on their academic records and interest in educational technologies. The primary course moderator, who
was accompanied by a teacher's assistant (TA) and a researcher, was a senior lecturer at the UH. In addition to
his research interests in innovative educational technology and collaborative learning communities, his prior
training in group counseling was relevant to enacting the adapted GP framework.

Data collection and analysis
To  draw   conclusions,   rich   micro-level   data from     ftf class   interactions, the   online collaborative    editing
environment     (Wiki),  personal   interviews    and   observations     of modersator/TA     meetings     were    collected
throughout the full duration of the course. These were analyzed micro-analytically (e.g., Meira, 1998; Siegler &
Crowley, 1991). Findings based on video and audio recordings of the ftf interactions, as well as all written
material from the Wiki, were reviewed by the researcher and triangulated by a committee of expert and novice
peers. Furthermore, conclusions were reached only after multiple sources of data validated a specific result.

© ISLS                                                                                                                  241
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                            Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

Design
CATELT had a blended course structure that was arranged as a series of 26 alternating and interconnected face-
to-face (ftf) and  online interactions. These  occurred     in a small  classroom   and  online collaborative  editing
environment (Wiki) (Ben-Zvi, 2007). Each pair of interactions occurred over one week, making the course
duration a thirteen-week semester. Several activities were run during each interaction, as seen in Figure 1.
Overall, reflective activity in the form of groups reflection sessions (GRS) consisted of nearly one-third (758 out
of 2410 minutes) of all ftf interaction; reflective diaries and moderator reflective messages were recurring and
central components of online interactions. The remaining components were either collaborative activities on the
course content, or aimed to build group cohesion between group members.

                       Figure 1. Sample of activities in CATELT's adapted GP framework.

Component 1. Content-Process Integration
Content and process in CATELT were integrated such that students could examine their own collaborative
learning process in a technology-enhanced environment. To do this, the learning process that emerged and was
practiced became the basis of both ftf and online discussions, primarily in reflective activities. Likewise, CSCL
content that was relevant to the students' experience of learning was collaboratively studied. These interacted
symbiotically. As students developed more collaborative experience, they could understand CSCL content more
deeply; as students understood CSCL content more deeply, they could collaborate more effectively. While this
integration in studying about CSCL is similar to that in GP, two key adaptations to the framework were made.
First, the actual content studied dealt with CSCL, instead of substantive content of GP. Second, the design was
adapted so that students could participate in a process of CSCL instead of GP.
          CSCL content was introduced in three broad themes that were addressed sequentially, in relation to the
expected learning trajectory of the students. The first theme focused on the individual learner, as the students
entered the course primarily with traditional views of learning. Specifically, the first four chapters from "How
People Learn"  (Bransford   2000) were studied  collaboratively to deepen their   understandings of learning, mainly
from an individualistic perspective, while providing them with collaborative experience. As the students gained
this collaborative learning experience, the course moved to the second theme of learning in a community. This
consisted  of academic   articles that had  an important     influence on CSCL    (e.g., Brown  &   Campione,   1994;
Brown, Collins, & Duguid, 1989). The content of the final theme maintained this collaborative focus but in
ways  that were   supported  by   technology  (e.g., Scardamalia   &   Bereiter, 1994),  as the students  increasingly
engaged in the course Wiki. As such, the content was planned to parallel the broad process of the students'
learning.
          Having students experience CSCL was also integral to the GP framework. Mediated ftf sessions alone,
like in GP, would not have sufficed to make the experience one that entailed CSCL. As such, a number of ftf
and online activities were supplemented to give the students a range of CSCL experiences. These were primarily
designed on the course Wiki, which the students needed to complete throughout the week. As part of their
online assignments, students were typically asked to work in self-created teams and co-author content pages on
the Wiki. These were based upon key concepts and ideas found in their assigned readings. Although some Wiki-
based  activities were   completed  individually, such    as the writing  of  final course  papers, all   of these had
components, such as peer-feedback, that encouraged the students to collaborate intensely.
          Assignments generally had ill-structured designs, leaving the group members to deal with challenges
like forming groups on their own and deciding for themselves where to stop. These assignments were designed
this way  purposely   so that students  could  engage    in  CSCL  experiences   that brought   about difficulties and
challenged    them to  think  deeply   about  the    process they  were   engaged   in.  Moreover,    the moderators'
interventions  challenged   the   students to  be    in a   continual  search for   improvement   and   deepening   of

© ISLS                                                                                                             242
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                             Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

understanding which took precedence over praising students for a job well done. This was important because it
focused on the process of collaboration over achieving a final product, raising important issues that could be
related to CSCL content, such as that learning never ends (lifelong learning) and that learning should be driven
by the   student  (learner-centered  design). Designing    and  intervening   for  serious challenges gave   the group
experiences that they could consider, becoming an important source of content in reflective activities. This also
explains the reference to challenges in the course title.

Component 2: Promoting Group Cohesion
Cohesion building in the group served two primary purposes. The first was to get the students, to the maximum
extent  possible, to feel a  part of and    participate in the  community.    The   second  purpose   was   to  generate
important collaboration-related process issues as content. To fulfill these purposes, several specially designed
activities as well as techniques throughout the course were enacted.
         Familiarization  activities were   the  most   direct method   to promote    group   cohesion.  Five   different
familiarization activities were run towards the start of the semester (weeks one, two, three, five, and nine). Each
of these used some artifact (e.g. image, textual prompt) and involved some form of peer-to-peer conversation so
that students could more freely share their personal feelings, attitudes, and perspectives with each other in a
trusting and  safe environment.   Additionally,  various   techniques  were   used  by  the  moderators   to encourage
group   cohesion,  both within and   outside  of the  familiarization  activities.  For example, at  the  start of peer
discussions  students were regularly asked to talk with someone who they didn't know yet         to reduce the fear of
approaching an unknown person and to deepen their relationship with them. At times, students were encouraged
to sit in different places in the room, which the moderators themselves often modeled by switching places
themselves. The moderators also discouraged particularly active students from dominating by encouraging them
to wait and listen; invited members to join the community by welcoming them warmly on the course Wiki; and
built a caring and trusting community with empathy by demonstrating personal knowledge of the students'
perspectives. Together with the familiarization activities, these many techniques promoted group cohesion.
         In addition to directly building the students' sense of membership to the group         a  second purpose of
promoting group cohesion was to give students experience on what it meant to build a learning community. By
being engaged in a process of building group cohesion, they could examine some of the related challenges and
issues.  For example,   one  student who    reflected upon  the  first ftf meeting,  which   was designed    largely to
promote cohesion, thought of the implications in relation to her own experiences as well as educational design
in general.

         Patricia (2): The excitement of first grade won't return but this was close... I left the class
         with a feeling of, "if a student didn't have a teacher that wanted them to feel, this is something
         they need to go through! So they will have an appetite for more". It was pleasant for me to be
         in class, many smiles, a lot of listening, a lot of patience, and attempts to calm fears. We the
         students were in the middle, we told about ourselves and listened to others, who listened to us
         and cared for us. (3)

         As such, cohesion building was not just a mechanism to facilitate the group's functioning        but was also
part of the content-process integration. In this way, like the other collaborative activities, the process of building
group cohesion was a basis for reflection and learning.

Component 3: Reflection
Reflective activities in CATELT had the purpose of creating rich discourse in two tiers. The first tier focused on
the here-and-now events of the group, and the second tier on illuminating this process. There were three types of
reflective activities in CATELT that enacted these two tiers. These included group reflection sessions (GRS),
online reflective diaries, and online moderator reflective messages. While reflection in CATELT was at the core
of its resemblance with GP because of these tiers, several adaptations were made.
         Among all CATELTs activities, GRS had the most direct resemblance with GP because of the format,
which   is typically run  in small   mediated   ftf groups  (Yalom,    2005).  GRS   elicited first tier here-and-now
discourse  based  on the  group's   present and  past   experiences. To    do this, the moderator   used  a  number  of
techniques all guided by an underlying principle of focusing on the here-and-now. For example, when one
student began talking abstractly and analysing his experience, the moderator abruptly stopped and refocused
him:

         Moderator: You can't make generalizations in a reflection discussion because a large portion
         of us... act from different paradigms that they bring from their previous lives...    which is why
         I'm asking you to explain your paradigm based on exactly what is happening to you.

© ISLS                                                                                                             243
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                        Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

          As an adaptation to GP, CATELT had many collaborative activities, particularly during the week on
the Wiki. These supplemented the GRS discourse, as students were encouraged to talk about the events that
occurred collaboratively over the week. While this adaptation broadened the experiences that could be discussed
during reflection sessions, it was still operationally consistent with GP, as "past events of the therapy group are
a part of the here-and-now" (Yalom, 2005, p. 162).
          A second adaptation had to do with the second tier. While both GP and CSCL deal with inter-group
relations and therefore have a great deal of content in common   CATELT's focus      on CSCL changed    the focus of
the process commentary. For example, during one reflection session the group discussed their experiences of
collaborative editing  on the  Wiki.   One student  raised the challenge of  editing   others' work    aware of the
different styles of writing but not wanting to offend a peer by making changes. At this point, Phil offered a
solution:

          Phil: There is a simple solution: You split the sections between the participants, you upload all
          of it, and then you decide that one person is the editor of everything.

The moderator used this opportunity to make process commentary based on CSCL content. Instead of focusing
on Phil's  motivations  for   offering advice as   may be   done in  GP  the moderator      instead focused  on  his
understanding of cooperation and collaboration.

          Moderator: This is one of the solutions [to how the group should work together]. You come
          from a perspective as if you know the answer. But this solution is problematic because when
          you talk about cooperation versus collaboration, the meaning of collaboration is more or less
          what Tina and Jane described: They worked nearly completely synchronously, on every word
          and statement. That is collaboration - a shared product that is a synergy of their work. You
          offer a different model.

          Together, the GRS included two tiers that are found in GP. The first tier elicited the group's here-and-
now experiences as they collaborated, and the second tier illuminated this process in relation to CSCL content.
          In addition to the GRS, online reflective diaries and online moderator reflection messages contributed
to the reflective discourse. The online reflective diary was a continuation of the GRS, where students were asked
to reflect upon their learning from the ftf meeting that passed. They wrote these in the community section of the
Wiki, where other members of the class could see. This encouraged a continuation and further deepening of key
ideas raised during the ftf meeting.     tudents  were also encouraged   to create   conversations  in each  others'
reflective diary discussion pages to deepen dialogues by seeding, migrating, and mutually appropriating ideas
(Brown & Campione, 1994). To strengthen the connection between these experiences and GRS, the course
moderators would sometimes take meaningful conversations and use them as part of ftf reflections. While the
writing of personal   diaries after sessions  is a common   practice in  GP,  the   public  online  format  of these
reflections, the discussions around them, and their connection to ftf meetings are adaptations.
          Like the reflection diaries, another common practice in GP is for the therapist to write and share their
own reflection following each ftf meeting (Yalom, 2005). In CATELT, this was done in the course Wiki. The
messages, which were written following reflective meetings by the moderators after each interaction, presented
the moderators' reflection of what was meaningful. They also encouraged exemplary behavior and built on
related CSCL content that was brought up during ftf meetings.

Transference and Change
Just like in the GP framework, a critical aspect of CATELT had to do with developing group cohesiveness so
that the members could re-experience their attitudes, behaviors, and understandings from their daily lives into
the group setting, a process known as transference (Yalom, 2005). The microcosm that developed in CATELT,
in comparison to GP, had a more direct focus on collaboration. As such, students had a chance to play out their
own past experiences in the collaborative learning microcosm that was formed. These were examined as part of
the reflective discourse. As students raised their awareness over who they were as learners along with their role
in the group, they were able to intentionally make changes to the way they collaborated.
          Transference into a  cohesive  CSCL    microcosm  occurred within  the    context of group   cohesiveness.
Examples of group cohesiveness could be found by the emergence of group behaviors as the course developed.
For example, the students began organizing their own shared lunches, had informal meetings before class over
coffee, and were very active online during the week    particularly commenting in each      others' diary discussion
pages. Evidence came about explicitly as well, such as when one student shared her feelings about the group as
part of a GRS. The discussion revolved around the metaphor of a turtle:

          Moderator: What is your protection? If you were a turtle, what would protect you?

© ISLS                                                                                                          244
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                          Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

         Beth: ...You are all my family, yes, in the past few weeks I feel this way: Protection.

         Given the cohesiveness of the group, transference effects were found prevalently. For example, Patricia
was a self-described competitive person, who worked in the hi-tech industry for many years. Showing that her
behavior in the course was transference from her "real" world      Patricia started the course in the same manner.
For example, she favored learning from an authority over her peers. She also made many arguments rejecting
the idea of collaborative learning on the grounds of practicality:

         Patricia: In a workplace when you come to work, the work is very important at the end of the
         day. And when I think about these things, I say... what is happening here is an island. ...In
         real life, ultimately you go to your job and you need to sit with yourself and work.

         Because    of  Patricia's  background     her  primary    preoccupation  in   the course   related   to her
individualistic, competitive  background.  The     cohesiveness  of the   microcosm   allowed   her to transfer   her
experience to CATELT.

Individual Change
The collaborative microcosm that developed, which formed part of the content of reflective activity, led to
discourse where the students examined and tested their own and others' behavior and identity as learners in the
course.

         Patricia: From the discussion on the Learning Sciences ­ [I reached the conclusion] that there
         is a need to learn more about how we learn and understand. That I need to learn the way I
         learn myself, what actions I do while reading, when I understand better, how I overcome a text
         that isn't clear, and an open question for me - learning in a community, looking at ourselves as
         a learning community. I am so much of a "lone wolf" in this respect...

Such discourse allowed students to become aware of themselves as collaborative learners, and suggest new
ways to participate in  the group. For  example    as part of Patricia's competitiveness she was very dominant in
the group towards the beginning of the semester. By becoming aware of her behavior through reflection, she
appeared to show greater sensitivity towards others by taking a less dominant role:

         Patricia: In the last few lessons in the reflection, especially in the beginning, I spoke a lot and
         now I talk less. This is because sometimes I want to hear others. I don't want to be in a
         situation ­ I admit that I talked a lot ­ and I don't want to be in a situation where I am always
         talking. I really want to hear others.

         Patricia's change   coincided  with    an epistemological  shift. At  first she questioned  the  logic  and
effectiveness of learning from peers, arguing that bad ideas could be seeded and migrated. As such, she resisted
collaboration with peers on the Wiki. However, upon reflecting on her collaborative experience with her peers,
she showed a greater openness and desire to listen and learn from others.

         Patricia: I assume that if someone wrote something, they thought about it, and this is what
         they understood.   [I want] to see why they understood it this way       because maybe   I didn't
         understand it.

         While Patricia's increased sensitivity and epistemological understanding was by no means linear nor
absolute, it did show that she was engaged in meaningful discourse about herself. Such personal awareness gave
her the will and desire to make these intentional changes.

Group Change
The intentional changes also occurred at the group level, which manifested, for example, as a group norms
discussion. From    the start of   the  semester,  at  any  time when     the group   complained  about   their  own
collaboration, the moderator encouraged the students to take responsibility over their own norms. Supporting
this call, a blank norms page on the Wiki was posted in the main navigation bar. This page included links to
previous iterations of the class' norms pages, suggesting that this stage would be reached later in the course. The
moderator did not assign such a task, however, waiting for the group to be ready to take responsibility for it.
Indeed, in  previous iterations of  the course,  the  group  norms  discussions  manifested  in different ways.   As
members in the group continued to reflect upon themselves and deepen their understanding of collaboration, the
idea coalesced that the group norms that emerged were not consistent with their desired behavior as a group.

© ISLS                                                                                                           245
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                                Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

         Patricia: On Wednesday, it became clear to me that I wasn't alone. That a few others thought
         that there wasn't collaboration and that it is not possible to create collaboration in this way.
         Something else is needed.

         The group, by consensus, chose to engage in a process of discussing their own norms so that they could
alter their existing norms.   With  the support  of          the group, two  student leaders  requested time  during  the
subsequent ftf interaction to lead a process where the group renegotiated their norms. They followed this with
more discussions on the Wiki. Showing symbolically that they really understood the process orientation of their
actions, they chose to work on their agreed upon norms in a page intended for collaborative discussion, instead
of a regular content page.
         Following the group norms discussion, the group maintained their collaborative focus for the remainder
of the semester. For example, when one student in a later assignment suggested that the group divide up a task
and complete the separate parts in small groups, the idea was rejected. One student wrote the following, and
several others quickly followed in agreement, showing that the group had intentionally changed.

         Patricia: Let's try  real collaborative editing         for once and not cooperative... not like Phil
         suggested (sorry Phil...). I mean that every person adds his insights to every paragraph and
         not that we shall break apart [the work] and each group writes something. That we already
         tried and we all thought this wasn't really collaborative editing...

Discussion and Conclusion
This theoretical paper presents a framework that is adapted from GP that can be used to design, enact, and
explain individual and group changes when teaching and learning about CSCL. Content-process integration,
group  cohesiveness,  and  reflection  are  essential         components  for this to  occur.  The idea  that a  learning
community can be viewed as a microcosm where transference effects take place, and where reflection empowers
students to make intentional changes, is a novel approach that can impact the field. Indeed, our illustrations,
while modest, show that there is potential in this framework for the design and promotion of deep learning.
Namely,  getting   individual learners  to make  intentional         changes  to their epistemological  ideas as well as
sensitivity towards others, along with getting groups to move from cooperative to collaborative learning, is a
potentially profound result. We posit that this is an important desired result of teaching and learning about
CSCL, and a key to getting students to enter the CSCL and Learning Sciences communities.
         Certainly, there are many aspects of our design and illustrations that are not considered as part of our
adapted GP framework. For example, GP has identified therapeutic factors that we have not considered here,
such as the instillation of hope (Yalom, 2005). We have focused on a simplified framework for GP to describe
the central mechanisms of individual and group change and what we consider are the most critical elements in
the design for this to happen. Our hope is that with more research, we can further develop this framework.
Moreover, using design-based research methodology, we can systematically adjust and refine our model to gain
a better understanding of how people learn about CSCL as they gain membership in the learning community.
         Our next steps include trying to re-teach CATELT with a different moderator. This can help us isolate
some of the characteristics of the moderator, such as personality and expertise, and focus instead on the role of
the design. Likewise, we are continuing our retrospective analysis of CATELT, micro-analysing the data on
related research questions that can provide a more complete description of the learning processes. We hope that
through these sustained efforts, we can positively influence programs and courses seeking to teach about CSCL
so students can be enculturated into the CSCL and Learning Sciences communities.

Endnotes
(1)   We use the terms transfer and transference in the context of its use in GP and not in relation to the concept as it is used
      commonly in the Learning Sciences (e.g., Bransford, 2000).
(2)   All course participants were designated pseudonyms to maintain their confidentiality.
(3)   All quotes were originally said or written in Hebrew, and have been translated for the sake of this paper. As part of our
      ongoing micro-analytic study, we closely examine the meaning of every word to make sure the translation is as close as
      possible to the original intention of the contributor.

References
Barab, S., & Squire, K. (2004). Design-based research: Putting a stake in the ground. Journal of the Learning
         Sciences, 13(1), 1-14.
Bielaczyc, K. (2006). Designing social infrastructure: The challenge of building computer-supported learning
         communities. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 15(3), 301­329.

© ISLS                                                                                                               246
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                        Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

Ben-Zvi,   D. (2007).  Using    Wiki   to promote    collaborative learning in  statistics education.   Technology
         Innovations in Statistics Education, 1(1), 1-18.
Bransford, J. D. (2000). How people learn: Brain, mind, experience, and school (Expanded ed.). Washington,
         D.C.: National Academy Press.
Brown, A. L., & Campione, J. C. (1994). Guided discovery in a community of learners. In K. McGilly (Ed.),
         Classroom lessons: Integrating cognitive theory and classroom practice (pp. 229-272). Cambridge,
         U.K.: The MIT Press.
Brown, J. S., Collins, A., & Duguid, P. (1989). Situated cognition and the culture of learning. Educational
         Researcher, 18(1), 32-42.
Darling-Hammond, L. (2000). How teacher education matters. Journal of Teacher Education, 51(3), 166-173.
De Graaf, R., De Laat, M., & Scheltinga, H. (2004). CSCL-ware in practice. In J. Strijbos, P.A. Kirschner, and
         R. Martens (Eds.), What we know about CSCL and implementing it in higher education (pp. 201-220).
         Boston, Mass.: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Kreijns, K., Kirschner, P. A., & Jochems, W. (2003). Identifying the pitfalls for social interaction in computer-
         supported collaborative    learning environments:  A  review   of  the research.   Computers    in Human
         Behavior, 19(3), 335-353.
Meira,  L. (1998). Making     sense of instructional devices: The   emergence   of transparency  in  mathematical
         activity. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 29(2), 121-142.
Phielix, C., Prins, F. J., & Kirschner, P. A. (2010). Awareness of group performance in a CSCL-environment:
         Effects of peer feedback and reflection. Computers in Human Behavior, 26(2), 151-161.
Ronen-Fuhrmann,    T., Kali,  Y., &   Hoadley,   C. M. (2008). Helping   education  students  understand    learning
         through designing. Educational Technology, 48(2), 26-33.
Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (1994). Computer support for knowledge-building communities. Journal of the
         Learning Sciences, 3(3), 265-283.
 ch n   D. A. (1987).  Educating  the reflective practitioner: Toward a new design for teaching     and learning in
         the professions. San Francisco, CA.: Jossey-Bass.
Sfard, A. (1998). On two metaphors for learning and the dangers of choosing just one. Educational Researcher,
         27(2), 4-13.
Siegler, R. S., & Crowley, K. (1991). The microgenetic method. American Psychologist, 46(6), 606-620.
Stahl, G., Koschmann,     T., &  Suthers, D. (2006).  Computer-supported    collaborative  learning: An  historical
         perspective.  In R.  K. Sawyer   (Ed.), Cambridge    handbook  of  the learning   sciences (pp. 409-426).
         Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Strijbos, J., Kirschner, P. A., & Martens, R. (2004). What we know about CSCL and implementing it in higher
         education. Boston, Mass.: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Yalom, I. D. (2005). The theory and practice of group psychotherapy (5th Ed.). New York, NY.: Basic Books.
Yost, D. S., Sentner, S. M., & Forlenza-Bailey, A. (2000). An examination of the construct of critical reflection:
         Implications for teacher education programming in the 21st century. Journal of Teacher Education,
         51(1), 39-49.

© ISLS                                                                                                         247
