CSCL 2013 Proceedings                     Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

                Designing Interactive Scaffolds to Support Teacher-Led
                         Inquiry of Complex Systems Concepts
                             Joshua A. Danish, Indiana University, jdanish@indiana.edu
                             Asmalina Saleh, Indiana University, asmsaleh@indiana.edu
                             Luis A. Andrade, Indiana University, laandrade@indiana.edu

         Abstract:    This   study examined     the design    of interactive  scaffolds  to support   teacher-led
         inquiry into complex systems concepts. The goal was to both develop a brief instructional unit
         with   minimal    resource  requirements,    and   to   examine    students'  initial  understanding  of
         complex systems concepts based on this unit. Early elementary students (aged six to seven)
         were randomly assigned to six mixed-ability groups of five students (N=30) who participated
         either in a scaffolded, teacher-led inquiry session with the BeeSign simulation software or a
         teacher-led book reading session, both centered on honeybees collecting nectar. Statistical
         analysis of   a  direct  measure   and   transfer measures    indicated that   while   students  in  both
         conditions developed initial understanding of systems related concepts, those in the BeeSign
         inquiry condition significantly outperformed their peers. Video analyses reveal that designing
         the simulation around teacher-scaffolded inquiry prompts led to more student articulations of
         their ideas and opportunities to examine prior misconceptions.

Introduction
         Recent   research   has  consistently  indicated  the   value   of teaching   students to view   the  world using
complex systems related concepts (c.f, Hmelo-Silver & Pfeffer, 2004; Resnick & Wilensky, 1998). The BeeSign
project  (Danish, 2009;    Danish,   Peppler,   Phelps, &   Washington,     2011),   a simple   computer  simulation   that
depicts  honeybees    in two  different   hives collecting    nectar has  also demonstrated     that with robust   teacher-
scaffolded inquiry, young students were able to explore honeybees collecting nectar from a complex systems
perspective (Figure 1 or http://joshuadanish.com/beesign.html). The present study aims to build on this prior
work in three ways. First, we aimed to extend the prior examination of elementary students' understanding of
complex systems concepts by explicitly examining both direct and transfer measures of learning based on items
from the complex systems inventory developed by Goldstone and Day (2010). Second, the goal was to explore
the potential for designing a short intervention with minimal resource requirements. This was intended to both
vet the possibility for supporting a broader range of teachers in teaching complex systems related concepts, and
to begin  documenting     how   a  first experience  with  a  system   might   support  student  understanding.    For that
reason,  inquiry  with   the BeeSign     software was   contrasted   with   students  collectively reading   a book  about
honeybees with their teacher, the manner in which most students would likely encounter this content currently.
Finally, to continue exploring the role of teacher scaffolds for supporting student engagement with inquiry into
the systems content, these scaffolds were supported by prompts integrated into the BeeSign software, which also
supported   the first goal   by limiting  the necessity    of prior  teacher  knowledge     of  systems  concepts,  instead
building upon their understanding of how to support inquiry more broadly.

Theoretical and Design Framework
The final design is a simple web-page framework designed to scaffold the teacher and students' use of BeeSign
(Figure 1). Our design was guided by activity theory, and by the scaffolding framework proposed by Quintana
and colleagues (2004). Specifically, activity theory helped us to attend to the relationship between the software
(tool), the intended   division   of labor,  and  assumed     rules  for the  classroom   environment    as  we  identified
scaffolds to include.

                                           Figure 1: The BeeSign framework

© ISLS                                                                                                                 241
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                  Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

Methodology
The participants were 30 students (six to seven years old) in a mixed-age classroom (first and second grade) in
an elementary school in a small midwestern city. Students were randomly assigned to the BeeSign experimental
or the book control condition (n=5, three groups per condition) with an effort to balance groups in terms of
teacher-identified ability level. Each condition took approximately the same amount of time (30-40 minutes).
All conditions were videotaped for later analysis and students participated in an interview-based post-test to
measure their conceptual understanding. These results were coded in terms of accurate mentions of feedback
loops, emergence, and iteration. One researcher coded all of the interviews and another coder then coded a
randomly selected 30% of the data for inter-rater reliability and achieved an overlap of 90%.

Results
Group results were compared using two t-tests with a Bonferroni-adjusted alpha of .025 (.05/2), two-tailed.
Students in the BeeSign condition (M = 8.79, SD = 4.66) performed significantly better, t(16.99) = 9.92, p =
0.003, than the control condition (M = 4.21, SD = 1.85) on the direct measure. The students in the BeeSign
condition (M = 3.93, SD =1.82) also performed significantly better, t(25.26) = .652, p = 0.012, than students in
the control condition (M = 2.21, SD = 1.53) on the transfer measure. To explain the differences in learning
gains, we examined video of the classroom activities. We hypothesized that the BeeSign activity promoted a
more targeted, rich discussion, providing opportunities for the teacher to guide students through conversations
related to how and why the bees behaved, and what the implications of the bee behavior were. The framing of
the activity as inquiry also supported the teacher in asking questions to make student thinking visible, and offer
opportunities to confront common misconceptions. Video analyses corroborated this hypothesis; the teacher in
the BeeSign group typically began the activity by asking students to read what was projected on the whiteboard
screen and describe their observations and predictions. He then encouraged them to reflect upon the reasons
behind these and solicited multiple competing hypotheses so that they could each be discussed and resolved
using the  simulation. The    teacher  frequently   challenged the students  to analyze  and   assess their prior
predictions. These discussions of specific processes helped students understand the relationship between the bee
dance and increased nectar collection.

Discussion
         Our design represents a first step in exploring alternative methods for helping schools to integrate
cutting edge content  into their curriculum  in   a non-resource-intensive manner.   While long-term   curricular
innovations coupled with professional development are important, the economic reality is that there will be new
content that need exploring without a curriculum overhaul. Thus, it is valuable to explore scaffolded design
models that leverage existing capabilities to engage teachers and students with this new content with minimal
additional cost. Our design was effective precisely because it relied upon the teacher's expertise in leading
effective group inquiry. By assuming that the teacher would effectively promote student inquiry, we were able
to instead focus upon which questions and aspects of the content to make most visible for the teacher and the
students to explore together.

References
Danish, J. A. (2009). BeeSign: a Design Experiment to Teach Kindergarten and First Grade Students About
         Honeybees   From   a  Complex   Systems    Perspective. Paper presented  at the American     Educational
         Research Association, San Diego, CA.
Danish, J. A., Peppler, K., Phelps, D., & Washington, D. A. (2011). Life in the Hive: Supporting Inquiry into
         Complexity Within the Zone of Proximal Development. Journal of Science Education and Technology,
         1-14.
Goldstone, R. L., & Day, S. (2010). Complex Systems Inventory. Indiana University, Bloomington, IN. Percepts
         and Concepts Lab, Psychological and Brain Sciences.
Hmelo-Silver, C. E., & Pfeffer, M. G. (2004). Comparing expert and novice understanding of a complex system
         from the perspective of structures, behaviors, and functions. Cognitive Science, 28(1), 127-138.
Quintana, C., Reiser, B. J., Davis, E. A., Krajcik, J., Fretz, E., Duncan, R. G., . . . Soloway, E. (2004). A
         scaffolding design   framework  for software   to support   science inquiry. Journal   of the  Learning
         Sciences, 337-386.
Resnick, M., & Wilensky, U. (1998). Diving into complexity: Developing probabilistic decentralized thinking
         through role-playing activities. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 7(2), 153-172.

Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Sarah Manlove, Gabriel Recchia, Johanna Keene & Robert L. Goldstone for their
efforts in this study, and the Indiana University Proffitt Endowment, which funded part of this research.

© ISLS                                                                                                       242
