CSCL 2013 Proceedings                    Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

Hybrid Shmybrid: Using Collaborative Structure to Understand the
          Relationship Between Virtual and Tangible Elements of a
                                            Computational Craft

     Maneksha DuMont, Deborah A. Fields, Utah State University, 2830 Old Main Hill, Logan, UT 84322
                          Email: m.dumont@aggiemail.usu.edu, deborah.fields@usu.edu

          Abstract: In this paper we use a case of students' collaborative models to reflect back on the
          relationship between computational and tangible elements in a design project. The dual nature
          of the  computational    craft rather  than  being   interdependent  was  dichotomized,    allowing
          students to use their prior interests to dictate participation.

Background
In recent years the DIY (Do-It-Yourself) movement has provided exciting new opportunities to open computing
to broader   audiences   by integrating     programming   with   new   media   production (Kafai   &  Peppler,  2011).
Computational crafts, a hybrid of tangible art and virtual computation, provide young people with new ways to
relate to computing     through   interests  and hobbies  (Eisenberg,     2003).  Studies show   these  hybrid  design
technologies can engage young people in multiple disciplines, like art and computer programming or circuit
design, especially young people who might not otherwise be interested in or exposed to these disciplines (Rusk
et al., 2008). Although studies investigate the benefits of designing with computational crafts, relatively few
examine the relationship between collaborative structures and the media themselves. Here we suggest that the
way students managed tasks in a collaborative design project highlights potential discrepancies in the fusion of
tangible and digital media.
          In this study, students' division of roles in collaborative group models demonstrates how compelling it
was to pull apart computational and tangible elements of the multi-modal design project. Rather than providing
multiple means of entry into design, for instance engaging in programming through a prior interest in crafting,
the multi-modality allowed for division of labor that separated these elements. In this poster we suggest that
collaborative structures influenced students' participation, or lack thereof, during a computational craft design
project, presenting a representative case where student design teams segregated tasks amongst themselves and
worked in isolation. We look at the relationship between students' division of labor to reflect on the hybridity
(or lack thereof) of the computational craft media and consider implications for learning.

Context & Methods
In this study alternative high school students designed tangible/digital pets over the course of 12 workshops.
Students at the alternative high school have failed so many classes at the traditional high school they need
intensive remediation to graduate. This project targeted those students in hopes of drawing them into interesting
areas of design and computation. During the study we collected surveys, field notes, video recordings, and
student interviews, focusing on collaboration in three design groups. We drew on activity theory (e.g. Cole,
1996) to analyze the relationship between students' division of labor in their collaborative groups and the nature
of the design project (the tool). We began by identifying and comparing episodes of collaborative interaction (an
exchange of three or more turns) and potential collaborative interaction (i.e. one student asking a question of
another related to the project). We focused on what students attended to during each episode then corroborated
these episodes with specific utterances in student interviews. Here we present the case of one group, Tegan,
Rocky   &    Ted, a  junior girl  and  two   senior boys,  who    worked    as a  team  using   Scratch (a media-rich
programming    environment)      and PicoBoards    (an  external  logic   board) to develop   a whimsical  interactive
physical  creature.  Their  pet, a  monkey,   resembled  recently  popular   children's toys  like Zhu  Zhu   Pets and
Webkinz   with    both physical  (a  fluffy real-world  body)  and virtual  (an  interactive avatar) elements. Tegan,
Rocky & Ted programmed the monkey's interactions on the screen via inputs from sensors, buttons, and sliders
embedded on the PicoBoard within the pet's body.

Findings
Our analyses draw on three groups of students, all of whom divided roles amongst themselves and in turn reified
existing  interests and  expertise.  For the  sake  of  space, in this  poster we   focus on  Tegan,  Rocky   & Ted's
collaborative group, but the findings reflect the relationship between division of labor and lack of integration in
the computational craft across all groups. The full poster will illustrate activities of the other groups as well.
          One of the first steps that Tegan, Rocky & Ted took was dividing the design task into separate parts:
programming the virtual pet, crafting the physical pet, and planning the interface between them. After this
decision  they rarely   exchanged    ideas  during  the design   task. For  instance, on  two   important days  of the

© ISLS                                                                                                             243
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                 Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

workshop (days 7 and 10), the group interacted together regarding their design for only 14 of 80 minutes of
workshop time. Tegan claimed ownership of the physical pet design, leaving her partners to do the computer
programming. As Rocky said, "Tegan pretty much made the pet and me and Ted pretty much programmed." Not
only this, but Tegan became so attached to her physical pet design that she refused to let her partners collaborate
with her on the design. At one point, when Ted tried to assist Tegan with a specific bit of construction, she
forcefully took the pet away from him saying his contribution was, "Not perfect". Rocky admitted, "She would
get mad at us if we tried touching her pet". The nature of the work was individual and illustrates how divided the
tasks were: the monkey was "her pet" not "our pet."
         By disassociating herself from other elements of the project, Tegan prevented her group's project from
being as successful as it could have been. In an interview, Tegan admitted she let her partners "do whatever they
wanted" with the computer program. In fact, once the craft materials arrived, Tegan did no further programming
and rarely looked at the computer. Thus the effect of compartmentalization; Tegan was at once fanatical about
her physical design and cavalier about the virtual counterpart. This disparity had ramifications for the students'
final product. For example, on the last day of the project, before students demonstrated their pets to invited
guests in a design exhibit, Ted expressed concern that their monkey looked different on screen versus real life.
For instance, the physical pet wore a scarf and mittens while the virtual pet had prominent freckles and no
accessories. Ted argued that this was a fundamental problem with their design project in that people would not
be able to tell the two elements went together. Tegan rebuffed his argument, saying the pets looked the same and
continued making changes to the physical monkey, widening the gap between tangible and virtual design. Not
only did Tegan refuse to address her partner's concern, she was disinclined to engage in other parts of the project
even in situations where the amalgamation of the overall design might reflect poorly on her efforts.
         Perceived expertise influenced students' participation within their groups. For instance, when asked
why the group broke up responsibilities, Tegan replied, "Well, cause they're (Rocky and Ted) not really crafty
and also they'd just mess it up because I had an idea in my head." The perception that the boys were not crafty,
shared by the boys, resulted in the boys' lack of opportunity to design with the crafts. The assumption that
computational crafts provide a pathway to computation and also deliver students to engage in new disciplines
does not always hold. In this case, the opposite was true, Tegan abandoned programming in pursuit of her
interest in physical pet design; Rocky and Ted were not encouraged to craft and were rebuked when either one
attempted to contribute. Similarly, Tegan and others in the role of crafter rarely accessed the computer and did
little to no programming. As observed elsewhere, division of labor has the potential to aggravate rather than
ameliorate changes in expertise in often-stratified classrooms (Abraham & Wilensky, 2005).
         In light of students' divided collaboration, we suggest the need for a framework considering the actual
hybridity of these media. As hoped, the tangible/digital pet design project provided multiple entry points for
students with different interests, some in crafting and others in programming.   However,   rather    than being
interdependent, the craft and computational media were dichotomized by students, allowing prior interests and
expertise to dictate participation. Students divided tasks and attended to different parts of the design, which has
potential implications for the development of new interests and learning. This need not be the case, but it
provides a word of caution to educators and researchers excited about the potential in the Maker movement.
Rather than assuming that tangible/digital crafts are promising simply because they combine approaches, we
need to develop models that see hybridity on a continuum and research effects of these media on learning and
interest development.

References
Abrahamson, D. & Wilensky, U. (2005). The stratified learning zone: Examination of the pros and woes of
         collaborative-learning design in demographically-diverse mathematics classrooms. Paper presented at
         the annual meeting of the American Educational Research Association. Montreal, Canada.
Eisenberg, M. (2003). Mindstuff: Educational technology beyond the computer. Convergence, 9(29), 29-53.
Cole, M. (1996). Cultural psychology: A once and future discipline. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Kafai, Y. B. & Peppler, K. A. (2011). Youth, technology, and DIY: Developing participatory competencies in
         creative media production. Review of Research in Education. 35, 89-119.
Rusk, N., Resnick, M., Berg, R. & Pezalla-Granlund, M. (2008). New pathways into robotics: Strategies for
         broadening participation. Journal of Science Education and Technology, 17(1), 59-69.

© ISLS                                                                                                      244
