CSCL 2013 Proceedings                   Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

       Collaboration in a Non-Digital, Computational Game Space
             Sean C. Duncan, Indiana University, Learning Sciences Program, secdunc@indiana.edu

        Abstract: An investigation of collaboration was conducted in a non-digital, computationally-
        minded board game, Pandemic. A heightened collaborative context was developed for the
        game,   as a   means   of   investigating collaboration and    play.  Content   codes   to capture
        collaboration  (help-seeking)   and computational   thinking  were   applied to  verbal utterances
        (n=80 turns), with Discourse analyses applied to uncover interpersonal dynamics in the space.

Introduction
In this paper, computationally-supported collaborative learning is investigated within a tactile play space. The
forms of collaboration   and   computational   thinking that  arise   through the  play  of a   single commercial,
cooperative, strategic board game,   Pandemic     (Leacock, 2007),  are discussed.   The game   was  designed    as a
computational system for players to cooperatively play against; with a deep look at the play of this game, the
conception of "computation" is broadened to incorporate algorithmic, rule-based practices, while also pragmatic
benefits of such systems for researcher manipulation and experimentation are advocated.
        Previous work has developed understandings of the forms of computational thinking (see Berland &
Lee, 2011; Berland & Duncan, 2012), and help-seeking (Duncan, Boecking, & Berland, 2012) within the game.
A common thread has been a focus on the naturalistic play within the game's rule constraints, and how changes
to the computational game structure of the game can elicit different collaborative and computational practices.
The emphasis in this paper is upon unpacking collaboration within a specific context for learning -- how can
we understand the ways that such manipulations to the collaborative, computational structure of a game give
rise to different forms of interaction? And what might this indicate about how games work as computational and
interactional rule-based systems?

Method
Pandemic is a commercial, collaborative game in which participants work together to rid the world of four
diseases simultaneously ravaging the globe. Adopting individual roles (e.g., the Scientist or the Medic) with
unique abilities/responsibilities, players are encouraged to work together in whatever way they see as most
effective. Participants in this study were provided all game components, along with an additional rule dictating
that one of the unused roles in the game would be controlled by all players as if it were another person, referred
to as the "ghost player" condition.
        Data from two (n=2; n=3) runs of the game were analyzed in the present study. Both sets of players
were undergraduates at a Midwestern University in the United States, and all participants were unfamiliar with
the game before  participating  in  the study. Participants  were   video recorded   during play,  with   the verbal
interactions of each group first transcribed for further analysis. All verbal interactions between players were
transcribed. In order to capture vocalized consequences of the heightened collaborative context (the "ghost
player" condition in these play sessions), a set of codes to capture "help seeking" (Nelson-LeGall, 1981; Aleven,
et al, 2006) utterances was also developed, including capturing when help on Rules were Requested, Given,
Received and Argued, as well as when help on Strategy was Requested, Given, Received, and Argued. Please
see Berland & Duncan (2012) for computational thinking codes.

Results
Computational thinking codes were quite highly applied, with Simulation and Algorithm Building the highest-
coded of the two "ghost player" groups (the only codes crossing 40% applied). Strategy-based help-seeking
codes were applied somewhat more than rules-based, perhaps indicating a trend toward strategic discussions in
this heightened collaborative context. Since when each player was speaking was key (the "ghost player"), the
context of the game at each point was captured in three forms for each player/turn combination and which
player's actual in-game turn was occurring: "On Turn" contexts, "Non-Turn" contexts, and a "Ghost" context.
The percentage coded for each varied widely across the set of computational thinking and help-seeking codes.
Most relevant for this study was the variation within the "Ghost" player/turn contexts.
        Several patterns emerged in this comparison. First, there were zero codes applied for the rules-based
help-seeking codes  within the  Ghost   contexts; on "ghost  player"   turns, no participants in   either group  had
utterances that indicated a discussion of the game's rules. Additionally, strategy help-seeking codes were similar
for most codes other than Strategy Argued, which appeared to be quite a bit higher (20% of the Ghost context
player/turns vs. 8.3% of the Non-Ghost contexts). And, for the computational thinking codes, two major trends
seemed  apparent   from  these data:  (1) There   appeared  to  be  a greater  proportion coded    for each   of the
computational thinking codes for most of the codes, and (2) Algorithm Building coded greater in Ghost contexts
than that for the Non-Ghost contexts (60% for Ghost contexts vs. 55% for Non-Ghost contexts).

© ISLS                                                                                                           245
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                   Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

        Finally,  following     Duncan     &  Berland's   (2012)    and    Duncan's    (2010)    connected  content
coding/Discourse  analysis    approach, content coding  was   used to  select data for qualitative Discourse (Gee,
2010) analyses. For each of the help-seeking codes, the greatest proportional disparity between Non-Ghost
contexts and the Ghost context was Strategy Argued, while for the computational thinking codes, the code with
the greatest degree of saturation (and most applied code overall) was for Algorithm Building. Thus, these two
highly-applied codes were singled out for co-occurrences: In the first (2-player) participant group, Algorithm
Building and Strategy Argued co-occurred four times: in turns 2, 6, 11, 14. In the second (3-player) group, the
codes co-occurred once (in turn 10). Of these, two player/turn combinations (group 1, turn 6 and group 2, turn
10) were also during the "ghost player" turn, and thus coded as Ghost contexts. Group 2, turn 10 was selected to
further investigate; in this turn, players (Aqua, Bryson, and Claire) discussed strategies for the "ghost player"
and ridding the board of different disease tokens (yellow and black, in this case), as well as the placement of the
"Ghosty's" token on the map and strategies for future players (Claire, in this case).

Discussion
First, the heightened collaborative context of the "ghost player" condition seemed to give rise to a number of
computational thinking practices, as evinced through the computational thinking codes (matching results found
by Berland & Lee, 2011). With the addition of the help-seeking codes to the analysis, however, it seemed
collaboration was potentially complicit in the computational thinking practices found within the space. The lack
of rules-based help-seeking during the Ghost context was a surprise; the heightened collaborative context of the
"ghost player" may have given rise to a greater degree of strategic discussion since the lack of player investment
in a particular role in the game (as it was the fictional player's turn) may lead to players' feeling less of a need
for rules clarification.
        Additionally,     the Discourse  analysis highlighted  a   gap  between    the Strategy   Argued/Algorithm
Building activity and the consequential actions of the group. Though a heightened collaborative context seemed
to encourage more  discussion     of strategy and  potential  computational,  there was   still a general deficit of
computational thinking in this context. This disconnect may be reflected in the role of Claire in this case --
while the game   (and     our  manipulation)  was  structured to   foster collaboration  between   the participants,
individual goals and play style clearly played a role. Claire was the only player in this case to discuss her own
goals, and to suggest an imperative for future action; it is notable that the Strategy Argued/Algorithm Building
in this case was ultimately unrelated, indicating that individual roles may have driven some choices.

References
Aleven, V., Stahl, E., Schworm, S., and Fischer, F. (2003). Help seeking and help design in interactive learning
        environments. Review of Educational Research 73 (3), 277-320.
Berland, M., & Lee, V. R. (2011). Collaborative strategic board games as a site for distributed computational
        thinking. International Journal of Game-Based Learning, 1(2), 65-81.
Berland, M. & Duncan, S. C. (July, 2012). Supporting computational thinking by modding strategic board
        games. Paper presented at the 10th International Conference of the Learning Sciences (ICLS 2012),
        Sydney, Australia.
Duncan, S. C. (2010). A dual-level approach for investigating design in online affinity spaces. In K. Gomez, L.
        Lyons  &   J.    Radinsky  (Eds.), Learning  in the   Disciplines:  Proceedings   of the  9th  International
        Conference    of  the  Learning Sciences  (ICLS 2010).   International Society  of the   Learning  Sciences:
        Chicago, IL, 346-347.
Duncan, S. C. & Berland, M. (June, 2012). Triangulating learning in board games: Computational thinking at
        multiple scales of analysis. Paper presented at Games+Learning+Society 8.0, Madison, WI.
Duncan, S. C., Boecking, M., & Berland, M. (2012). Help seeking and computation in a collaborative board
        game task. Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the American Educational Research Association,
        Vancouver, BC, Canada.
Gee, J. (2010). An introduction to Discourse analysis: Theory and method (3rd edition). New York: Routledge.
Leacock, M. (2007). Pandemic. Mahopac, NY: Z-Man Games.
Nelson-LeGall, S. (1981).     Help-seeking:  An understudied   problem-solving   skill in children. Developmental
        Review, 1, 224-246.

© ISLS                                                                                                        246
