CSCL 2013 Proceedings                   Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

The Long & Winding Road to Collaborative Observational Practice
Catherine Eberbach, Cindy Hmelo-Silver, Yawen Yu, Rutgers University, 10 Seminary Pl., New Brunswick, NJ
     catherine.eberbach@gse.rutg ers.edu, cindy.hmelo-silver@gse.rutgers.edu, yawen.yu@gse.rutgers.edu

         Abstract: A central challenge of observational practice is to reach agreements about what an
         individual sees with what others see. We used a case study to trace how computer tools--in
         concert with small group and whole class discussions--mediate collaborative observational
         agreements    in a  middle school   classroom.   Results suggested    that shifting conceptions   of
         nutrients affected  student   observations.  Our  analysis examines    how   this was  temporally,
         materially, and socially mediated leading to convergence in observations and understanding.

Observation  is fundamental   to  scientific practice and  to how   scientists generate  new   knowledge.     A central
challenge of observational practice is to reach agreements about what an individual sees with what others see
(Daston, 2008).    To address this challenge, scientists have forged cultural tools--language, equipment, and
disciplinary systems of knowledge and practice--that enable the collaborative construction of shared vision
(Goodwin,   1994).  Although   observation   plays  a central role  in science, we   know    little about how   novice
observers develop into scientific observers (Eberbach & Crowley, 2009) and how computer tools might support
such development. In this paper, we explore how computer tools mediate middle school students' agreements,
observations, and knowledge of nutrients in a pond ecosystem. We do this by examining the collaborative
observational practices that facilitate agreements about observed phenomena.

Methods
This study is part of a program of design research that develops and explores computer-based instructional
interventions that mediate middle school student understanding of natural systems (Hmelo-Silver, et al., 2011).
The context for this analysis was a 6-week unit on aquatic ecosystems. The unit was organized around the
problem of fish dying suddenly in a local pond. Working in small groups, students engaged in inquiry by using
assorted scientific evidence, including computer simulations, a computer modeling tool, authentic data, and
student worksheets. Video data and student-generated artifacts served as our primary data sources. Although we
generally focused on one group of four students, we made forays into whole class interactions to trace the path
that students took to achieve shared understanding of nutrients in a way that enabled collaborative observation
of scientifically meaningful patterns.

Results and Discussion
In the results we show how complex interactions among small groups, whole class discussions, and interactions
with various tools led to collaborative construction of shared meaning of nutrients in a pond ecosystem (See
Figure 1).
Questions about the meaning of nutrients first surfaced during our group's interactions with a simulation that
enabled students to explore relations between populations (algae, fish), environmental factors (sunlight, nutrient
runoff), and levels of  CO2   and O2   in a  pond  ecosystem.  Like many    novices,  this group    conflated the term
nutrients with food, which affected what they expected to observe in the simulation. Conceptualizing nutrients
to be essentially good for fish, they maximized the amount of nutrients into the pond but were surprised by what
they observed: "It's weird that they live longer with less nutrients but they live shorter with less nutrients. So
nutrients are bad?" In attempt to make sense of these results, the students repeatedly manipulated the simulation,
observed similar results, and grudgingly recorded their findings in their worksheets. Near the end of this session,
the teacher  initiated a  whole   class discussion    "to make  sure   they have    the same   understanding    of the
simulation." This  discussion  revealed   little agreement  about   what constituted    nutrients:  Students  typically
described nutrients as food, animal waste, or fertilizer, whereas the teacher characterized nutrients as chemicals
that support life processes.
         The following day, the group continued to explore the simulation and to revise their computer model to
explain why the fish died in the pond. They agreed to include several system relations, including those that
connected  photosynthesis    with algae,  oxygen,    and  water temperature.    The  group   also   agreed to   include
nutrients, but did so in a way that isolated nutrients from the rest of the model, suggesting that nutrients was
something of a black box. The question for the students remained, "If it isn't food, then what is it?"

© ISLS                                                                                                             247
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                  Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

Figure 1. This model shows the many pathways to constructing collaborative agreements about the meaning of
nutrients in a pond ecosystem. Convergent conceptual change is mediated by observational practice, which is
distributed across time, social interactions, and material resources.

         In practice, the  teacher's observations were  substantially   different from those of the  students:   She
observed functional relations at a micro-level (i.e., chemical) whereas they saw structures in isolation. But as
students continued    to manipulate   other simulations featuring     micro-level processes  (e.g., decomposition,
nitrification), complete  worksheets  that  narrowed their observations   of the  simulations, negotiate     modeling
decisions, and participate in discussions they slowly began to reach certain agreements about what constitutes
nutrients ("Decomposers make nutrients from dead matter"). Agreeing among themselves that nutrients are
micro level structures that involve micro-level processes also brought them in closer alignment with how the
teacher conceptualized nutrients. In time, the group eventually decided to move nutrients into the model proper,
connecting them to decomposers and fish with a vague claim that "the nutrients are affecting the fish in some
way."
         In conclusion, the path to reaching agreements that enable seeing what others see was neither straight
nor simple.  Technology    offers opportunities for  conceptual  convergence   as  learners have    opportunities  to
display, negotiate, and repair their ideas (Roschelle, 1992). Thus, engaging with simulations and modeling tools
as well as whole class and small group discussions mediated agreements. The simulations and small group
discussions were occasions for individual groups to engage in collaborative observational practices and for
negotiating what they had noticed through disciplinary content. The whole class discussions provided a context
where the teacher could help learners develop and apply appropriate disciplinary lenses. The model was the
place for students to make their thinking visible and to articulate their expectations about the meaning and role
of nutrients in the pond ecosystem. These agreements transcended simply naming objects to describe behavior
or form, but enabled learners to agree on shared observation of patterns of form, function, and process. The
implications of our analysis suggest that the long and winding road of convergent conceptual change is mediated
by observational practice and that this practice is distributed across time, tools, and social interactions.

References
Daston, L. (2008). On scientific observation. Isis, 99, 97-110.
Eberbach, C., & Crowley, K. (2009). From everyday to scientific: How children learn to observe the biological
         world. Review of Educational Research, 79(1), 39-68.
Goodwin, C. (1994). Professional vision. American Anthropologist, 96(3), 606-633.
Hmelo-Silver, C. Jordan, R., Honwad, S., Eberbach, C., Sinha, S., Goel, A., Rugaber, S.,     & Joyner, D. (2011).
        Foregrounding behaviors and functions to promote ecosystem understanding. In Proceedings of Hawaii
        International Conference on Education (pp. 2005-2013). Honolulu HI: HICE.
Roschelle,  J.  (1992).  Learning by  collaborating: Convergent   conceptual   change.  Journal  of   the    Learning
        Sciences, 2(3), 236-276.

Acknowledgments
IES # R305A090210 funded this research. Conclusions expressed here are those of authors and may not reflect those
of IES.

© ISLS                                                                                                           248
