CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                         Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

          The Sequential Analysis, Modeling and Visualization of
   Collaborative Causal Mapping Processes and Effects on Causal
                                          Understanding

                              Allan Jeong, Woon Jee Lee, Florida State University
                                  Email: ajeong@fsu.edu, woonjee@gmail.com

        Abstract: This paper describes a case study that illustrates how particular techniques and two
        developed software applications can be used to sequentially analyze, model, and visualize the
        processes and discourse student produce while working collaboratively in pairs to construct a
        causal diagram. The analysis was conducted at various levels in order to model students' map
        construction   processes, the  map    construction processes     in  conjunction with  students'
        discourse, and processes observed within each group versus across all groups. Transitional
        state diagrams   produced  from the   sequential  analysis  of each  group's behaviors revealed
        unique sequential patterns in the processes used between the three groups. These observed
        processes provide potential explanations for the observed differences in the accuracy of the
        maps   between   the  groups. The  implications    of the   findings and directions  for further
        refinements to the techniques and software tools are identified and discussed in further detail.

One of the essential skills in solving complex problems is the ability to identify, articulate, and understand
causal relationships between variables and/or events within a complex system. One way to accomplish this task
is to construct a causal map. A causal map is a two-dimensional network of nodes and links that conveys the
hierarchical and cause-effect relationships between events or variables within a complex system. Causal maps
for example can be used to identify which variables exert direct/indirect effects on an outcome variable, which
variables are to be viewed as root causes, and how the effects of variables on a given outcome are mediated by
other variables. They can serve as a useful tool for scaffolding learning (Cho & Jonassen, 2002), especially so
when students work collaboratively to construct a causal map (Nesbit & Adesope, 2006). Furthermore, causal
maps can be used to assess students' causal understanding and systems thinking skills (Jeong & Shin, 2013;
McClure & Bell, 1990).
        Although various procedures have been developed to provide guidance on how to construct causal
maps (Jonassen & Ionas, 2008; Bryson et al., 2004; Scavarda et al., 2006; Clarkson & Hodgkinson, 2005;
Decision Systems Inc., 2012), there is little empirical research that have modeled the processes students use and
that have identified the specific processes that create more accurate maps (Jeong & Lee, 2012). Based on a
review of the empirical research and frequent reports on the high amount of variance in quality often observed
across students causal maps, Ruiz-Primo & Shavelson (1996) concluded that maps should not be used in the
classroom for  large-scale assessments  until students'  facility, prior knowledge/skills with   using maps, and
associated training techniques are thoroughly examined. The point is that we do not yet know at this time to
what extent students' causal maps (when used as an assessment tool) are measures of their causal understanding
or measures   of their causal mapping   skills/processes. Furthermore,    few  studies have examined     how peer
interaction are integral to the processes students use when working collaboratively to construct causal maps, and
how these processes affect map accuracy and/or causal understanding.
        The purpose of this case study was develop, test, and illustrate a set of techniques and software tools
that were developed and used to sequentially analyze, model, and precisely visualize students' map construction
processes across multiple levels ­ map construction behaviors only, the interplay between map construction
behaviors and student discourse, and the map construction processes within group versus across all groups. To
illustrate our approach, this case study examined the following questions:

    1.  What sequential patterns exist in students' map drawing processes?
    2.  What sequential patterns exist between map drawing behaviors and students' dialog when working
        collaboratively on a shared causal map?
    3.  Which patterns help to explain observed differences in the accuracy of students' maps?

Method
Procedures. The participants were six graduate students (all female with ages ranging from 22 to 38) enrolled
in a computer multimedia development course at a large university in the southeast region of U.S. in fall 2011.
Students completed a 15-minute practice session on how to use the jMAP software (Jeong, 2012) to create
causal maps and received from the instructor an introduction to causal maps with example applications. The
students were paired up with another student, presented with a copy of the jMAP software with 15 pre-specified

© ISLS                                                                                                       248
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                 Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

events (Figure 1), and collaboratively constructed a causal map to identify chains of events and critical events
that explains how and why a given multimedia tutorial (presented in a hypothetical scenario) was producing
inferior learning. To correctly link the 15 given events into the correct hierarchical sequence/structure, students
had to apply their knowledge  of multimedia e-learning principles studied in the course. Each      group  was
recorded on video camera.
         The accuracy of each group's map was assessed in comparison to the instructor's map. In figure 2 is
the instructor's map in jMAP viewed in relation to each group's map (dark green links = correct link with
correct causal direction; light green = correct link with incorrect causal direction; gray = missed link; green halo
= correctly identified root cause). Map accuracy was based on the total number of dark green links, nodes with
green halos, and number of 1, 2nd, and 3rd order links that stem directly from a correctly identified root cause.

             Figure 1. A screen capture of the initial causal map presented to students in jMAP.

Group 1
Low
accuracy

Group 2
High
accuracy

Group 3
Medium
accuracy

       Figure 2. The maps of each group and the instructor's map viewed in relation to the group's map.

© ISLS                                                                                                    249
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                         Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

Data Analysis.   The    map   drawing  behaviors  observed  in the   video recordings  were   coded   into the  six
categories: PN - Position a node for the first time, RN - Reposition a node, AL- Add a causal link between two
nodes, CA - Change the attributes of a causal link, DL- Delete a causal link, CL- Insert a comment to explain a
causal link. The inter-reliability between two coders showed very good agreement (Cohen's Kappa coefficients
k = .926, .893 and .889 for codes assigned to behaviors observed in Group 1, 2, and 3, respectively).     A total of
seven dialog moves were identified from a close review and analysis of the discussion transcripts (Table 1). The
inter-reliability between two coders showed good agreement (k = .712 in Group1, .734 in Group2, and .748 in
Group3). Using these seven dialog moves, student conversations were manually classified into six forms of
discourse based on specific dialog move sequences (Table 2) to better examine the relationship between specific
map construction behaviors and the discourse that took place prior to, after, and/or concurrently with each
observed behavior. In the future, multidimensional scaling can be used to classify dialog move sequences with
more scientific rigor.

Table 1: Seven codes used to classify dialog moves

Codes       Code Descriptions
EXP         Explain one's ideas in reference to specific nodes and their causal relationships.
DIR         Provide directions on how to construct the map (e.g., move the node, make the link, etc.) and
            how to use the mapping tool (e.g., "click the arrow button")
QUE         Ask questions. The question may require a specific answer, an opinion, or simply a confirmation
            (e.g., "right?").
AGR         Agree with partner's explanation or directions; positive responses to the confirmative questions.
DIS         Disagree with partner's explanation or direction, plus showing negative responses to the
            confirmative questions.
STA         Self-talk aloud to verbalize current actions performed on the causal map.
EVI         Provide evidence based on the reading materials. (e.g., it is saying that ...)

Table 2: Six forms of discourse based on observed dialog move sequences

Discourse                 Description                          Indicators in terms of dialog move sequences
Collaborative             Information and idea sharing         EXPAGRAGR
                                                               EXPAGREXPAGR
                                                               EXPEXPEXP... AGR
Interrogative             Exchange of questions & answers      QUEEXP
                                                               QUEAGR
Argumentative             Conflicting viewpoints               EXPDISEXP
                                                               QUEDIS
Confirmative              "Right?" and "Yes"                   QUE ("Right?") AGR ("Yes")
Explanation               Single explanation                   EXP
Agreement                 Single expression of agreement       AGR

         For each group, the codes for the map behaviors were entered sequentially into a spreadsheet column
with each code assigned a sequence number in the adjacent column based on their natural chronology (e.g., first
action performed by the group is assigned the sequence number 1). This data was used to model the map
drawing  processes independent   of  the discourse  that took  place   during the map  construction   process.  To
examine the interplay between the map construction process and discourse, the codes for both the map drawing
behaviors and discourse   were  entered  sequentially into another   spreadsheet  with each   code   assigned to  a
sequence  number   reflecting their chronological order.  For  behaviors and   forms of    discourse that occurred
simultaneously and/or concurrently, these events were assigned the same sequence number.
         Each of the resulting data sets were sequentially analyzed using the Discussion Analysis Tool (DAT)
(Jeong, 2012b). DAT produced frequency matrices to compute transitional probabilities for each event pair. To
determine which  two-event    sequences  could be   deemed  to  be   a behavioral  "pattern",  the DAT    software
computed  z-scores for   each reported probability. Probabilities that were   significantly higher/lower   than the
expected probability were identified by z-scores that were greater than the critical z-score of 1.64 at alpha = .10
with observed frequencies of no less than five (Bakeman & Gottman, 1997). The DAT software was then used

© ISLS                                                                                                          250
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                             Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

to generate   transitional  state diagrams  (Figure    3)   to visually   convey  the   observed    probabilities  so  that
similarities and differences in behavioral patterns between groups can be easily identified. In the state diagrams,
the thickness of the arrows in the diagrams is in direct proportion to the observed transitional probabilities. The
black and gray arrows identify probabilities that are and are not significantly greater than expected. The first and
second numerical value displayed in each node identifies the number of times the given action was performed
and the number of events that followed the given action. The size of the glow emanating from each node
conveys the number of times the given action was performed. Note that the state diagrams in figure 3 and 4 do
not reveal the transitional probabilities found to be significantly lower than expected (showing action sequences
that a particular group may have the tendency to avoid). If necessary, these probabilities can be identified with
gray arrows drawn with sparsely dotted lines (e.g., -     -  -  >).
          What is important to note is that the relative position of each node in a state diagram is identical in all
state diagrams for other groups. As a result, the similarities and differences in sequential patterns between the
groups are immediately apparent, making the patterns easier to identify and easier to interpret. If the location of
any given node were to vary from one state diagram to another, the differences and similarities become very
difficult to  discern (the  same  kind  of difficulty  one  experiences    when   trying  to  compare  the   causal   maps
produced by different groups as illustrated at the top half of figure 2). However, holding the node positions is a
fixed location in the state diagrams also presents some disadvantages. The nodes must be positioned in a circular
alignment so that all possible transitions between nodes can be clearly displayed in the state diagram. When the
number    of  nodes exceeds   six  (as in  Figure  4), there   is insufficient space   to  clearly  display  all observed
transitions because the arrows cross over and partially obstruct one another. As a result, a state diagram with
more than 6 nodes shows only those transitions found to be significantly higher than the expected probability
(diagrams with black arrows only with gray arrows omitted).

Results
Mapping processes used by students across all groups. To identify sequential patterns in the map construction
process exhibited by students across all three groups, the sequential data from each group was appended into
one spreadsheet column and entered into the DAT software to produce the left state diagram in Figure 3. This
state diagram revealed six sequential patterns to suggest two general procedures. In one procedure, students
moved a node into position, then attached a link to either point to or from the node, changed the link attribute
(positive  or negative   in causal  relationship), then   inserted   a comment    into  the  link to  explain the   causal
relationship, and either revised the existing comment or inserted a new comment to another previously added
causal link.  In the  second  procedure,   students deleted    a  link   from the causal   map    (which was  performed
relatively infrequently), then repositioned a node just prior to inserting a link to point either from or to that node.
Once the link was added, they progressed through the same sequence of actions by changing the link attribute,
and inserting one or more comments to explain one or more causal relationships. In the future, data will be
collected (using the same procedures presented in this case study) to generate a state diagram that identifies the
processes used by the instructor and other experts. This can then be compared to the findings revealed in Figure
3 to reveal potential differences (if any exists) and possible deficiencies in student's mapping processes and the
processes to scaffold and facilitate in future causal mapping software systems.

Mapping processes associated with map accuracy. The state diagram in Figure 4 revealed some unique patterns
between groups (with only 1 of the 10 total patterns observed in all three groups). Despite the absence of an
expert process model in this case study, the unique patterns revealed in Figure 4 provide plausible explanations
as to why differences in map accuracy were found between the groups. For example, the low performing group,
which  produced     the least accurate  map   among    the  three    groups,  exhibited  a  four-step linear  process   of
positioning node, inserting causal link, changing link attributes, and inserting comments on link. The medium
performing group, which produced the second most accurate map, used more of a stepwise process in which
multiple  nodes  were   placed into  position first before     links were  added  to  the  nodes.  In contrast,   the high
performing group, which produced the most accurate map among the three groups, exhibited a three-step linear
but iterative process of positioning nodes, adding links, and specifying link attributes (spending no time adding
comments into the links to explain the causal relationship). A close review of the video showed in fact that this
group  work   progressively   backwards   from nodes    that   had   the most  direct to  the least  direct effect on  the
outcome variable. Although the sample size was not sufficient to make these findings conclusive, the findings
serve to illustrate how the techniques and tools described in this study can be used in the future to analyze larger
data sets. This is now possible given that the latest version of the jMAP tool automatically logs up to 26 unique
and more precise actions that can be performed on a causal map at any time (Jeong, in press).

© ISLS                                                                                                                251
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                       Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

            Figure 3. Transitional state diagrams of the map construction process across all groups

               Figure 4. Transitional state diagrams of the map construction processes by group

Map and discourse processed performed by student across all groups. The state diagram in Figure 5 revealed a
total of six action sequence patterns between mapping actions (move and/or reposition a node, add and/or delete
a node) and forms of discourse. The main patterns or processes revealed in Figure 5 are that: a) the movement of
nodes was generally preceded by either confirmative  collaborative or interrogative discourse; and b) the
adding and deletion of links were generally preceded by argumentation  agreement  explanation. Once
again, future plans are in the works to generate an expert process model      to determine to what   extent the
processes observed in Figure 5 are different to those processes performed by experts (if any exists). Comparing
the findings in Figure 5 (or similar findings produced with a larger data set) to the expert model can help to
determine how to scaffold the communications between group members to trigger the mapping actions most
likely to produce more accurate causal diagrams. The ultimate goal is to help students produce more accurate
causal diagrams in order to increase students' ability to explain the causal mechanisms underlying direct and
indirect cause effect relationships between variables in complex systems.

© ISLS                                                                                                      252
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                                           Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

       Figure 5. Transitional state diagram of map and discourse processes performed across all groups

               LOW performing group                               MEDIUM performing group                            HIGH performing group

       Figure 6. Transitional state diagrams of the map construction and discourse processes by group

© ISLS                                                                                                                                        253
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                            Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

Mapping and discourse processes associated with map accuracy. The state diagrams in figure 6 reveal a total
of 15 unique patterns between mapping actions and discourse. Of these 15 unique patterns, not one of these
patterns was observed in all three groups. Among the patterns that were observed in at least two of the groups
was the collaborative discourse that took place just before moving a node, and the argumentation that took place
just prior to expressing agreement. With respect to map accuracy, here are just some of the findings revealed via
a comparative analysis of the three state diagrams in Figure 6. In both the high and medium performing groups
(but not in the low performing group), the movement of nodes was preceded by collaborative discourse. These
differences suggest that collaborative dialog  move node action sequence may have contributed to increases in
map accuracy relative to the low performing group. To help explain how the high performing group produced a
more accurate causal map than the medium performing group, the state diagrams show that the high performing
group moved nodes and linked the nodes just prior to engaging in collaborative discourse. These particular
changes to the causal map (moved node with added link) may have been tentative changes used to create a
shared visual artifact used to scaffold and facilitate the collaborative discussion and assessment of the proposed
actions - similar to the processes described in Cho & Jonassen's (2002) study on the use of argument diagrams
for scaffolding group debates. Once the actions were assessed through collaborative discourse, the state diagram
shows that the collaborative discourse was then followed by further actions on the placement of the nodes. A
close review of the discussion transcripts will be necessary to identify excerpts that illustrate and validate this
particular process.
         In a similar manner, the process of making tentative changes to the causal map to scaffold further
discussion was also observed in the medium performing group, which helps to explain why this group produced
a better causal   map   than the low   performing   group.  The state  diagram   for the medium    group   shows that
explanative discussion immediately followed the movement of a node and the addition/deletion of a link. The
explanative  discussion  was   then immediately     followed  with confirmative     exchanges.  In contrast, the low
performing group to an extent performed this process in reverse order ­ explaining (or simply announcing) the
act of moving a node or adding/deleting a link, then executing the proposed and/or explained action. A close
review of the video revealed that in the low performing group, one of the students controlled and dominated the
task, with the dominant student often explaining or simply announcing (as opposed to discussing) her next
course of action.

Discussion
Although the sample size in this case study was not sufficient to determine conclusively if the observed patterns
are stable or completely     unique to  the  groups  across different  levels of performance,   this study's primary
purpose was to illustrate how the described techniques and software tools can be further refined and used in the
future to better understand the complex interplay between students' actions and supporting discourse when
working collaboratively to construct causal diagrams. While the findings suggest that the processes students
perform  while    constructing   causal diagrams    can vary    widely (which    is  consistent with  Ruiz-Primo  &
Shavelson's 1997 findings), this study illustrates how a comparative analysis of processes between groups can
provide plausible explanations as to why, when, and how some groups produce more accurate maps than others
(and/or achieve and exhibit better causal understanding and causal reasoning skills). This approach may be most
appropriate when studying complex ill-defined domains where it may be the case that there is no one particular
process (or expert model) that produces the best results.
         With the ability to automatically log and capture more precise actions performed on a causal diagram
within the  jMAP    software,  larger   data sets can  now  be  acquired and   processed  more    quickly. But  more
importantly,  the  type of data  captured    in the jMAP   logs will  enable  future studies to  examine   and model
students' causal reasoning processes in far greater detail. For example, the captured log data can now be used to
determine when a student is deleting the link AC (when the causal map is currently showing AC and B)
and inserting a link AB in order to produce the causal chain of events ABC (having realized that B alone
is sufficient to cause C and that the effects of A on C is mediated by B). This type of data can help determine to
what extent a student is using a backward/deductive vs. forward/inductive approach and depth vs. breadth-first
approach (work in progress).
         Overall, this paper describes an approach that can be used to conduct further and larger scale studies to
identify and validate the key processes that produce higher quality causal diagrams. Once these key processes
are identified and tested, the next generation of causal mapping software can be developed to actively monitor,
scaffold and standardize the processes (using either a fixed or a dynamic model) to help ensure that the causal
maps students produce are accurate measures of their causal understanding rather than a measure of their causal
mapping and causal reasoning skills. Such an application can then be used not only as an instructional tool, but
also as an alternative and potentially powerful tool for assessing causal understanding in science education on a
large-scale basis.

© ISLS                                                                                                           254
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                         Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

References
Bakeman, R., & Gottman, J. (1997). Observing interaction: An introduction to sequential analysis. Cambridge,
         UK: Cambridge, University Press.
Bryson, J. M., Ackerman, F., Eden, C., & Finn, C. B. (2004). Visible thinking: Unlocking causal mapping for
         practical business results. Chichester: John Wiley and Sons.
Cho, K.  L., &  Jonassen, D.   (2002).  The  effects of argumentation   scaffolds  on argumentation   and problem
         solving. Educational Technology Research & Development, 50(3), 5-22.
Clarkson, G. P, & Hodgkinson, G. P. (2005). Introducing CognizerTM: A comprehensive computer package for
         the elicitation and analysis of cause maps. Organizational Research Methods, 18(3), 317-344.
Decision  Systems,   Inc.  (2003).   Root   cause    analysis  using  REASON.      Last  retrieved  July  2012  at
         http://www.rootcause.com.
Jeong, A.  (in press). Sequentially   analyzing   and modeling   causal mapping     processes that support  causal
         understanding and systems thinking. To appear in Ria Hanewald & Dirk Ifenthaler's (Eds.) Digital
         Knowledge Maps in Education: Technology Enhanced Support for Teachers and Learners, Springer.
Jeong, A.  &   Shin, H.  (2013).    The sequential   analysis of causal mapping    processes  that support  causal
         understanding and systems thinking. Paper to be presented at the 2013 American Educational Research
         Association conference in San Francisco, CA.
Jeong, A. & Lee, W.J. (2011). Developing causal understanding with causal maps: The impact of total links,
         temporal  flow,  and   lateral  position  of outcome    nodes.  Educational     Technology   Research  &
         Development, 60(2), 325-340.
Jeong, A. (2012). jMAP. Last retrieved on November, 2012 at http://myweb.fsu.edu/ajeong/jmap.
Jeong,    A.   (2012b).    Discussion     Analysis     Tool.    Last   retrieved    on    November,      2012   at
         http://myweb.fsu.edu/ajeong/dat.
Jonassen, D.   H., &   Ionas I. G.   (2008). Designing    effective  supports  for causal  reasoning. Educational
         Technology Research and Development, 56, 287-308.
McClure, J., & Bell, P. (1990). Effects of an environmental education-related STS approach instruction on
         cognitive  structures  of  pre-service   science teachers.   University   Park, PA:  Pennsylvania    State
         University. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED 341 582).
Nesbit, J. C., & Adesope, O. (2006). Learning with concept and knowledge maps: A meta-analysis. Review of
         Educational Research, 76(3), 413­448.
Ruiz-Primo,  M.,   Shavelson,   R., &   Schulz, S.   (1997).  On  the validity of  concept  map-base   assessment
         interpretations: An experiment testing the assumption of hierarchical concept maps in science (CSE
         Technical Report 455). Los Angeles: University of California.
Scavarda, A.J., Bouzdine-Chameeva, T., Goldstein, S.M., Hays, J.M., & Hill, A. V. (2006). A methodology for
         constructing collective causal maps. Decision Sciences Journal, 37(2), 263-284.

© ISLS                                                                                                        255
