CSCL 2013 Proceedings                 Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

        Structuring the PA Process: Impact on Feedback Quality
                      Mario Gielen, Bram De Wever, Department of Educational Studies,
                              Ghent University, Dunantlaan 2, 9000 Gent, Belgium
                            Email: mario.gielen@ugent.be, bram.dewever@ugent.be

        Abstract: The present study examines the impact of structuring the peer assessment process
        in a wiki-based CSCL-environment. Three conditions are involved: a non-structured, a basic
        structured, and an elaborated structured peer feedback condition. The main aim of this study is
        to foster insight into the aspect of peer feedback quality by focusing on the impact of the level
        of structuring and on the implemented measures to assess peer feedback by both peers and
        instructor.

Introduction
By structuring the peer assessment (PA) process in a wiki-based CSCL-environment, this study investigates the
impact on the quality of the peer feedback. Previous research highlighted the added value of PA in higher
education (Topping, 2003) due to direct engagement in the learning process (see also Topping, 1998). Peer
feedback can be seen as a specific approach of peer assessment, which aims to involve students in assessment
for learning by asking them to provide fellow students with opinions, ideas and suggestions for improvement
(Black &   William,  1998). However,   previous   literature pointed  out that students sometimes   perceive  peer
assessment as unfair and often question peers' qualifications to review and assess their work (Kaufmann &
Schunn, 2010;   Strijbos, Narciss, &  Dünnebier,  2010).  Previous    research emphasizes   on  the importance  of
students' feedback ability (Van Zundert et al., 2010) and the preference of using multiple peer markers to
enhance accuracy of peer assessment (Bouzidi & Jaillet, 2009). Previous research also highlights the learning
benefits of offering structure in a CSCL-environment (Strijbos & Weinberger, 2010), especially when certain
support or structure is provided that further specifies the roles and activities for the involved learners (Fischer,
Kollar, Mandl, & Haake, 2007; Schellens & Valcke, 2006; Strijbos, De Laat, Martens, & Jochems, 2005).
Recently, research emphasizes on the need for structure and support to ensure effective feedback (Poverjuc,
Brook, & Wray, 2012). Therefore, the present research focuses on the impact on the feedback quality when
structuring the peer assessment process in a wiki-based CSCL environment. Empirical evidence suggests the use
of wikis as an ideal CSCL-tool for supporting PA activities and online collaboration (De Wever, et al., 2011).
Recommended by previous research, this study incorporates "feedback instruments such as performance scoring
rubrics with criteria, or structured feedback forms that force feedback providers to ask reflective questions and
give suggestions for improvement could be valuable instruments for increasing the quality of the peer feedback"
(Prins, Sluijsmans, & Kirschner, 2006, p. 300).

Methodology
The main aim of this study was to investigate the quality of students' feedback. During one semester, first year
university students  (N=178)  participated in  a  quasi-experimental   study   in an authentic  context in Higher
Education.  All students, enrolled in an  educational  sciences   program,  were   divided into groups  (N=37)  of
maximum five students and were asked to collaborate on writing assignments, in which each group member had
to contribute to the wiki by writing three abstracts based on provided articles. Although this study uses only one
fixed group member to provide peer feedback on the draft version of another group member, this process was
structured (see further). Based on the feedback, the final version of the abstract was constructed together with
an evaluation of the received peer feedback. After submitting their individual wiki page with three abstracts, all
participating students had to summatively assess the three abstracts of the other group members with the help of
a scoring  rubric. In the  beginning  and  at the end  of    the assignment  phase,  students  had  to complete a
questionnaire including 5-point Likert items evaluating how they perceived the peer feedback process.

During  the peer   assessment process, students   were required    to employ   a  feedback form  provided  by  the
instructor, in which the structuring level depended on the condition. Three conditions were implemented: a non-
structured peer feedback (NS-PFB) condition, a basic structured peer feedback (BS-PFB) condition and an
elaborated structured peer feedback (ES-PFB) condition. Therefore, a more elaborated structure contains more
guiding questions to assist students' thinking process during the peer assessment process, than a basic structured
form. This study will investigate the impact of the three conditions on the quality of the feedback. Moreover,
this study will explore how to effectively measure feedback quality. Therefore, the following hypothesis is
examined: A higher level of structuring the PA process will lead to (H1) a higher feedback quality, and (H2) a
higher reliability of PA

© ISLS                                                                                                        255
CSCL 2013 Proceedings              Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

Analysis
Firstly, the quality of the feedback will be analyzed by the researcher through content analysis, which can be
described as "a summarizing, quantitative analysis of messages that relies on the scientific method and is not
limited as to the types of variables that may be measured or the context in which the messages are created or
presented" (Neuendorf, 2002, p. 10). Secondly, students have to evaluate their received peer feedback through a
provided scoring rubric, which is based on the Feedback Quality Index (Prins, Sluijsmans, & Kirschner, 2006).
Consequently, this study will examine the reliability of the feedback quality scores between instructor scores
and students' scores.

                                       Figure 1. Research design.

Results
The findings of this study will be reported at the CSCL 2013 conference. This research will provide information
to what extent the instructor should structure the PA process in a CSCL environment to ensure effective peer
feedback, by applying suggested feedback instruments for increasing the quality of the peer feedback. This
poster session aims at gathering constructive input on the aspect of feedback quality, and more specifically, on
the instructors' intervention to ensure or maximize the quality of the peer assessment process.

References
De Wever, B., Van Keer, H., Schellens, T., & Valcke, M. (2011). Assessing collaboration in a wiki: The
    reliability of university students' peer assessment. The Internet and Higher Education, 14(4), 201­206.
Prins, F. J., Sluijsmans, D. M. A, & Kirschner, P. A. (2006). Feedback for general practitioners in training:
    quality, styles, and preferences. Advances in health sciences education: theory and practice, 11(3), 289­
    303.
Van Zundert M., Sluijsmans D. M. A., Van Merrienböer J. J. B. (2010). Effective peer assessment processes:
    Research findings and future directions. Learning and Instruction, 20, 3270­3279.

© ISLS                                                                                                        256
