CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                          Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

   When Instruction Supports Collaboration, but Does not Lead to
   Learning ­ the Case of Classroom and Small Group Scripts in the
                                          CSCL Classroom

   Ingo Kollar, Christof Wecker, Sybille Langer & Frank Fischer, Ludwig-Maximilian University of Munich,
              Email: ingo.kollar@psy.lmu.de, christof.wecker@psy.lmu.de, sybille-langer@web.de,
                                           frank.fischer@psy.lmu.de

         Abstract: Typically, instructional guidance for CSCL has two aims, namely to help students
         (a) collaborate on a higher level and (b) become more proficient in the practices that are
         facilitated during collaboration. This paper presents an empirical study in which high school
         students' collaborative online search behavior (as a learning process measure) as well as their
         online search   competence (as   individual learning    outcome)   were   targeted by small group
         collaboration scripts and classroom scripts. Both the small group collaboration script and a
         plenary-plus-group level classroom script yielded positive effects on online search activities
         during collaboration. When no or just one scaffold was given, correlations between the quality
         of collaborative online search activities and individual online search competence (as learning
         outcome) were positive. When both interventions were combined, however, the correlation
         disappeared, indicating that although this combination helped students act on a higher level
         during collaboration, it did not contribute to individual learning.

Introduction and aims of the study
Numerous studies have demonstrated that to make CSCL effective, instructional guidance, e.g. through the
provision of argument maps (Suthers & Hundhausen, 2003), group awareness tools (Buder & Bodemer, 2008)
or collaboration scripts (Kollar, Fischer & Slotta, 2007), is necessary. The aim of such guidance typically is two-
fold: first, it is meant to help learners collaborate on a higher level (e.g., by increasing the level of knowledge
building activities; see Schellens, De   Wever,  van  Keer    &  Valcke,    2007)  than without  guidance.   Second,
guidance  also aims  at  helping students learn more,   i.e. reach   higher  individual knowledge  and   skill levels
measured after collaboration (see, for example, Weinberger, Ertl, Fischer & Mandl, 2005).
         Sometimes, multiple sources of guidance are combined to reach these objectives. For example, Kollar
et al. (2012)   combined   small  group   collaboration scripts   with  heuristic  worked    examples  in  a   CSCL
environment designed to acquire mathematical argumentation competence. Likewise, Kopp and Mandl (2011)
used both a small group collaboration script and a content scheme to provide guidance in a case-based CSCL
environment. Providing learners with several sources of instructional guidance typically has the aim to produce
synergistic scaffolding effects (Tabak, 2004), i.e. that the potentially positive effects of the used scaffolds do not
simply add up, but rather interact positively with each other, with the result that the effects of each scaffold are
amplified by the simultaneous provision of the other. However, as research shows, combining scaffolds in a way
that synergistic scaffolding occurs is difficult. For instance, Kollar, Wecker, Langer and Fischer (2011) showed
that combining a small-group collaboration script guiding dyadic online search processes and a plenary-plus-
group level classroom script (i.e., an instructional intervention that alternated the modeling of online search
activities as plenary activities and dyadic online search phases as group level activities in the classroom) did not
yield  a synergistic  scaffolding effect  on the  acquisition     of online   search  competence.    Although    both
interventions  were  effective when  the  other one   was    not provided,   their combination   did not  affect the
effectiveness of the small group collaboration script and even slightly reduced the effectiveness of the plenary-
plus-group level classroom script. However, in the Kollar et al. (2011) study, no process-based explanation for
this result was provided. Therefore, this paper aims at providing an analysis of collaborative online search
activities that occurred in the Kollar et al. (2011) study and investigates how these collaborative online search
activities relate to online search competence students displayed in a subsequent individual posttest.

Fostering online search competence as a grand challenge for education
To participate in societal debates about science-related issues (e.g., whether nuclear power plants should be shut
down), members of the information society need to have well-developed strategies to find and use relevant and
credible information. Much of this information is available on the Internet. Since anyone can publish on the
Internet, however, credibility, lopsidedness, timeliness and relevance of information are critical issues. Thus,
supporting learners in their development of online search competence is a grand challenge for education.
         Gerjets, Kammerer and Werner (2011) proposed a five-step model of successful online search: (1)
Users face an information need and define a search goal. (2) They select a search engine, choose search terms
and send their query off. (3) They scan the resulting search results page and evaluate it based on a set of criteria

© ISLS                                                                                                           256
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                         Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

such as relevance or credibility. (4) Once they have selected a website for closer inspection, users scan it and
extract the required information (again, based on quality criteria such as relevance and credibility). Finally, (5)
users need  to  compare and    integrate  the information they  found  on the selected  website(s) into a coherent
solution for the information problem. As a wealth of empirical research has shown, this ideal online search
strategy can however hardly be observed in students across different age groups and educational contexts. For
example, Tomaiuolo and Packer (1996) demonstrated that many university students have problems employing
appropriate search terms for solving simple retrieval tasks such as "locate the full text of the Magna Charta".
Likewise, Brand-Gruwel, Wopereis and Walraven (2009) showed that students often use inadequate criteria to
assess the quality of websites, such as the language in which they are written or text length. Thus, there clearly
is a need to design instructional interventions that help learners gain online search competence.

Scripting as a way to foster online search competence
A promising way to foster online search competence is having students collaborate (Lazonder, 2005) during
their online search and by structuring their collaboration through scripting (e.g., Fischer, Kollar, Mandl &
Haake, 2007). Scripts provide learners with direct guidance on how to structure their collaboration by assigning
activities and roles to different learners within a social learning setting. One way to differentiate different types
of scripts is to distinguish between classroom scripts and small group collaboration scripts (see Kollar et al.,
2011). Classroom scripts provide coarse-grained activity structures that distribute learning activities over the
social levels of the classroom (see Dillenbourg & Jermann, 2007). For example, group level classroom scripts
would have all learning activities within a classroom carried out solely by small groups, while a plenary-plus-
group-level  classroom  script   might alternate  between   modeling  (as a plenary  activity) and dyadic learning
activities (as  group  level activities). Of   course, further  classroom   scripts are conceivable.  Small group
collaboration scripts, in turn, provide more fine-grained guidance with respect to the specific activities that are
to be shown within small group collaboration. For example, a small group collaboration script may have one
learner of a dyad suggest which link to click on a search results page, while the other learner is prompted to
critically reflect upon his/her learning partner's choice based on credibility considerations. As the study by
Kollar et al. (2011) demonstrated, both classroom scripts and small group collaboration scripts can be designed
in a  way  that online search  competence     (as an individual  learning outcome)   can effectively be facilitated.
Further research has produced a wealth of evidence for the potentials of classroom scripts (e.g., Dillenbourg &
Hong, 2008; Hmelo-Silver, 2004; Kolodner, 2007) and small group collaboration scripts (e.g., Kollar, Fischer &
Slotta, 2007; Rummel & Spada, 2005; Schellens et al., 2007; Tsovaltzi et al., 2010; Wecker & Fischer, 2011)
also for the acquisition of skills and competences beyond the online search field.

The present study
As already mentioned, this study provides an in-depth analysis of collaborative online search activities from the
study by Kollar et al. (2011). For the purposes of that study, a 4.5 weeks curriculum unit for 9th grade biology
classrooms was designed. Over the course of the unit, students had repeated opportunities to use the Internet to
develop a well-warranted position on whether Genetic Engineering should be allowed or not. In a 2x2 factorial
design, we systematically varied two independent factors: "type of classroom script" (group level classroom
script vs. plenary-plus-group-level classroom script) and "small group collaboration script" (with vs. without).
In Kollar et al. (2011), the main dependent variable was the students' level of online search competence after
completion of the curriculum unit (prior online search competence was controlled for). The results demonstrated
that both the small group collaboration script and the plenary-plus-group level classroom script had a positive
effect, as long as students were only provided with one of the two. Concerning the combination of the small-
group collaboration script and the plenary-plus-group level classroom script, we expected to find a synergistic
scaffolding effect, i.e. that receiving modeling of good online search would especially pay off if the subsequent
dyadic online search would be structured by appropriate prompting. However, no synergistic scaffolding effect
(Tabak, 2004) was found. As these results have already been published, they are not further reiterated in the
analyses of this paper. Instead, this paper tries to answer two research questions aiming at a better understanding
of the results with respect to the acquisition of online search competence as reported in Kollar et al. (2011):
        1.            What   are the effects  of  providing learners with a small   group collaboration script  (vs.
                      unscripted small group collaboration), a plenary-plus-group level classroom script (vs. a
                      group-level classroom script), as well as their interaction on the quality of online search
                      activities exhibited during collaboration?
        2.            How does the quality of the collaborative online search activities relate to the online search
                      competence individual students demonstrate in a subsequent posttest?
        Based on the learning outcome analyses reported in Kollar et al. (2011), we expected an analogous
result pattern for the quality of the collaborative online search activities that were shown during collaboration.
More specifically, we expected positive effects of both the small group collaboration script and the plenary-
plus-group level classroom script, as long as they were provided individually, on the quality of the exhibited

© ISLS                                                                                                          257
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                         Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

collaborative online search activities. In the combined condition, we expected a significantly lower quality of
collaborative online  search  activities when  compared  to  the condition   "plenary-plus-group  level classroom
script/without small group collaboration script", but a comparable level to students from the condition "group
level classroom script/with small group collaboration script". Learners who neither received the small group
collaboration script nor the plenary-plus-group level classroom script were expected to show the lowest levels of
collaboration online search activities. With respect to the relation between the quality of collaborative online
search activities in the process and individual online search competence displayed in the individual posttests, we
expected significant and positive correlations in all conditions, i.e. the higher the quality of the collaborative
online search activities in the dyads, the higher the individuals' online search competence after collaboration.

Method

Participants and design
Overall, 174 students from eight classes of four high schools from Southern Germany participated in the study.
However,   only  for 151  9th graders data   from online search  phases   as well as the individual  posttest were
available. Therefore, only these 151 students were included in this study. As described, we established a quasi-
experimental 2x2-factorial pre-post test design with the independent factors "type of classroom script" (group
level  classroom script vs. plenary-plus-group-level  classroom   script) and  "small group collaboration  script"
(with vs. without). Eight classes were randomly assigned to the four experimental conditions, i.e. each condition
was implemented in two classes (see table 1).

Table 1: Design of the empirical study.

                                                         Small-group collaboration script
                                                         Without                     With
Type of        Group-level                               N = 36 students             N = 48 students
classroom                                                (2 classes)                 (2 classes)
script         Plenary-plus-group level                  N = 22 students             N = 45 students
                                                         (2 classes)                 (2 classes)

Instructional setting and independent variables
The experimental design was integrated in a curriculum unit during which students received the task to use the
Internet to develop a well-warranted position on the question whether Genetic Engineering should be allowed or
not. For this purpose, each single student was equipped with a laptop computer on which a LAN connection was
established to allow for Internet browsing. Since the experiment took place in the regular Biology lessons of the
participating classes and followed the regular timetable of each class, only two lessons per week in each class
took place. Overall, the curriculum unit spanned seven lessons. One additional lesson right before the start of the
intervention was used for the administration of pretests, and one lesson right after the end of the intervention
was used for posttests. During the seven learning sessions, after a general introduction by the teacher to the topic
and to successful online search behavior, three content-specific learning cycles were created. Cycle 1 dealt with
economic issues, cycle 2 with ecological issues, and cycle 3 with health-related issues of Genetic Engineering.
Each of these cycles consisted of three steps. In step 1, students had the opportunity to browse an online
environment that held relevant Biological content knowledge on Genetics and Genetic Engineering. The online
environment was created in WISE (Slotta & Linn, 2000), and its content design was based on regular 9th grade
Biology textbooks. In step 2, the actual online search phase took place, during which the experimental variation
was implemented (see below). During this step, learning mainly took place in dyads. In step 3, classes in all
conditions engaged   in a plenary discussion   that invited the  students to  exchange and  critically discuss   the
arguments and pieces of evidence they had found or developed during their Internet search.

Independent variables
The   two  independent   factors "type    of classroom   script" and   "small-group   collaboration  script"  were
systematically varied during step 2 in each of the three learning cycles, i.e. in the phases in which students were
supposed to search the Internet for arguments and evidence that would seem helpful to develop a position in the
Genetic Engineering debate. In all four experimental conditions, the Internet browsers of two learning partners
each were connected to each other, i.e. whenever one learning partner went to a new website, his/her partner's
browser would go there too. This was realized by a browser plug-in called S-COL (Wecker et al., 2010).

© ISLS                                                                                                         258
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                        Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

 plenarylevel            ...                                                                  ...
 small gr.level                       ...                       ...

                                                                                                          t
         formulation of an initial argument and                localization of relevant information on
         sketch of the information needed                      a web page
         selection of search terms                             revision of initial argument

         evaluation of search engine results                   Plenary discussion
         page
Figure 1. Graphical representation (derived from Dillenbourg & Jermann, 2007) of the plenary-plus-group level
classroom script (lines represent the two social levels "plenary" and "small group", boxes represent the different
                        online search activities exhibited on the respective social levels.

       In the plenary-plus-group level classroom script condition (see figure 1), dyadic online search during
step 2 of each cycle was interrupted from time to time by modeling phase (as plenary activities), during which
the teacher and a student or two students demonstrated what a successful online search looks like, before student
dyads went on with their own online search. The design of the plenary-plus-group level classroom script as well
as the content of the modeling phases was based on an adaptation of the five-step online search competence
model by Gerjets et al. (2011). Thus, students were instructed to follow a five-step online search strategy: (1)
formulating an  initial argument  and a   sketch of  the information  needed,  (2) selecting    search  terms,  (3)
evaluating the search engine results page (SERP), (4) localizing relevant information on a web page, and (5)
formulating the final elaborated  argument.  For all  steps, certain quality criteria were    also provided in the
modeling phases. For example, during the evaluation of the hit list, students were instructed to discuss the
credibility and relevance of the single links. In contrast, in the group level classroom script condition, all search
activities in step 2 of each content-specific learning cycle were to be conducted in dyads, i.e. dyadic search
activities were not interrupted by modeling phases.

Figure 2. Screenshot of the small group collaboration script (view of the screen of one of the two learners during
the step "scan search engine results page"; the right side of the screen displays a regular Google results list; the
    left side of the screen provides prompts related to this online search step for one of the two learners).

       Just like the plenary-plus-group level classroom script, the small group collaboration script (see figure
2) was designed on the basis of the adapted five-step online search competence model by Gerjets et al. (2011).
For each of the five online search steps, the two learners of each dyad received complementary prompts that told
them what to do. Typically, learner A was supposed to suggest what to do next (e.g., suggest a link to click on
while the browser displayed a hit list), and learner B was supposed to critically reflect upon the suggestions of

© ISLS                                                                                                         259
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                           Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

learner A  (e.g., by  a prompt   "Do you    think the link   your  learning   partner suggests  is appropriate   to find
information  that  is (a) relevant for  the  argument    you  sketched before,  (b)   scientifically substantiated  and
credible and (c) impartial? Would you have chosen a different link?"). With each new search, these two roles
were switched among the learning partners. When the small group collaboration script was combined with the
plenary-plus-group level classroom script, modelling was alternated with structured dyadic search activities
based on the prompts specified in the small group collaboration script. When the small group collaboration
script was combined with the group-level classroom script, all search activities were to be conducted in dyads,
and all dyads received the prompts that made up the small group collaboration script; however, dyads in this
condition  did not    receive  modelling  of  successful  online   search.  In  the   condition without    small  group
collaboration script, no prompts were displayed during dyadic online search; however, the Internet browsers of
the two learning partners were connected in the way that was described earlier.

Dependent variables
The quality of the collaborative online search activities the dyads exhibited during treatment was analyzed
based on screen-and-audio-recordings. The first ten minutes of each dyad in each search phase were video-
coded based on a coding scheme that was designed on the adapted competence model of successful online
search by Gerjets et al. (2011). E.g., we coded whether the students currently performed activities belonging to
the step of sketching an argument, or whether they performed activities belonging to the step of evaluating a
search engine results page, as well as what quality criteria they applied. The unit of analysis for this analysis
were segments of ten seconds, and the predominant activity in these 10 seconds was coded. The mutually
exclusive  codes  were:   (1) formulation  of an  initial argument   and    a sketch  of  the information   needed,  (2)
selection of search terms, (3) evaluation of the hit list, (4) localization of relevant information on a web page,
(5) formulation of the final elaborated argument, and (6) other. Because all time samples were drawn from the
beginning of the online search phases, activities belonging to early steps of the underlying online search model
by Gerjets et al. (2011) were more appropriate than later steps. Therefore, a composite indicator of the quality of
collaborative search activities was computed that reflects the appropriateness of the activities belonging to each
of the five steps of the strategy during the first ten minutes of each search phase. This composite indicator was
calculated as the sum of the proportions of time spent on the activities belonging to the more appropriate first
two steps "formulation of an initial argument and sketch of the information needed" (with fourfold weight) and
"selection of  search   terms" (with double   weight),   minus  the  sum   of the proportions   of   time  spent on  the
activities belonging to the less appropriate final three steps "evaluation of the hit list" (with unit weight),
"localization of relevant information" (with double weight), and "written formulation of the final elaborated
argument" (with threefold weight). This indicator was calculated separately for the learners and their learning
partners, resulting in  two   composite indicator variables   for  strategy performance.   A   value  of  higher than 0
would   mean  that  a person  displayed  more  reasonable    (step 1 and   2) than  unreasonable   (steps  3, 4  and  5)
activities during the first ten minutes of each search phase, while a value of lower than 0 would mean that s/he
displayed  more   unreasonable   (steps 3,  4 and  5) than    reasonable (steps   1   and 2)  activities. To  determine
objectivity, a subsample of 11% of the data from this and a further study (Wecker, Kollar & Fischer, 2011) that
used the same task and coding scheme (but different experimental variations) was coded by three independent
raters, with ICCs for each of the five online search steps of about .90 (formulation of an initial argument and
sketch of the information needed: ICC = .96, selection of search terms: ICC = .90, evaluation of the hit list:
ICC = .95, localization of relevant information: ICC = .97, written formulation of the final elaborated argument:
ICC = .88, composite indicator of strategy performance: ICC = .97).
          Online search competence as an individual learning outcome was measured in an individual posttest
(see also Kollar et al., 2011) that asked students to describe in as much detail as possible how they would use the
Internet to arrive at a reasoned position in a science-related debate different from Genetic Engineering (whether
nuclear power plants should be shut down or not). For the pretest, an analogous test on a different science topic
was used. Since the results analyzing the effects of the two treatments and their combination on this measure
have already been published elsewhere, interested readers are referred to the corresponding paper (Kollar et al.,
2011).  To  understand    the analyses  of  this  paper,  the result pattern   on   the  acquisition of   online search
competence however needs to be kept in mind: As reported above, Kollar et al. (2011) found that although both
interventions were effective when the other one was not provided, their combination did not yield synergistic
scaffolding effects, i.e. it did not affect the effectiveness of the small group collaboration script and even slightly
reduced the effectiveness of the plenary-plus-group level classroom script.

Statistical analyses
To determine the effects of the two independent variables on the quality of the collaborative online search
activities, an ANCOVA with "type of classroom script" and "small group collaboration script" as fixed factor,
classes as further fixed factor nested within the experimental conditions (to account for the hierarchical data
structure), the composite indicator for quality of collaborative online search activities as the dependent variable

© ISLS                                                                                                              260
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                             Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

and prior   online search    competence   as a covariate    was conducted.   To answer    the question   on the relation
between   learning   activities  and    outcomes,   bivariate   correlations  were   computed     between   "quality   of
collaborative online  search    activities"  and  "online   search  competence    (outcome)".   For  all  analyses,   the
significance level was set to 5%.

Results
With respect to RQ 1 on the effects of the two treatments and their different combinations on the quality of
online search activities during collaboration, the descriptive data (see table 2) showed that learners who received
the small group collaboration script together with the plenary-plus-group level classroom script exhibited the
highest quality levels. The lowest levels were observed when learners did not receive the small group script and
followed  the group   level   classroom   script.   Students   from the   other two    conditions ("with    small group
collaboration script and     group  level classroom    script"  and "without    small  group  collaboration    script and
plenary-plus-group level classroom script) were in between and reached comparable levels.

Table 2: Means and standard deviations of the (composite indicator of) quality of collaborative online search
activities for the four experimental conditions.

                          Without small group collaboration script        With small group collaboration script
                          Group level             Plenary plus group      Group level             Plenary plus group
                          classroom script        level classroom         classroom script        level classroom
                                                  script                                          script
                          M          SD           M           SD          M           SD          M            SD
Quality of online         -0.68      0.33         -0.49       0.28        -0.33       0.47        -0.01        0.50
search activities

         An ANCOVA with "type of classroom script" and "small group collaboration script" as fixed factors,
classes as a further fixed factor nested within the experimental conditions (to account both for the hierarchical
data structure and to control for possible teacher effects), the composite indicator for quality of collaborative
online search activities as the dependent variable and prior online search competence as a covariate revealed a
significant main   effect for the small group collaboration     script, F(1; 142)   = 29.23, p < .01, partial Eta² = .17,
with students who had learned with the small group collaboration script outperforming students who did not
receive a small group collaboration script. Also, we found a significant main effect for type of classroom script,
F(1; 142)   = 14.72, p < .001,  partial Eta² = .09, favoring  the conditions with   plenary-plus-group   level classroom
script over learners who had learned with the group level classroom script. There was no significant interaction
effect, F(1; 142) = 0.02, p = .88, partial Eta² < .01.
         With  respect    to RQ  2  concerning    the relation  between   the  quality of  collaborative  online  search
activities and the levels of online search competence students displayed in the individual posttest, bivariate
correlations were calculated. When all four conditions were taken together, this correlation turned out to be
insignificant (r = .05, p = .24). However, we also calculated separate correlation analyses for the combined
condition (small group collaboration script and plenary-plus-group level classroom script) and the remaining
three conditions. This revealed an interesting pattern: When both scaffolds were combined, there was a slightly
significant negative correlation between the quality of the search strategy during the process and online search
competence that students exhibited in the posttest (r = -.27; p = .08; two-tailed), while for the other three
experimental conditions taken together, the correlation was positive and approached statistical significance(r =
.18; p = .08; two-tailed).

Discussion
This paper provides an in-depth process analysis of a study presented in Kollar et al. (2011) which showed that
both a small group collaboration script and a plenary-plus-group level classroom script that were employed in a
curriculum unit on Genetic Engineering in 9th grade Biology classrooms were effective ways of fostering online
search competence. Once these two scaffolds were combined, however, neither an addition of effects nor a
positive interaction (meaning that both treatments would have amplified each other's effects) appeared. To the
contrary, adding the small group collaboration script while a plenary-plus-group level classroom script was
implemented   tended   to    reduce the  effectiveness   of the latter,  while  the effectiveness of the    small   group
collaboration script compared to unsupported collaboration was not affected by the type of classroom script that
was employed. Thus, with respect to the acquisition of individual online search competence, combining a small
group collaboration script and a plenary-plus-group level classroom script may have produced what Dillenbourg
(2002) termed "overscripting" (for the exact analyses that underlie these results, please see Kollar et al., 2011).

© ISLS                                                                                                                261
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                                Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

         The results of the process analyses presented in the current paper only partially reflect these results,
since with respect to the quality of the collaborative online search activities, the two treatments did not work
best in isolation, but instead when they were combined, as was indicated by the additive main effects that were
found with respect to research question 1. On the one hand, given the incongruence with respect to the results of
the learning outcome analyses reported in Kollar et al. (2011), this result is surprising. On the other hand,
theoretically it may have been expected, since both the small group collaboration script and the plenary-plus-
group  level  classroom      script were    specifically  designed   with   the aim   to  support  students   during their
collaborative    online  search  activities. That  the  two  scripts were   effective with   respect to this  aim,  can  be
regarded   as support     for   previous   research  that has   demonstrated    (a)  the  effectiveness   of small   group
collaboration    scripts to  facilitate collaborative  learning  activities  (e.g., Schellens  et al., 2007)  and   (b) the
effectiveness of instructional classroom approaches that implement specific distributions of learning activities
over the   different  social    levels  of the classroom,   such as   Problem-based    Learning   (Hmelo-Silver,    2004),
Learning-by-Design (Kolodner, 2007) or Reciprocal Teaching (Palincsar & Brown, 1984), even though it has to
be noted that few empirical studies exist that systematically compared the effects of different distributions of
activities over   social  levels  on    individual  learning outcomes.      However,  even   though    we found   that  the
combination of learning with a small group collaboration script and a plenary-plus-group level classroom script
was most successful, we still did not find a true synergistic scaffolding effect (Tabak, 2004). Such an effect
would mean that the two scaffolds would mutually amplify their effects (i.e. cause a positive interaction effect).
It is possible that true synergistic scaffolding was not produced because both scaffolds were redundant, since
their design followed the same theoretical assumptions concerning good online search strategies. It might be that
once students have seen the teacher or other students model high level online search strategies, they may not
have seen the necessity of paying attention to the small group collaboration script prompts anymore. If this is
true, this may indeed be labelled an overscripting effect (Dillenbourg, 2002). Further research is necessary to
test the validity of this interpretation.
         Still, that the additive effects pattern we found with respect to the quality of the collaborative online
search activities did not appear on the learning outcome level (using students' performance in the online search
competence    posttest)  requires   further  consideration,  and  the  correlational  analyses    we ran  with respect   to
research question 2 are helpful in this respect. As these analyses revealed, when the three conditions that either
employed the small group collaboration script or the plenary-plus-group level classroom script alone, or none of
the two, were taken together, there was a weak, but (marginally) significant positive correlation between the
quality of collaborative search activities and online search competence measured in the posttest. However, in the
condition that combined the small group collaboration script and the plenary-plus-group level classroom script,
a marginally     significant  negative  correlation  of  moderate    size was   observed. In  other  words,  although   the
combination of these two scaffolds helped students act on a higher level during collaboration, it did not help
them to actually acquire the competence; it even tended to hinder their competence acquisition. A tentative
explanation   for this   result could   be  that students may   exhibit   a high degree   of collaborative   online search
strategy use  without    actually   internalizing  the strategy due   to  over-reliance  on  the  rich scaffolds with   the
combination of the two scaffolds. Another interpretation might be that the combination of the two scaffolds has
led to an advanced automatization of the online search strategy that was proposed in the two scripts, which may
have  made    it hard    for students   to have  the strategy later  available   declaratively (since   the  online search
competence test had students describe ­ and not perform ­ an ideal online search). Future research is necessary
to test these assumptions.
         In summary, our results imply that the combination of small group collaboration scripts and plenary-
plus-group level classroom scripts seems helpful to help dyads perform higher-level search activities. If the goal
is to produce positive effects on individual online search competence, yet, the two scaffolds should rather be
given without presenting the other as well.

References
Brand-Gruwel, S., Wopereis, I., & Walraven, A. (2009). A descriptive model of Information Problem Solving
         while using Internet. Computers & Education, 53, 1207-1217
Buder, J. & Bodemer, D. (2008). Supporting controversial CSCL discussions with augmented group awareness
         tools. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 3, 123-139.
Dillenbourg, P. (2002).      Over-scripting CSCL: The risks of blending collaborative learning with instructional
         design. In P. A. Kirschner (Ed.), Three worlds of CSCL. Can we support CSCL (pp. 61-91). Heerlen:
         Open Universiteit Nederland.
Dillenbourg, P., & Hong, F. (2008). The mechanics of CSCL macro-scripts. International Journal of Computer-
         Supported Collaborative Learning, 3, 5-23.
Dillenbourg, P. & Jermann, P. (2007). Designing integrative scripts. In F. Fischer, I. Kollar, H. Mandl &, J.
         Haake (Eds.), Scripting Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning: Cognitive, computational, and
         educational perspectives (pp. 259-288). New York: Springer.

© ISLS                                                                                                                  262
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                        Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

Fischer, F.,  Kollar, I., Mandl, H.  &  Haake,  J. (Eds.) (2007).  Scripting Computer-Supported     Collaborative
         Learning: Cognitive, computational, and educational perspectives. New York: Springer.
Gerjets, P., Kammerer, Y., & Werner, B. (2011). Measuring spontaneous and instructed evaluation processes
         during web search: Integrating concurrent thinking-aloud protocols and eye-tracking data. Learning
         and Instruction, 21, 220-231.
Gillies, R. M. (2004). The effects of cooperative learning on junior high school students during small group
         learning. Learning and Instruction, 14(2), 197-213.
Hmelo-Silver, C. E. (2004). Problem-based learning: What and how do students learn? Educational Psychology
         Review, 16, 235-266.
Kollar, I., Fischer, F., & Slotta, J. D. (2007). Internal and external scripts in computer-supported collaborative
         inquiry learning. Learning and Instruction, 17(6), 708-721.
Kollar, I., Ufer, S., Lorenz, E., Vogel, F., Reiss, K. & Fischer, F. (2012). Using heuristic worked examples and
         collaboration scripts to help learners acquire mathematical argumentation skills. In J. van Aalst, K.
         Thompson, M. J. Jacobson & P. Reimann (Eds.), The future of learning ­ ICLS 2012 Conference
         Proceedings (Volume 1 ­ full papers) (pp. 331-338). International Society of the Learning Sciences.
Kollar,  I., Wecker,  C.,  Langer, S., &  Fischer, F.  (2011). Orchestrating  Web-Based     Collaborative Inquiry
         Learning with Small Group and Classroom Scripts. In H. Spada, G. Stahl, N. Miyake & N. Law (Eds.),
         Connecting    Computer-Supported      Collaborative   Learning  to  Policy  and    Practice:  CSCL2011
         Proceedings, Vol. 1 - Long Papers (pp. 422-429). International Society of the Learning Sciences.
Kolodner, J. L. (2007). The roles of scripts in promoting collaborative discourse in learning by design. In F.
         Fischer,  I. Kollar, H. Mandl,  &  J. M.  Haake  (Eds.),  Scripting Computer-Supported     Collaborative
         Learning--Cognitive,    Computational,    and Educational    Perspectives  (pp.  237-262).   New  York:
         Springer.
Kopp, B., & Mandl, H. (2011). Fostering argument justification using collaboration scripts and content schemes.
         Learning and Instruction, 21 (5), 636­649.
Lazonder, A.W. (2005). Do two heads search better than one? Effects of student collaboration on Web search
         behavior and search outcomes. British Journal of Educational Technology, 36, 465-475.
Rummel, N., & Spada, H. (2005). Learning to collaborate: An instructional approach to promoting collaborative
         problem solving in computer-mediated settings. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 14(2), 201-241.
Schellens, T., Van Keer, H., De Wever, B., & Valcke, M. (2007). Scripting by assigning roles: Does it improve
         knowledge    construction  in asynchronous    discussion groups?   International Journal of   Computer-
         Supported Collaborative Learning, 2(2-3), 225-246.
Slotta, J. D. & Linn, M. C. (2000). How do students make sense of Internet resources in the science classroom?
         In M. J. Jacobson & R. Kozma (Eds.), Learning the sciences of the 21st century. Mahwah, NJ: LEA.
Suthers, D., & Hundhausen, C. D. (2003). An experimental study of the effects of representational guidance on
         collaborative learning processes. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 12(2), 183-218.
Tabak, I. (2004). Synergy: A complement to emerging patterns of distributed scaffolding. The Journal of the
         Learning Sciences, 13(3), 305-335.
Tomaiuolo, N. G. & Packer, J. G. (1996). Web search engines: Key to locating information for all users or only
         the cognoscienti. In Online Information 96 (Eds.), Proceedings of the International Online Information
         Meeting (20th, Olympia 2, London, England, United Kingdom, Dec. 3-5, 1996), Retrieved 8/11/2008,
         http://www.eric.ed.gov/ERICDocs/data/ericdocs2sql/content_storage_01/0000019b/80/14/f9/a2.pdf.
Tsovaltzi,   D., Rummel,   N., McLaren,  B. M.,    Pinkwart, N.,  Scheuer,  O., Harrer,  A. &  Braun,  I. (2010).
         Extending a virtual chemistry laboratory with a collaboration script to promote conceptual learning.
         International Journal of Technology Enhanced Learning, 2(1/2), 91-110.
Wecker, C. & Fischer, F. (2011). From guided to self-regulated performance of domain-general skills: The role
         of peer monitoring during the fading of instructional scripts. Learning and Instruction, 21 (6), 746-756.
Wecker, C., Kollar, I., & Fischer, F. (2011). Explaining the Effects of Continuous and Faded Scripts on Online
         Search Skills: The Role of Collaborative Strategy Practice. In H. Spada, G. Stahl, N. Miyake & N. Law
         (Eds.), Connecting Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning to Policy and Practice: CSCL2011
         Proceedings, Volume 1 - Long Papers (pp. 390-397). International Society of the Learning Sciences.
Wecker, C., Stegmann, K., Bernstein, F., Huber, M. J., Kalus, G., Kollar, I., Rathmeyer, S. & Fischer, F. (2010).
         S-COL: A Copernican turn for the development of flexibly reusable collaboration scripts. International
         Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 5(3), 321-343.
Weinberger, A., Ertl, B., Fischer, F., & Mandl, H. (2005). Epistemic and social scripts in computer-supported
         collaborative learning. Instructional Science, 33(1), 1-30.

Acknowledgments
The research reported here was funded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG). The authors would like
to thank the students and teachers who have participated in the study.

© ISLS                                                                                                       263
