CSCL 2013 Proceedings                    Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

  SANCTUARY: Asymmetric Interfaces for Collaborative Science
                                  Learning In Shared Space(s)
      Jason Haas, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 77 Massachusetts Ave. Cambridge, MA 02139,
                                                   jhaas@mit.edu

         Abstract:  SANCTUARY         is an   interactive and  participatory game  that   allows  novices  to
         experience approachable and collaborative exercises in 10th grade biology and math through
         the lens   of ecological  problem    solving.    The  chief  innovation  is   the development     of
         asymmetric    interfaces on   a shared    game   space,  providing  different tools   and  different
         epistemological  frames   for   each player  on   shared  problems.   Students   can  both   become
         familiar with a way of knowing and be aware of different ways of knowing.

Major Issues/Potential Significance
SANCTUARY is a multiplayer game designed to encourage science learning for 10th grade math and biology
students, attempting to promote greater public understanding of science and interest in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) learning. The design descends in part from Elliot Aronson's work on the
Jigsaw Classroom (2011), principally in that it requires a group task to be completed by students with a group
goal but  with individual accountability   (through  specialized  roles).  The game    is  played  by two  co-located
players on two tablet computers (iPads in this version). While both players are seeing the same simulated world,
each  player has  a different set  of tools   with which   to act in  that world. The   purpose   is  to elicit quality
communication,   arguments,   coordination,   and   co-strategization (planning   ahead    for future turns)  between
participants. This is an advance over single-player or multiplayer learning game experiences, in which players
are rarely required to verbally express and formalize their strategies during play. The project is also intended to
provide a counter to a "one-size-fits-all" status quo in learning games.

                          Figure 1. A remote shot of a playing field in SANCTUARY.
                        Figure 2. A look at a bear through the Mathematician's interface.

         The ERIA Interactive group at the University of Wisconsin-Madison's Institute for Discovery has
begun work on a very thorough simulation for environmental planning, Trails Forward (see Shapiro et al.,
2011). The work of these groups though, is principally to help professionals and pre-professionals make careful
decisions at the highest level. SANCTUARY aims to reduce the complexity to a manageable level for high
school students, as well as to provide them with strictly collaborative goals. Several fantastic games for science
learning for this high/middle school audience have emerged in recent years as well, such as Filament Games'
Resilient Planet (2008) or ERIA Interactive's Citizen Science (2011). Single player games do not frequently
allow for  multiple perspectives  on  a  play space  due   to insufficient budgeting or   scope.  Augmented     Reality
games and participatory simulations such as those developed by Klopfer et al. (2008) have experimented with
role-based decision-making,   but  generally  in   large  workshops   that are hours   long and   require  specialized
technology. Finally, while this game aims to be located in the tradition of games with asymmetric interfaces,
from lightly asymmetric (as in World of Warcraft (2004) or Team Fortress 2 (2007)) to highly asymmetric (as
in the Artemis Bridge Simulator (2012) or Carnegie Mellon's Fusion (2010)), none of these games are designed
for science and mathematics learning, and it might be a considerable stretch to teach with them.

© ISLS                                                                                                            261
CSCL 2013 Proceedings               Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

Theoretical and Methodological Approaches
The player roles, by virtue of having a constrained set of tools, necessarily represent an epistemology and thus
provide an epistemological frame (Shaffer, 2006) on the shared problem space of the game. Shaffer et al.'s
(2011) Epistemic Frame   Theory   posits a frame that consists of the skills, identity, knowledge,   values   and
epistemology of professional practitioners. The theory states that if students can internalize this frame, they will
become practitioners in important ways. Shaffer (2006) likens epistemic frames to, "the proverbial `hats' or
`glasses' we don as we take on a variety of identities or perspectives in dealing with different situations," saying
that they, "may represent a ... tight linkage between practices and ways of knowing, but at the level of the local
cultures developed by individual communities of practice." The biologist player has tools that allow him/her to
perform quadrant sampling and tag and recapture studies, for instance, while the mathematician player has the
ability to swap out creatures algebraically and to extrapolate future trends using statistical tools. The players
must then engage in a third epistemic frame, that of the collaborative practitioners, in order to successfully
complete the level together. For instance a level in the game has the goal of sustaining three wildflower species
in the ecosystem despite an onslaught of predators. Players then come to understand what it is to know things as
a biologist or a mathematician might, but also learn to be collaborative. This allows SANCTUARY to impact a
neglected aspect of science and math education, teaching students collaborative skills, particularly problem
solving across disciplines. The interactive nature of this game also makes it an exciting tool to share in a poster
session, allowing the researcher to share this work in a hands-on fashion with fellow attendees.

Findings, Conclusions, Implications
During the session, the results of a pilot study will be available for discussion. This study, the first phase of
more involved Design Based Research (Brown, 1992; Collins, 1992; Barab & Squire, 2004) project, provides
10th grade students (or other high school students involved with the relevant coursework) with up to an hour of
play experience in pairs, during which the players are observed, followed by a group interview about their
experience. Special attention is paid to participants' genders and their grades in mathematics and science.

References
Aronson, E. & Patnoe, S. (2011). Cooperation in the classroom: The jigsaw method. London: Pinter & Martin.
Barab, S. & Squire, K. (eds) (2004). Design-based research: Clarifying the terms [Special Issue]. Journal of the
        Learning Sciences, 13(1).
Beck, I. L., McKeown, M. G., & Kucan, L. (2002). Bringing words to life. New York: The Guilford Press.
Brown,  A. L.  (1992). Design experiments:   Theoretical and methodological   challenges  in creating  complex
        interventions in classroom settings. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 2(2), 141-178.
Collins, A. (1992). Toward a design science of education. In E. Scanlon & T.O'Shea (Eds.), New directions in
        educational technology (pp.15-22). New York:Springer-Verlag.
Kafai, Y. B., Quintero, M., and Feldon, D., (2010). Investigating the ''why'' in whypox : Casual and systematic
        explorations of a virtual epidemic. Games and Culture, 5(1), 116-135.
Klopfer, E. (2008). Augmented learning: Research and design of mobile educational games. Cambridge, MA:
        MIT Press.
Shaffer, D. W., Hatfield, D., Svarovsky, G. N., Nash, P., Nulty, A., Bagley, E., Frank, K., Rupp, A. A., and
        Mislevy, R. (2011). Epistemic network analysis: a prototype for 21st-century assessment of learning.
        International Journal of Learning and Media, 1(2), 33-53.
Shaffer, D. W. (2006). Epistemic frames for epistemic games. Computers & Education, 46(3), 223­234.
Shapiro, R. B., Squire, K., and the Educational Research Integration Area (2011). Games for participatory
        science. Educational Technology.
Squire K.D. & Jan, M. (2007). Mad City Mystery: Developing scientific argumentation skills with a place-based
        augmented reality game on handheld computers. Journal of Science Education and Technology, 16(1),
        5-29.

Software
Blizzard Entertainment. (2004). World of warcraft [computer software]. Irvine, CA.
ERIA   Interactive.  (2011).  Citizen    science  [computer    software].  Madison,     WI.      Available   from
        http://www.eriainteractive.com/project_CitizenScience_WebPlayer.php
ERIA Interactive. (in development). Trails forward [computer software]. Madison, WI.
Filament Games. (2008). Resilient planet [computer software]. Madison, WI.
Liang, L., Lin, Y., Shan, Y., Dewhurst,    S., Chang, E., &  Xiao,  M.  (2010).  Fusion   [computer   software].
        Pittsburgh, PA.
Robertson,  T.  (2012)  Artemis   bridge   simulator  [computer   software].  The  Internet.     Available   from
        http://www.artemis.eochu.com/?page_id=35
Valve Software. (2007). Team fortress 2 [computer software]. Kirkland, WA.

© ISLS                                                                                                        262
