CSCL 2013 Proceedings                     Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

"Together we can beat this game: The prevalence of collaborative
                          learning in educational video game play"
      Joshua S. Halterman, Dr. Camellia Sanford, Rockman et al, 3925 Hagan St. Bloomington IN, 47401
                                 Email: Josh@Rockman.com, Camellia@Rockman.com

         Abstract: The ever-increasing popularity of video games has raised questions about their role
         in generating meaningful learning experiences. Despite the prevalence of digital media and
         social networking, relatively little research has been conducted on the presence and benefits of
         social learning in educational video games. Preliminary studies suggest that by facilitating
         interactive and engaging experiences, video games offer opportunities for players to engage in
         problem-solving, socialization, and most importantly, collaborative learning.
           
As the doctor began to extract the ectoderm cells that he had painstakingly cultured for today's spinal
surgery he cringed at the idea of repeating this procedure again. "You're going to kill those cells,"
said his assistant. "Shut up," replied the doctor, "I know what I'm doing." Just then the cells began to
decompose.       "See,"   affirmed  his   assistant, "I told you".   "It's fine," sighed  the  doctor  "You   were
right, next time we'll try it your way."
         While this vignette may sound at first like an exchange between two physicians, it is actually
a conversation between two high school students playing Progenitor X, an educational video game
focused on regenerative biology concepts. Interactions of this nature are commonplace and frequently
written off as a casual disagreement amongst game players. However, these conversations provide
evidence     of  a rich   collaborative   learning experience   taking  place   during video   game   play.  Unlike
other  educational        delivery  systems,   video    games   offer  the  opportunity   to   construct  learning
experiences through a combination of social interactions and immersive gameplay.
         Early     research   has  indicated that    some  games   are  effective  at  facilitating learning  gains
(Squire,     2004)  but   the source   of these  gains  is unknown.    Studies  suggest  the   primary  benefit  of
educational gaming is purely motivational. While content knowledge has served as the benchmark for
assessing the effectiveness of learning from video games. Current findings suggest that a tremendous
amount of experiential learning is taking place unbeknownst to the player or observer. This aspect of
collaborative learning could have far reaching implications for future game development, but has thus
far gone largely unobserved.
         There have been myriad applications of digital media for creating communities of gamers in
online networks, but these have largely been viewed as serving a recreational function. Collaborative
learning, on the other hand, has been studied extensively and shown to result in content learning gains
by  as much        as 50%     in formal   educational   settings (Johnson    et al, 1981).   Despite   widespread
acceptance of the benefits of collaborative learning and the nature of games as a catalyst for social
interaction,    relatively  little research  has   been conducted    on  the  benefits of video     games towards
stimulating collaborative learning (Amory, 2007). While the focus of video game effectiveness has
centered     largely  on  individual   content  learning,  Foko  asserts   that games   provide the   context  and
information to accomplish a task; yet it is the social interactions between peers and technology that
result in new understanding (Foko, 2006). It has been determined that the observational recording of
gameplay      provides    a unique  and   naturalistic  approach  to  observing   collaborative learning     without
hindering experimentation of the subject.
         The CyberSTEM games study focuses on collaborative learning within a suite of educational
STEM-focused          games   developed   by the   Educational   Research   Integrated  Area   (ERIA)   under   the
direction of Dr. Kurt Squire. Rockman et al (REA), an independent research and evaluation company
is utilizing    a  multi-method    approach  to  study  social  interaction  and  problem  solving   during   game
play.  To    date,  REA     has  observed   28  peer-peer    dyads playing   Progenitor   X.   These  dyads   were
recorded     via  webcam    and    screen capture  software  to  observe   social interactions and   conversations
off-screen while simultaneously recording their activities on-screen as they navigated through various
game activities. Instances of collaborative discussion including shared problem solving, providing and
requesting help, delivering praise, as well as task switching and player conflicts over controls have
been   recorded       and coded    for the  purposes    of observing    collaborative  learning     patterns within
gameplay. These recordings were supplemented with pre/post survey data and post-interviews which

© ISLS                                                                                                          263
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                  Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

examined    changes   in conceptual   understanding     and   interest  as well  as players'   perceptions  of the
game experience and the benefits and drawbacks of partnered gameplay.
         The following example illustrates the types of social interactions targeted for the CyberSTEM
study.  Here, "Amy" and "Barrett" have arrived at a place in Progenitor X where they must replicate
and collect mesoderm cells. As Amy begins to collect them, Barrett reminds her that she should pay
attention to the health meter, which is getting low. "The what?" she replies. "The health meter is at
24%, you're going to die!" he says. Quickly Amy selects the micropipette to collect her cells before
they break down. "Yeah, we bad!" Amy exclaims in triumph. This small but significant interaction
highlights how the collaborative process supports experimentation, helps point out missed or unclear
objectives,  guides   player  decisions,    and ultimately    provides   a  supportive    framework    that builds
confidence   amongst   players.   Without   Barrett's   assistance, Amy     would   have  made    more   mistakes,
exhibited less confidence, and increased the likelihood of quitting the game from frustration.
         Preliminary survey and interview findings from those who engaged in peer-peer gameplay
suggest that players found partnered game play useful in learning game instructions, overcome game
challenges, and monitoring in game prompts. A majority of participants (70%, N=56) reported that
playing the game with a partner made the game easier, due to their ability to share the inquiry process:
"It felt a lot easier, we could discuss what's going on and how we need to finish." 75% of players
reported that they had learned more as a result of having a partner present during gameplay. These
findings are consistent with Gee's assertion that the benefit of video games is that they are "sites of
naturally occurring, intrinsically motivated learning" (Gee, 2004) and that this learning largely takes
place in the form of collaborative problem solving.

References
Amory,   A.  (2007).   Game  Object   Model    Version  II:   A Theoretical  Framework     for Educational   Game
         Development. Educational Technology Research and Development, 5(1), 51-77.
Foko, T. (2006). The role of computer games and social constructivism in skills development of learners from
         different     educational        backgrounds.,       Retrieved      October      28,      2012,      from
         http://146.230.128.141/jspui/bitstream/10413/133/3/Thato Foko PhD Dissertation.pdf
Gee, J. P. (2004). Learning about learning from a video game: rise of nations. Retrieved October 29, 2012, from
         http://simworkshops.stanford.edu/05_0125/reading_docs/Rise%20of%20Nations.pdf.
Gunter, G., Kenny, Robert, & Vick, E. (2008). Taking Educational Games Seriously: Using the RETAIN Model
         to Design Endogenous Fantasy into Standalone Educational Games. Educational Technology Research
         and Development, 56(5/6), 511-537.
Harteveld, C., & Bekebrede, G. (2011). Learning in single- versus multiplayer Games: The More the Merrier?
         Simulation & Gaming: An Interdisciplinary Journal, 41(3), 316-340.
Johnson,  D. W.,    Maruyama,    G., Johnson,   R., Nelson,   D., &    Skon,  L. (1981).  Effects  of  cooperative,
         competitive,  and  individualistic  goal  structures on  achievement:   A  meta-analysis.  Psychological
         Bulletin, 89(1), 47-62.
Mayo, M. J. (2009). Video Games: A Route to Large-Scale STEM Education? Science, 323, 79-82.
Paquin, M. (2002). Effects of a museum interactive CD-ROM on knowledge and attitude of secondary school
         students in Ontario. International Journal of Instructional Media, 29, 101-111.
Puntambekar,  S.,   Erkens, G.,  &   Hmelo-Silver,  C.  (2011).  Analyzing   interactions in CSCL:     methodology,
         approaches and issues. New York: Springer
Salen, K., & Zimmerman, E. (2004). Rules of play: Game design fundamentals. Cambridge: The MIT Press.
Squire, K.  (2004). Replaying    history: Learning  world history through   playing  Civilization III. Dissertation,
         University of Indiana, Bloomington.
Squire, K. (2006). From Content to Context: Videogames as Designed Experience. Educational Researcher,
         35(8), 19-29.

© ISLS                                                                                                         264
