CSCL 2013 Proceedings                    Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

    Learning at the Seafloor, Looking at the Sky: The Relationship
 Between Individual Tasks and Collaborative Engagement in Two
                                       Citizen Science Projects
                  Katie DeVries Hassman, Gabriel Mugar, Carsten Østerlund, Corey Jackson
                                         Syracuse University, Syracuse, NY
              Email: klhassma@syr.edu, gmugar@syr.edu, costerlu@syr.edu, cjacks04@syr.edu

         Abstract: In this study, we explore the relationship between individual and collaborative
         learning activities as they occur in two online citizen science projects, Seafloor Explorer and
         Planet Hunters. Trace ethnography is suggested as a methodology suitable for investigating
         this relationship. Preliminary findings identify relationships between four types of activities
         that emerge which support individual and collaborative learning activities and participation.

Introduction
Online citizen science projects provide tools and opportunities that support public engagement in scientific
research processes, often involving large data sets (Wiggins & Crowston, 2011). The activities supported by
citizen science projects    have   the potential to  lead   to significant  scientific discoveries and to   also support
participant learning opportunities     (Bonney   et al., 2009;  Brossard,   Lewenstein   &  Bonney,  2005;   Wiggins   &
Crowston, 2011). Until recently, research investigating citizen science projects has conceptualized learning as a
potential consequence of individual participation. Expanding on previous research, we draw on the notion of
learning from Lave & Wenger's (1991) theory of legitimate peripheral participation and conceptualize learning
not as  an  outcome,    but rather  as evolving  forms     of participation in a community    of  practice. We   use this
perspective to explore the relationship between individual and collaborative types of participation in online
citizen science projects.

Methods & Findings
The  research presented     in this poster builds   on     preliminary findings  generated  through  online  participant
observation (Hine, 2000) and trace ethnography (Geiger & Ribes, 2011) of two online citizen science projects
from the   Zooniverse   (www.zooniverse.org)        suite: Seafloor  Explorer  (SE)    and Planet  Hunters  (PH). Trace
ethnography allows us to draw attention to and use documentary traces to map both individual and collaborative
forms of learning. The method compliments online participant observation as it draws attention to the visible
traces left as remnants of otherwise invisible activity. Following the way that particular traces (e.g. comments,
hashtags) are engaged throughout online activities can help draw attention to the ways that different activities
and learning practices are related.
         Based on our participant observation and analysis of documentary traces we identify four types of
individual and collaborative participant activities that emerge amongst three basic features of the PH & SE
projects (see ovals in Figure 1).

                                         Figure 1. Participant Activity Model

Initial participants respond to prompts by the system annotation feature to annotate particular characteristics in
image data, or what we describe as primary annotation. Participant primary annotation activities tend to be
individual  activities, producing   individual   annotations    that are then  aggregated   and   used by   scientists in
subsequent analyses that fulfill the primary scientific goals of individual projects. As participants become more
familiar with the projects, they may begin to engage in user generated annotation and user generated queries
practices. These two practices go beyond the primary annotation goal of the citizen science projects and when

© ISLS                                                                                                               265
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                    Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

enacted, often represent more collaborative activities. Participants with extensive experience with the projects
may also begin to engage in advanced conversations and collaborations with other participants about the data, or
what we refer to as user generated analysis. During each of the four activities participants can leave various
types of traces of their engagement. Participant traces can take many forms. For example, they can be comments
connected to specific image data objects or self-curated image data collections to name a few. Examining the
activities that emerge   around    one particular type   of  trace, a hashtag,   highlight the   connections   between
individual and collaborative learning within the two projects. In SE & PH, hashtags are used to emphasize the
presence of characteristics or properties within individual image data objects (see Example 1).

Example 1. Species Identification Hashtag (SE)

In the  above   example, the   hashtags  are related to  individual  and   collaborative practices  of user   generated
annotation, user generated queries, and user generated analysis activities. The #snake-eel hashtag left by
Participant 1 is an example of an individual act of species identification (user generated annotation), but the
hashtag is also presented as a scaffold to assist Participant 2 in subsequent species identification. Participant 2's
#convict-worm hashtag draws attention to an image data characteristic and also prompts collaborative feedback
(user generated queries) in identifying potential species present. Once created, both hashtags are aggregated by
the SE system, creating keyword collections of images with comments including the same hashtag names. By
contributing the #convict-worm hashtag to the comment, the referent image is automatically included in a
searchable collection of all images containing potential convict worm candidates. This is important in the SE
project, because this links Participant 2's activity to the larger collaborative activity prompted by the project
science   team  moderators    of identifying a  potentially new  species   called  a convict  worm     (user  generated
analysis).
          Based  on our  Participant   Activity Model    of  participation in  the PH    & SE    projects we  find that
participants engage in more collaborative activities as they move toward sustained participation in the two
projects.  Following the  traces   of hashtag   activity around one   instance  of   hashtagging   allows  us  to begin
exploring  the  dynamic  and     complex relationships   between    different levels of  individual and    collaborative
learning   and  participation enacted  within   participant trajectories. Researchers   interested in  studying   online
learning activities may benefit from incorporating trace ethnography into their work as it provides a way to
identify and understand the interconnections amongst various types and levels of learning that may otherwise be
invisible in online environments

References
Bonney, R., Cooper, C.B., Dickinson, J., Kelling, S., Phillips, T., Rosenberg, K.V., & Shirk, J. (2009). Citizen
          science: A  developing    tool for  expanding   science   knowledge   and   scientific literacy. BioScience,
          59(11), 977-984.
Brossard, D., Lewenstein,     B., & Bonney, R. (2005). Scientific knowledge and attitude change: The impact of a
          citizen science project. International Journal of Science Education, 27(9), 1099-1121.
Geiger, R.S., & Ribes, D. (2011). Trace ethnography: Following coordination through documentary practices. In
          Proceedings of the 2011 44th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS '11) (pp.1-
          10). Washington, D.C: IEEE Computer Society.
Hine, C. (2000). Virtual ethnography. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Lave,  J., &   Wegner,   E.   (1991).  Situated learning.   Legitimate    peripheral participation. Cambridge,     UK:
          Cambridge Univeristy Press.
Wiggins,   A.,  &  Crowston,   K. (2011). From    conservation  to  crowdsourcing:    A  typology   of citizen science.
          Proceedings of the 2011 44th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS '11) (pp.1-
          10). Washington, D.C: IEEE Computer Society.

Acknowledgments
This project was partially supported by the US National Science Foundation under grant number 1211071. The
authors thank members of the Zooniverse team for providing support and feedback to this project.

© ISLS                                                                                                             266
