CSCL 2013 Proceedings                     Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

   Dynamic of interaction among actors mediated by the visibility in
                         an online community, what's up with...?
              Juan Carlos Hernández, Andrea Montoya, Andrés Mena, Maritza Castro, Johana López
                                           UMB Virtual, Cajicá Colombia
           {juan.hernandez, andrea.montoya, andres.mena, martiza.castro, johana.lopez}@umb.edu.co

          Abstract: This research aims to describe the behavior of a virtual learning community in
          relation to the process of knowledge building and collaborative learning from a strategy based
          on the pedagogical use of the visibility of academic production. The research environment is
          configured  as  two   courses   of   Manuela    Beltran  University    supported   on  the   platform
          VirtualNet 2.0.

Introduction
The implementation of ICT in education is increasing the didactic and pedagogic challenges in teacher and
students; the setting of learning environment supported by computer requires a detailed planning to ensure a
good learning process using the available resources. It also requires making conscience about the configuration
of a community with a specific organization to learn together a special topic. In this sense, to consider the
collaborative dynamic and knowledge building process in relation with the visibility is a focus on interest with
the perspective to generate new strategies for the pedagogical experience. Thus, this project develops a scientific
study about   visibility of academic    production   of students  and  relationships  with  collaborative   learning and
knowledge building.

Literature Review
From a reticular look, social phenomena, Prada (2005) contribute to the creation of a vision about of knowledge
network and its relation with innovation community. The knowledge networks can be a powerful strategic tool
that increases the innovation and learning. Brighenti (2010) elaborates the concept of visibility as a general
category for social theory and social research. He also describes the approaches or disciplines in relation with
this project, in specific   cultural and  media  studies,  science   and technology   studies,  sociology   and  identity
studies. Wasserman and Faust (1994) propose a model graph theory with application in social context, from
there, this project takes the concept of "node" understood as an actor as a member of the learning community,
"connection"    understood  as  the  interaction that occurs   among   actors.   Bossalasco  et al  (2009)   set learning
process as the emerge result the interaction into learning content, the subject to guide and subject to learn, which
permits the knowledge management. Respect Onrubia (2005) analyze the process and consider two types of
representations, the meaning of learning content and the sense that have learned.

Research objectives and Methodology
The goal in this research is to describe the dynamic of the online community in relation with collaborative
learning  and   knowledge   building  from   a  strategic  based  in pedagogical   use   of visibility  of  the academic
production.   As sample   this  project  has two  groups   of  the   Virtual Unit  of Manuela    Beltran    University  in
Colombia,   each    group   has approximately     160   students.    The only    different  between     the two   groups
(experimental and comparison) is the implementation of didactic strategy based in pedagogical use of visibility.
In  this since, the research interest  is established   by the incident  of  the  pedagogical   use  of the  visibility in
collaborative learning and knowledge building.

Results
The presentation of the results intended to illustrate the behavior of the three categories of analysis. In the
experimental group, it was tested the activities based on visibility strategic. The analysis and monitoring of the
activities permitted to seen: 1) the principal effect of the comments was because of the teacher indicates it, 2)
the comments have only agree and disagree level, 3) the publications of academics products generated that the
comments were incorporated in the final products. 4) There is a strong influence of the first publication on the
academic production of the other members of the group, no important if this doesn´t have the requirements. 5) A
significant number of students involved on the closing date. 6) Challenger tasks generate more interest. 7) When
the  answers  of  comments   were    distant to  the date  of publication    the student generated   low    motivation  to
conform group of work. 8) The success of the strategic depends on the level of recognition that students have
used the tool. 9) It is not only important to make public the relevant academic production, it is very important to
make visibility management for obtaining better results.

© ISLS                                                                                                               267
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                       Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

To collect the necessary data to represent the collaborative activity proceeded to design an instrument named
"Poll  of interaction",  which    has   enabled   collaborative  data     collection activities developed.  Figure   1  is a
compilation   of   the first 4   graphs  of  activities, this  shows   the   collaboration behavior   form  the activity   of
visibility, the main results are in activities 1 and 4, the explanation is given since the incidence of visibility
strategy, in activities 2 and 3 the visibility strategy was not very strong in its configuration and the results show
it.

                                            Figure 1. Dynamic of collaboration

In the case of the caparison group knowledge building process is relevant only the communication category,
through   the expression     of  ideas  between   student-teacher and     use of  resources,  the  academic  production    is
oriented from the instruction. Regarding the quality of the production, a marked difference is evident. In the
experimental group the effect of publishing academic products establish interaction in the moment to make
visible, it enables students independently improve the quality of academic production, taking the contribution
made by their peers and the teacher.

Discussion and conclusions
An element of this discussion is the behavior of pedagogic strategic, Brighenti (2010) develops a discussion
around the visual and visible. In this research it is understood as the public and the visible, with this context it is
possible to say that just to make public an academic product does not generates the effects of the visibility,
reaching  this level   require   that  the pedagogic strategic   ensures     the interaction between  actor  and academic
production to move from the public to the visible. Reaching the state of visibility described above takes up two
approaches, Clifford (1963) regarding the impact of visibility from a dynamic educational, 1) positive visibility
as the ideal state actor participation, generating constructive contributions to meeting the objectives of academic
activities, and 2) negative visibility as a incidence of distractions presented for agreement and understanding of a
group to reach the fulfillment of a goal. So is that part of the potentials are presented as forms that allow the
actor to establish relationships with others and with the resources that are set in the virtual environment, such as
the ability to contribute to the production of other, seeking to strengthen it and complement it to improve its
quality.  In  that sense,    the knowledge    building    that would      be given   from  the  Hill (2010)  poses   as  the
"relationship of a group of individuals (community) with a common, with a technological object", which is set
from the virtual learning environment.

References
Bossalasco,   M,   Donolo,   D.,  &    Chiercher, A. (2009).   Indicador     de  construcción   conjunta de  conocimiento.
          Referencia al aporte de otro en foro de discusión. En Revista Innovación Educativa, Vl. 9, No. 47,
          abril-junio,    pp.     19-31.      México:        Instituto    Politécnico      Nacional.     Recuperado        de
          http://redalyc.uaemex.mx/src/inicio/ArtPdfRed.jsp?iCve=179414895003
Brighenti     A.    (2010)      Visibility   in   Social      Theory      and     Social   Research.     Recuperado      de:
          http://www.capacitedaffect.net/visibility/Brighenti_2010_Visibility.pdf
Clifford E. (1963) Social Visibility. Child Development, Vol. 34, No. 3 (Sep., 1963), pp. 799-808. Recuperado
          de: http://www.jstor.org/stable/1126773
Onrubia,  J.   (2005).  Aprender      y enseñar   en entornos    virtuales:   actividad    conjunta, ayuda   pedagógica    y
          construcción   del    conocimiento.   En: RED    Revista     de Educación   a  Distancia.  Publicación en  línea.
          Murcia   (España).     Año    IV.  Número   monográfico      II.-  20   de  Febrero   de   2005. Recuperado      de
          http://www.um.es/ead/red/M2
Prada  E. (2005)    Las  redes   de   conocimiento   y   las  organizaciones     Revista Bibliotecas  y  tecnologías de    la
          información Vol. 2 No 4 (Octubre ­ Diciembre) Año 2005
Wasserman,     Stanley   and    Faust,  Katherine.  (1994),    Social  Network     Analysis,    Methods  and  applications.
          Cambridge University.

© ISLS                                                                                                                  268
