CSCL 2013 Proceedings                Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

           Productive Subjective Failure in a Learning Community:
                 Process of Explicating and Negotiating Norms
                          Yotam Hod and Dr. Dani Ben-Zvi, University of Haifa, Israel
                       Email: yotamhod@edtech.haifa.ac.il, dani.benzvi@edtech.haifa.ac.il

         Abstract:  This  paper presents  a case study   of an exemplary      blended graduate classroom
         learning community that showed students taking responsibility over their own collaborative
         learning. Specifically, the group went through a stage of productive subjective failure before
         intentionally deciding to explicate and negotiate their own group norms. This transition saw a
         marked increase in collaboration among group members. Using a micro-genetic interpretive
         approach, we analyzed the stages of group development that led to this outcome. Our findings
         indicate that the process of explicating and negotiating norms (PENN) was the climactic event
         whereby the group transformed their responsibility and collaborative learning behavior. We
         discuss the implications of our findings, which we believe inform both theory and design of
         productive failure in CSCL.

Introduction
Productive failure (PF) has generated a great deal of interest by the Learning Sciences community in recent
years, offering a new prism to examine learning. As research on PF is still maturing, there has been a call to
extend the study of it to different contexts and content areas (Kapur & Kinzer, 2009). One of these areas which
is in need of further development has to do with a foundational concept in CSCL: learning communities (LCs),
which has a focus on the socio-cultural aspects of learning (Brown, Collins & Duguid, 1989). Bringing PF and
LCs together is not only an interesting challenge, but an important bridge to build so that two areas of research
can be better connected.
         Research on PF has based its definition of failure measured against a canonical standard (Kapur, 2008;
Kapur & Kinzer, 2009; Kapur & Bielaczyc, 2012), making it reasonable that attempts that fall short of meeting
the standard may still be rewarding, so long as learners engage in sustained, divergent thinking. If the standard
upon which the concept of failure is altered to a subjective one, in contrast, a different explanation for the
hidden efficacy of failure may result. A subjective interpretation of failure means that it is the appearance of
failure which defines the term, regardless of what external standard is reached. Given this definition, subjective
failure involves an interpretation of a particular situation or problem. In LCs, the way the group perceives their
failure and the productivity that results becomes the essential issue.
         The differing standards upon which failure is based also leads to variation in the way that failure is
induced.   In canonically-based failure, ill-structured problems  are    given  so that there  are many   problem
parameters, along with several other characteristics, designed to make the problem complex (Kapur, 2008).
While the level of the learner or group is taken into consideration so that the problem is outside the relevant
zone of proximal development, the problem itself is at the center of failure inducement. In subjective failure in
LCs, in contrast, the group is at the center of failure inducement. While the complexity of the problem is still
important, there are different considerations for how to induce the failure. These can include interventions that
affect group cohesiveness, social norms and other aspects of group dynamics.

Methods
In this paper, we present a case study of an exemplary blended graduate learning sciences course that was
developed over seven years as part of the Educational Technologies Graduate Program at the University of
Haifa (UH), Israel. As part of the course (CATELT), interventions that induced subjective group failure were
part of the design. We micro-genetically analyzed the discourse of members of the course to examine individual
and group development, with the aim of providing fine-grained evidence of group productive subjective failure
in our environment.

Findings
The second stage of CATELT had a subjective failure effect as a result of exposing students to the epistemic
reality of being  part of a technology-enhanced   classroom    learning   community.    A group  feeling of stress
manifested over the quantity (i.e., workload) and quality (i.e., type of interaction) of contributions entailed as
part of such practice. This ultimately led to a group perception of failure.
         There was a learner-centeredness in the design that contributed to students' experience of failure. This
was based on the reflective activities, where students had to engage in a continual process, throughout the
semester, to develop their own narratives about who they were as learners. This was done by having students

© ISLS                                                                                                       269
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                     Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

relate their own repertoire of previous experiences from their personal lives to the collaborative experiences
they were having.
         By week seven (out of thirteen), the group had shown repeated signs of tension and conflict. A string of
events appeared to be a climactic turning point for the group, based on a subjective perception of failure.

         Pheobe: I had enough - this topic of the group. You always present it like we are here for you
         [referring to another student], but it is like a school of sharks during the week, and I think also
         in the assignment of the week, and last week.

         Pheobe's comment showed that the way the group was behaving was unacceptable to her. Her extreme
metaphor   of   the  sharks appeared   to represent  a climax  for the   group,  which  saw a turning point   in their
discourse  from   complaining    to  recognizing that  they failed as  a group.  In the ensuing  dialogue,  the group
explicitly discussed   the  fact that  something   was wrong   in  the way   they  were working  together.  This  was
summarized by one student:

         Patricia: On Wednesday, it became clear to me that I wasn't alone - that a few others thought
         that there wasn't collaboration and that it is not possible to create collaboration in this way.
         Something else is needed.

         The    onset  of the  third stage  in  CATELT   was   marked    by  the group  assuming responsibility  over
explicating and negotiating their own norms (PENN). This came in the context of the course design, which
afforded   this opportunity   both   during ftf sessions and   in the  online collaborative Wiki   environment.   The
productivity    that ensued   resulted from  their perception  of  failure, making  the PENN    an example   that the
subjective perception of failure in stage two was productive.
         Once the group reached a perception of failure, the discourse changed to one that was focused on
taking responsibility over the PENN. Two students requested to lead a special activity that was endorsed by the
group and the instructors. The students broke down into small work groups, and then engaged in a PENN in the
learning community. During the subsequent online interaction, the students requested the instructors to add the
development of the Wiki norms page to the weekly online assignment. For the first time in the semester, the
students   also  edited   the weekly    assignments   page, showing    they   were  taking  responsibility over  their
collaborative practices. The entire group was thereafter very active in further explicating and negotiating their
own norms, as well as collaborating more meaningfully.

Discussion and Conclusion
Our research is at the beginning stages of what we hope can make a contribution to the concept of productive
failure. Our learning community approach, which considers subjective standards of failure, calls for a different
standard upon which to define failure, a different way to induce it, and a different methodology to research the
phenomenon. The idea that there could be hidden efficacy in the perception of failure by a group, and not just in
failing against a conventional standard by individuals, suggests a whole host of considerations that extend the
meaning of the concept and may make it more applicable to the learning community approach. We hope to
extend our exploration of this group process involved in inducing failure in future CSCL research.

References
Brown, J. S., Collins, A., & Duguid, P. (1989). Situated cognition and the culture of learning. Educational
         Researcher, 18(1), 32-42.
Kapur, M. (2008). Productive failure. Cognition and Instruction, 26(3), 379-424.
Kapur,   M.  &   Kinzer,   C.  (2009).  Productive  failure in CSCL      groups. Computer-Supported   Collaborative
         Learning, 4(1), 21-46.
Kapur, M. & Bielaczyc, K. (2012). Designing for Productive Failure. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 21(1),
         45-83.

© ISLS                                                                                                            270
