CSCL 2013 Proceedings                      Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

         Sociomathematical participation: Participatory culture and
                    mathematics pre-service teacher education
           Jeremiah I. Holden, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 225 N. Mills St, Madison, WI 53706,
                                               remi.holden@gmail.com

          Abstract:   Despite    intersections  between     discipline-specific  mathematics    content   and
          classroom social norms and learning practices, little research documents relations between
          social and mathematical activity as examined through social and digital media. Drawing upon
          complementary theoretical perspectives concerning social media and mathematical activity,
          this research investigated the participatory culture of mathematics pre-service teachers.      Data
          suggest multiple social practices, including collective intelligence, distributed cognition, and
          appropriation, that were exhibited through a discursive classroom activity structure.

Introduction
Scholars are attentive to intersections among engagement with discipline-specific mathematics content and the
social norms and learning practices of classrooms (White & Brady, 2010; Yackel & Cobb, 1996).             Advances in
educational   technology  have   afforded   researchers  software  designs and   network-based    devices that further
delineate relationships between social and mathematical activity (e.g. Roschelle, Knudsen, & Hegedus, 2010;
White & Pea, 2011).     While many technologies and activities are designed to support students' familiarity with
mathematics content, prior research has seldom documented how relations between social and mathematical
activity may be examined through behaviors, media, and technology that are primarily social and participatory.

Participatory Culture and Mathematics Education
Digital and social media are changing classroom interactions.         One significant change concerns participatory
culture,  or  interactive and   social practices   with  "relatively  low barriers to  artistic expression and   civic
engagement, strong support for creating and sharing one's creations, and some type of informal mentorship"
(Jenkins, Clinton, Purushotma, Robison, & Weigel, 2006, p. 3). Participatory culture has fostered new digital
literacies and  impacted   classroom    teaching    and learning  (Gee, 2007;   Lankshear   &   Knobel,   2009).   Yet
mathematics    teachers   often only use    technology  to  model  examples  for  students  who   then complete   drill
exercises (Niess et al., 2009).    Within mathematics teacher education, little research examines social practices
associated   with participatory  culture.    With early career and pre-service teachers "digitally able" (Starkey,
2010),   those  enrolling  in   teacher    education programs     are likely to  consider   participatory  culture "a
commonplace way of socializing and learning" (Davidson & Goldberg, 2009, p. 13). This research investigated
pre-service teacher learning at the intersection of participatory culture and mathematics education.

Theoretical Perspectives
This research drew upon theoretical perspectives about participatory culture, mathematical activity, and social
practice.  Participatory culture(s) are locations and patterns of social interaction and skill developed through
collaboration and networking (Jenkins et al., 2006).     Participatory culture includes membership "affiliations" in
communities    with  similar    interests, creative  forms  of media   "expressions,"  "collective  problem-solving"
generating new knowledge, and "circulations" among media networks.               Corresponding skills include play,
performance, simulation, appropriation, multitasking, distributed cognition, collective intelligence, judgment,
transmedia navigation, and networking, and negotiation.        Concerning mathematics and social practice, learning
norms can complement social practices.       Yackel and Cobb (1996) distinguish sociomathematical norms as those
aspects of mathematics discussions that are specific to students' understanding of mathematics.          In contrast to
purely social norms, a sociomathematical norm establishes an understanding for what counts as an acceptable
mathematical   explanation   within  a  classroom.    This  research  asked: What  pre-service   teacher  participatory
culture social practices and digital media representations correlate to mathematics education discussions?

Methods
This research concerned a classroom activity structure developed to examine the intersection of pre-service
mathematics teachers (n=21) participatory culture with mathematics activity.        Data were collected from online
discussions about course texts.    Six pre-service teacher groups convened weekly to answer discussion questions
and create digital media representations.    Data were analyzed to examine what social practices and digital media
representations   correlated    to  online   discussions    about  mathematics,    and  if  these  instances   suggest
sociomathematical norms.        A deductive coding scheme was created based upon eleven "new literacy skills"
defined    by Jenkins   and   colleagues    (2006)   (play, performance,   simulation,  appropriation,   multitasking,

© ISLS                                                                                                            271
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                  Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

distributed cognition, collective intelligence, judgment,   transmedia  navigation, networking,     negotiation); for
example, the "collective intelligence" code was applied when pre-service teachers displayed an ability to pool
knowledge and compare notes with others towards a common goal, "distributed cognition" when interacting
with tools that expanded mental capabilities, "appropriation" when meaningfully sampling and remixing media
content; and "transmedia navigation" when following information across multiple modalities.

Findings
Pre-service teachers generated 24 discussion representations about   mathematics education.   14 were   wiki-based;
seven utilized the wiki-based course website to create text only representations, four included text and digital
images, two multiple linked wiki pages with media, and one with embedded video.          Pre-service teachers also
created three digital media presentations hosted elsewhere online but embedded within the course wiki website,
two blogs, one podcast, and four representations that featured other media.     The 24 discussion representations
included 42 instances of seven participatory culture social practices. Collective intelligence was exhibited in   15
instances, distributed cognition in nine, and appropriation in seven.   Four social practices were not exhibited:
performance, simulation, multitasking, and judgment.       Multiple practices were used across all groups.    Four
groups exhibited both distributed cognition and collective intelligence in eight representations.     For example,
Group 1 exhibited distributed cognition and collective intelligence in three of four representations.   Nearly one-
third (seven  of  24) representations exhibited  at  least three participatory  culture  practices, including three
representations created by Group 1, and one each created by Groups 2, 3, and 6.     This subset of representations
included five  of the  eight pairings of distributed cognition   and collective intelligence, and   all instances  of
networking.

Conclusion
This  research suggests  that  participatory culture practices,  particularly collective intelligence,   distributive
cognition, and appropriation, were exhibited when pre-service teachers discussed and created representations
about their developing knowledge of mathematics and mathematics education practices.             With blended and
online learning environments prevalent within higher and teacher education, the classroom activity structure
described in this study may be useful within education settings that span multiple learning spaces and modalities
to leverage students' tacit familiarity with digital and social media.   For mathematics education researchers,
these findings suggest that technologies and social practices associated with participatory culture might help
establish sociomathematical norms, expanding the repertoire of behaviors and locations available for teaching
mathematics.

References
Davidson, C.N. & Goldberg, D.T. (2009). The future of learning institutions in a digital age. Cambridge, MA:
         MIT Press.
Gee, J. P. (2007). What video games have to teach us about learning and literacy.
         New York, NY: Palgrave Macmillan.
Jenkins, H., Clinton, K., Purushotma, R., Robison, A. J., & Weigel, M. (2006). Confronting the challenges of
         participatory culture: Media education for the twenty-first century. Chicago, IL: MacArthur
         Foundation.
Lankshear, C., & Knobel, M. (2009). New literacies: Everyday practices and classroom learning. Maidenhead,
         UK: Open University Press.
Niess, M. L., Ronau, R. N., Shafer, K. G., Driskell, S. O., Harper S. R., Johnston, C., Browning, C.,Özgün-
         Koca, S. A., & Kersaint, G. (2009). Mathematics teacher TPACK standards and development model.
         Contemporary Issues in Technology and Teacher Education, 9(1), 4-24.
Roschelle, J., Knudsen, J., & Hegedus, S. (2010). From new technological infrastructures to curricular activity
         systems: Advanced designs for teaching and learning. Designs for learning environments of the future,
         233-262.
Starkey, L. (2010). Supporting the digitally able beginning teacher. Teaching and Teacher Education, 26(7),
         1429-1438.
White,  T.  &  Brady,  C. (2010).  Space   and  time in  classroom   networks:  Mapping   conceptual    domains    in
         mathematics   through  collective activity structures.  In K. Gomez,   L.  Lyons  &  J. Radinsky   (Eds.),
         Learning in the Disciplines: Proceedings of the International Conference of the Learning Sciences.
         University of Illinois at Chicago: Chicago, IL.
White, T., & Pea, R. (2011). Distributed by design: On the promises and pitfalls of collaborative learning with
         multiple representations. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 20(3), 489-547.
Yackel, E. & Cobb, P. (1996). Sociomathematical norms, argumentation, and autonomy in mathematics.
         Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 27(4), 458-477.

© ISLS                                                                                                         272
