CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                               Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

               Teacher framing, classroom collaboration scripts,
                     and help-seeking and help-giving behaviors
                         Eleni A. Kyza, Yiannis Georgiou, Cyprus University of Technology
                                Eleni.Kyza@cut.ac.cy, Ioannis.Georgiou@cut.ac.cy
             Demetra Hadjichambi, Andreas Hadjichambis, Cyprus Ministry of Education and Culture
                                demhad@ucy.ac.cy, a.chadjihambi@cytanet.com.cy

           Abstract:  This   case   study    investigated students'    collaborative     help-seeking  and  their
           teachers' help-giving behaviors in inquiry-based learning.         Data from two pairs of middle-
           school students, using two different scaffolding scripts, and from their biology teacher, were
           collected and analyzed.     The   following research   questions   were  pursued:     How does each
           collaboration script influence students' help-seeking and teachers' help-giving activity?        Data
           included videotapes of each pair's interactions, the discussions between the pairs and the
           teacher, whole-class    discussions,  learning assessments    and    a teacher  interview.   Findings
           indicated that the pair in the ImplicitScaffolding script sought help less frequently than the
           ExplicitScaffolding  pair   while the  nature  of the  help sought     was different.   Findings also
           showed   that the different  scaffolding  scripts  impacted   student   motivation    and  framed   the
           teacher expectations differently, regardless of the type of help sought by the students.        These
           findings  highlight  the  connection   between     collaboration   scripts,   teacher  cognition  and
           scaffolding, and bear implications about students and teachers.

Introduction
While inquiry is widely accepted as a means to facilitate learning in science, inquiry-based tasks can still be
highly challenging    for  students,   especially when    students are  not   appropriately    and sufficiently supported
(Kollar, Fischer, & Slotta, 2007; Linn, 2006). Research has provided evidence that help-seeking is often related
to better learning (Nelson-Le Gall, 1981) while at the same time there is evidence that students do not often
engage in such activities (Aleven, Stahl, Schworm, Fischer,       & Wallace,    2003).   Effective help seeking strategies
could  promote    student  learning    in such   inquiry-based   learning environments      (e.g.  Aleven   et  al., 2003).
Considering    that help  seeking   is an  important   meta-cognitive   skill   (Nelson-LeGall,    1981; Newman,      1994)
several researchers have focused on designing learning environments promoting help-seeking behaviors (Aleven
& Koedinger, 2001), tried to explicitly teach this skill to students (e.g. Ames, 1983; Nelson-LeGall, 1981;
Newman, 1994) and tried to motivate students to seek help more often.             While students' help-seeking behavior
has received some attention in the literature, it appears that teachers' help-giving behaviors have been largely
ignored in such discussions (Butler, 2006).
           The present   study  is a   multiple  case-study  into  students'  collaborative    help-seeking  behavior.   It
examines students' collaborative help-seeking and teacher's help-giving in two comparable contexts, each using
a  different  classroom  script to   support  student  collaboration.   The   first context    involved  a guided    inquiry
environment,    in   which    students    collaborated    to  address  a  biological     problem.      This  environment
(ExplicitScaffolding) relied on the teacher, peer collaboration, and worksheets to support the learning process.
The second context involved a less-structured inquiry environment, in which students collaborated to address
the same biological problem on the computer.         This environment (ImplicitScaffolding) relied on the web-based
inquiry investigation, peer collaboration and the teacher for guidance.           We investigate the following research
questions:    How   does  each  classroom     script influence   the framing    of  the  teaching  and  learning   activity?
Specifically,  a)   how  does  the  group  help-seeking   behavior    differ in   explicit vs. implicit  scripted  learning
environments and b) how does the teacher help-giving behavior differ in such context?

Theoretical Framework
Our work draws on literature conducted on small group collaboration scripts, students' self-regulated learning as
it relates to  help seeking,  scaffolding    and  teacher cognition.   In this    study, we specifically   seek to   explore
whether the collaboration script in inquiry-based learning, a topic discussed in Makitalo-Siegl, Kohnle and
Fischer (2011) influenced the help-seeking behavior of the students and the help-giving behavior of the teacher.
Collaboration scripts seek to structure collaborative activity in meaningful ways and support intersubjective
learning (Kobbe et al., 2007; Kollar, Fischer, & Friedrich, 2006; Kollar, Fischer, & Slotta, 2007). Kobbe et al.
(2007) identified   five important   components    of  collaboration   scripts:   learning objectives, type of activities,
sequencing, role distribution, and representation type. Whereas the Makitalo-Siegl et al. (2011) study explored

© ISLS                                                                                                                 272
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                          Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

two different versions of collaboration scripts both provided by the Web-based Inquiry Science Environment
(WISE) learning platform we wanted to explore students' help-seeking behavior in more traditional (learning
environment+worksheets)     setting versus  in more  open-ended,  yet   scaffolded  versions  (web-based    learning
environment + web-based scaffolded articulation spaces).
         Makitalo-Siegl, Kohnle and Fischer (2011) investigated whether students, working in collaborative
inquiry  settings employing   high  and    low-structured  classroom  scripts, appropriately  used available  help.
Confirming prior studies, Makitalo-Siegl et al. found that students did not engage in much help-seeking in either
context.  Furthermore, exploring the effect of low-structure and high-structure collaboration scripts provided
through the WISE platform, Makitalo-Siegl et al. found that students in the low-structure situation engaged in
statistically significant more help seeking than students in the high-structure situation, and that students in the
low-structure situation exhibited smaller learning gains than the students in the high-structure condition.
         While teacher scaffolding (e.g. Tabak, 2004) and the use of technology to scaffold student learning
(e.g. Quintana et al., 2004; Lu, Lajoie, & Wiseman, 2010) are topics that have received significant attention to
date, teachers' help-giving behavior, in response to student help-seeking is a topic that has not been discussed
much.   We believe that coupling the investigation of the two phenomena of interest (students not seeking help
much even though help-seeking is positively associated with learning and teacher cognition in providing help to
support collaborative inquiry learning) merits further examination.

Methodology

Participants

Teacher
One biology teacher, with five years of teaching experience and a master's in science education, and her 7th
grade students at an urban middle-school were involved in this study.    The teacher (Mrs. Tonia, a pseudonym)
was a member of a participatory design group who collaborated to design the learning materials with the goal of
supporting inquiry learning; she did not participate in the planning of this research study nor was she aware of
the specific  research  questions.   Mrs.   Tonia  enacted  the learning  module    using the  ExplicitScaffolding
collaboration materials with one of her classes and used the web-based, ImplicitScaffolding materials with her
second class. The teacher was familiar with both approaches to inquiry-based learning.

Students
Two   intact  classes, taught by    the same   teacher (Mrs.  Tonia)   participated  in  this study.    Conceptual
understanding   assessments   and  motivation  surveys were   administered to   all students  following a   pre-post
design.  The analysis of the conceptual understanding pre-test indicated no statistically significant difference in
terms of the two classes' content knowledge before the teaching intervention (    =-.052, p=.958),   indicating that
students in each collaboration script were equivalent in terms of their prior knowledge regarding the human
reproductive system.   Similarly, the comparison of students' motivation in the two collaboration scripts did not
indicate any statistically significant differences in terms of students' views about   a traditional biology lesson
( =-1.191,   p=.234) or about an ideal biology lesson (    =-1.772, p=.076). Hence, these results, confirmed that
both classrooms were equivalent in terms of students' motivation.
         Two pairs of students (one from each of the classes taught by the same teacher) formed our case study
groups in this study. Students in each pair were 12-year-old girls of comparable academic performance and
motivation to engage in science learning, as assessed by their teacher and as confirmed by their grades in
language arts and science education. The pairs were selected by the teacher due to their comparability and to
their willingness to be videotaped. Data from two other pairs were also collected but were not analyzed for this
paper.

Implementation context

Intervention
The  teaching intervention  consisted   of seven, 80-minute  sessions.  Students,   assuming  the role of a doctor,
investigated a scenario-driven problem that dealt with human reproduction; according to this scenario students
were   involved   with  a socio-scientific  investigation, gathering,  interpreting  and  synthesizing    secondary
information in order to take an evidence-based decision and to offer advice to a young couple seeking medical
advice in order to have a baby.

© ISLS                                                                                                         273
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                         Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

Collaboration Scripts
Two collaboration scripts, one in each classroom, were employed. In the ExplicitScaffolding script each pair
worked with learning materials and worksheets and relied on the teacher, on peer collaboration and on the
worksheets to progress with solving the problem posed to them.   In the ImplicitScaffolding script each pair had
access to the same learning materials organized using a web-based educational application and used online
articulation spaces with general type prompts to organize their inquiry.    Students relied on prompts provided
online, on peer collaboration and on the teacher for guidance.   In both conditions, the teacher was available
during the sessions and walked around the classroom in a non-systematic manner while students were working
in pairs. At the end of the unit, a plenary discussion was led by the teacher in both conditions. One researcher
was present during the lessons to collect enactment data from each classroom script.

Data Coding and Analysis
All classroom  interactions  were  videotaped,  including  discourse at   the level of the    pair and   whole class
discussions with the teacher.  The data were transcribed verbatim and were coded using qualitative analysis
software. A forty-minute interview with the teacher after the implementation investigated how she considered
her role  in each  learning  environment in  terms   of  scaffolding the   students.   Conceptual     understanding
achievement tests and motivation surveys were also administered prior to and after the learning intervention to
students in both classrooms.
         We coded all instances of each pair's help-seeking and teacher's help-giving behavior using a coding
scheme informed by prior studies (Makitalo-Siegl, Kohnle & Fischer, 2011).          The coding was performed at
episode level and focused on six areas: context of help-seeking, type of help sought, content of help sought, type
of help provided, recipient of help, and usage of help. All coding categories and their definitions are shown in
Table 1. An inter-rater reliability check performed by two of the authors yielded a score of 90% agreement.     All
disagreements were first discussed and resolved between the two coders; subsequently, all data were coded
accordingly by one of the coders.

Table 1: Help-seeking and help-giving coding scheme

Coding category                     Definition
1. Context of help-seeking          This category describes the context in which students seek for helping
1.1Student-centered                 The students ask for help while collaborating for their investigation
1.2 Teacher-centered                The students ask for help while participating into a whole-class discussion
                                    led by the teacher
2. Type of help sought              This category characterizes the type of help sought by the students
2.1. Executive                      Students request direct answers such as "is this right"
2.2. Instrumental                   Students request help to support them figuring out the problem on their
                                    own
3. Content of help sought           This category characterizes the content of help sought by the students
3.1 Domain knowledge                Students ask for help regarding a domain related issue (e.g. reproductive
                                    system)
3.2 Inquiry skills                  Students   ask for  help regarding  an  inquiry  skill (e.g. how   to formulate
                                    hypotheses)
3.3 Procedural issues               Students seek help regarding procedural or writing issues (e.g. asking for
                                    the  repeat of a statement  so   that they can  copy   it correctly,  discussing
                                    grammar, etc.)
4. Type of help provided            This category characterizes the type of help given to the students
4.1 Executive                       Direct answers are provided as help
4.2 Instrumental                    Students are scaffolded in finding the answer on their own
4.3 None                            No help is provided to the students
5. Recipient of help                This category describes how help giving is provided
5.1 Help provided to the group      Help is provided to the students who sought it
5.2  Help  provided  to the  whole  Help  is provided   to the whole   class,  in response    to the students' help
    class                           seeking

© ISLS                                                                                                          274
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                         Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

6. Usage of help                      This category  codes   whether students  have followed   up on   the advice
                                      provided by the teacher or other peers.
6.1 Help used                         The students utilize the help given
6.1 Help not used                     The students do not utilize the help given
6.2 Insufficient data                 The available data do not allow determining whether the help provided
                                      was utilized by the students

After the initial identification and coding of episodes (n=42), episodes were analyzed for emerging patterns,
examining the data first at the episode level and then contrasting episodes with each other. Episodes presenting
similar patterns were then grouped to determine   dominant trends in each of the two scripted environments.  This
analysis represents the crux of what we are interested in, as we seek to explore the relationship between scripts,
students' collaborative behavior and the teacher's response.

Findings
The analysis of the data informs our case study approach (Yin, 2003), with the multiple sources of data and the
different data analyses serving to triangulate our findings. In this section we first present findings on the pairs'
help-seeking behavior and then present the results of the pattern analysis which examines students' help-seeking
behavior as coupled with the teacher's help-giving behavior.

Help-seeking
Of the 42 episodes identified, 27 belonged to the explicit and 15 to the implicit scaffolding script. Whereas all
help-seeking in the implicit scaffolding script (ImplicitScaffolding) took place in the context of the collaboration
of the pair, 12 of the 27 episodes (44%) of the explicit scaffolding script (ExplicitScaffolding) occurred in the
context of whole-class discussions with the teacher.  The ExplicitScaffolding pair sought executive help more
often, seeking directly the "right answer" whereas the ImplicitScaffolding pair sought more instrumental and
procedural help. Table 2 presents these findings.

Table 2: Help-seeking and help-giving findings

                                                             No of episodes and percentages
                                      ImplicitScaffolding Script (N=15)       ExplicitScaffolding Script (N=27)
Context of help seeking
   Student-centered                                15 (100%)                             15 (56%)
   Teacher-centered                                 0 (0%)                               12 (44%)
Type of help sought
   Executive                                        5 (33%)                              18 (67%)
   Instrumental                                    10 (67%)                               9 (33%)
Content of help sought
   Domain knowledge                                 5 (34%)                              21 (78%)
   Inquiry skills                                   0 (0%)                                2 (7%)
   Procedural issues                                8 (53%)                               4 (15%)
Type of help provided
   Executive                                       11 (73%)                              17 (63%)
   Instrumental                                     3 (20%)                               3 (11%)
   None                                             1 (7%)                                7 (26%)
Recipient of help
   Help provided to the group                      14 (100%)                             12 (60%)
   Help provided to whole class                     0 (0%)                                8 (40%)
Usage of help
   Help used                                       14 (100%)                             12 (60%)
   Insufficient data                                0 (0%)                                8 (40%)

Help-giving
In both collaboration scripts, the teacher provided students mainly with executive (more direct answers and
explicit guidance) rather than instrumental help (73% of the episodes for the ImplicitScaffolding pair and 63%
of the time for the ExplicitScaffolding pair). In 7 out of 27 episodes (26%) the pair was not provided with help

© ISLS                                                                                                       275
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                          Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

in the explicit guidance script, whereas also in 8 of the 20 episodes when help was given it was provided in the
context of a whole-class discussion and was not related to the specifics of the collaborative work conducted by
the pair.

Analysis of help-giving and help-seeking patterns
Each pair's help-giving and help-seeking episodes were analyzed separately to identify collaboration patterns.
The dominant patterns (showing up in at least 5 episodes each) are shown in Figure 1.

                       Figure 1. Help-giving and help-seeking dominant patterns identified

Six different patterns were  identified  in  the ImplicitScaffolding script, with one of    them being a dominant
pattern since it was identified in eight of the episodes. According to this pattern the two girls at several points
sought instrumental help since they were asking for supportive guidance to continue with their process of
inquiry. The teacher responded to the pair's help-seeking by providing executive help, helping define next steps;
this help was taken up by the pair. The following brief excerpt illustrates this pattern:

[Episode 9, ImplicitScaffolding script]
Maria:       Mrs...
Teacher:     Yes?
Maria:       There's an instruction here asking us to complete the template "From fertilization to birth" but
             there is also another template...
Teacher:     Have you completed the "Menstrual Cycle" [template]?
Maria:       Yes.
Teacher:     Ok... Then this is the right template.
Maria:       Just a moment.
Teacher:     This is the right template.
Anna:        Let's read [the sources] first.
Maria:       No.
Teacher:     Name your template first.
Maria:       What should we name it?
Anna:         "Birth" because it refers on the natural way of childbearing...
Maria:       Fetus...
Teacher:     So now you should answer all of these questions [on the template] regarding the natural way of
             childbearing.
The pair continues with their work.

On the other hand, the pattern analysis in the 27 help-seeking/help-giving episodes of the ExplicitScaffolding
script revealed fourteen different patterns, two of which were identified as dominant, being detected in five and
six different episodes  respectively.  For   example,  according to  the first dominant    pattern the pair sought
executive help on several occasions since they were asking directly for the "right" answer regarding domain
knowledge necessary to finish their task. The teacher provided the pair with executive help, giving "right
answers"; this help was taken up by the pair, who mechanically wrote the right answers.        The following brief
excerpt illustrates this pattern:

© ISLS                                                                                                        276
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                                 Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

[Episode 8, ExplicitScaffolding script]

    Fiona: Mrs Tonia, should we write that [the ovaries] stop releasing ovules after a certain age?
    Teacher: Yes... Because this is the way they function...

The girls record the right answer on their worksheet.

As the teacher explained in her post-enactment interview her instructional objectives remained the same in both
situations:   "The aims     were  the   same...  What    had    changed    was  the  approach    in order to  see   how  the
development of inquiry skills, content knowledge and collaboration could be promoted. It shouldn't be right to
have different aims... I had the same aims but within a different approach in order to see the result..."

However, the teacher felt that in spite of identical educational objectives her role should be differentiated. Mrs.
Tonia  felt that in  the ImplicitScaffolding      script there  was    no  need to  guide  her students  except  with some
procedural    issues   that  concerned      the  details    of  using   the   templates   provided.   In  contrast,  in  the
ExplicitScaffolding script she felt that she should comment on students' work more frequently, correcting their
answers to their worksheets and providing more explicit guidance through whole class discussions.

    [In the ImplicitScaffolding script] I was talking as less as I could compared to the other class. The
    only thing that [my students] needed was that they wanted to know what exactly they should do in
    some of the templates ... I didn't want to guide them. I wanted each pair to move at their own pace...

    [In the ExplicitScaffolding script] things were more guided. The whole class should stop at the same
    point in order to make some comments, to move forward and to check the answers to the questions
    they worked on by the end of the lesson. And after all, the lesson was guided by me... I mean that
    they followed their worksheets but we should stop at the same point, as indicated in lesson plan, in
    order to watch a video or to talk about how to go on... It was something very different...

    The  [ImplicitScaffolding]       provided    by the  web-based     tool   could  function  more   autonomously.
    Students could work without my own help... In contrast, in the other class, if I were not to give
    instructions, the students could not work so easily I guess...

Conceptual understanding achievement tests
The  statistical analysis   of   the students'   pre- and   the post-test  on   conceptual  understanding,   employing   the
Wilcoxon sign rank test, yielded statistically significant results for the students in the ImplicitScaffolding script
( =-2.785, p=.000) as well as for the students in the ExplicitScaffolding script (          =-4.012, p=.000). Therefore, it
can be concluded that students in both classroom scripts presented a statistically significant difference in their
learning gains, as an outcome of the learning intervention.

Motivational assessment test
The comparison of students' responses to a survey about the motivational potential of a traditional biology
lesson and the motivational potential of an ideal lesson, indicated that a traditional biology lesson was much less
motivating than an ideal biology lesson; the difference was statistically significant for both the students in the
ImplicitScaffolding script (     =-2.925, p=.003) as well as for the       students in the  ExplicitScaffolding script (   =-
3.142,  p=.002).   Even     though    there   was   no   statistically significant   difference  for  the students   of  the
ExplicitScaffolding  script    (  =-.735,   p=.462)   between   the inquiry   lessons they  attended  and  their  traditional
biology lessons,   the analysis      of the responses    of the  students   in  the ImplicitScaffolding   script indicated a
statistically significant difference between the      inquiry lessons and their traditional biology lessons (       =-2.591,
p=.010), in favor of the inquiry lessons.

Discussion and Implications
Help  seeking    processes  can   be    affected by   patterns  of classroom    interaction and  facilitated by   instruction
(Aleven et al., 2003; Karabenick & Newman, 2009; Oortwijn, Boekaerts, Vedder, & Strijbos, 2008). However,
there has been little research on the question concerning how different patterns of classroom interaction may
differentiate  the  process    of help-seeking      and  help-giving    to  date.   Aiming    to shed  some   light to   this
underexplored    area, the  present     study focused    on help-seeking    /  help-giving  behaviors  using  two   different
classroom scripts to teach an inquiry-based biology learning module.
        According to our findings, the ImplicitScaffolding scripts provided our case study students with the
necessary structure and guidance and supported their learning.             In contrast, the ExplicitScaffolding classroom

© ISLS                                                                                                                  277
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                              Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

script  constrained  the pair's autonomous      inquiry,   as the  students'  help-seeking    and   help-giving    behavior
showed.   The differentiation observed in the process of students' help seeking could be partially attributed to
each classroom script, which afforded different teacher and students' interactions that differentially shaped the
process of help-seeking and help-giving.     The dominant patterns of student help-seeking and teacher help-giving
behaviors were different in each scaffolding script. In the case of the ImplicitScaffolding script, the pair working
with the web-based learning environment framed their inquiry as a multi-step process. In this context, students
asked mainly for instrumental help when they felt uncertain about how to carry forward with their investigation.
In contrast, in the ExplicitScaffolding script, students sought help more frequently, sought more executive help
and requested direct answers relating to domain knowledge.           While students in the ImplicitScaffolding script
sought less help when compared to the help-seeking behavior of the students in the ExplicitScaffolding script, no
statistically significant differences were found between the classes and both classes improved on the conceptual
understanding test.  This suggests that,   perhaps,  students in the ImplicitScaffolding  script voiced fewer     questions
because   the scaffolds  may    have   afforded a process     that helped  them  answer   questions     in   the context of
collaboration and thus reducing the need for teacher guidance.        Such results are supported by discussions about
the reflective affordances of articulation tools and processes (e.g. Chi, de Leeuw, Chiu, & Lavancher, 1994;
Quintana et al., 2004).
          The results of all students' motivation surveys, comparing the students' views between the current
(inquiry) and past (traditional) biology lessons indicated a statistically significant difference between the two
collaboration scripts.   The results suggest that students found the ImplicitScaffolding script more motivating
than past instructional settings; this is important as motivation has been reported as having the capacity to result
to enhanced    learning  (Blumenfeld,   Kempler   &  Krajcik,    2006).   As  Makitalo-Siegl     et al. (2011)   discussed,
different classroom    scripts  impact  help-seeking    behavior;   Makitalo-Siegl   et al.   found     that students  who
participated in collaborative learning environments providing appropriate structure and scaffolding,              tended to
seek help much less and to achieve better learning results.        In our case, data support the first but not the second
conclusion.   However,   it maybe that the learning assessments only capture     part of the learning occurring      in such
contexts; indeed, if self-regulated inquiry learning is what we are pursuing the use of other assessments tapping
into inquiry-related and metacognitive skills should be explored.
          The teacher also responded differently in each of the classroom scripts, as suggested by the analysis of
the video and teacher interview data. The teacher's behavior was framed by the context, as the teacher assumed
that students in the ImplicitScaffolding script should be able to work more autonomously, while she felt that the
students in the ExplicitScaffolding script needed more guidance and structure. Hence, it is no surprise that in this
context, students' help-seeking/help-giving episodes in the ExplicitScaffolding script often took place into a
more   teacher-centered  environment,    while   the opposite    was  true for  the  ImplicitScaffolding     script.  Levin,
Hammer and Coffey (2009) discussed the concept of teacher framing as a way to understand teacher attention.
According   to Levin   and  his colleagues   "whether   and   how   teachers  attend and  respond    to   student  thinking
largely reflects how they frame what is taking place in their classes" (p.143).      While Levin et al. suggested that
institutional requirements    frame  teacher   activity to  selectively  attend to   issues   of learning    and  teaching,
curricular materials, especially new methods of teaching may also have a similar impact.                This topic merits
further  exploration as  it relates  to teacher  professional    development   through  curricula    that  have   educative
properties, even when these properties are not explicitly communicated to teachers (Davis & Krajcik, 2005).
          A, rather, unexpected finding is that the teacher provided executive help to most of the pairs' requests,
regardless of  the  collaboration  script.  This  may   be explained    by the  finding that  students    in  one  situation
(ExplicitScaffolding) requested such type of response whereas most of the questions students posed in the other
situation (ImplicitScaffolding) were instrumental for their process but yet could be often answered via executive
support. Future qualitative exploration of our dataset, as well as the analysis of the videotaped interactions of
two additional pairs not included in this analysis (one in each scaffolding condition) can help elucidate our
findings and provide better insights into the conditions under which each type of support provided may be most
helpful.
     These    findings  contribute  to  our understanding     of students' help-seeking   behavior      and  how   to better
support it, and can inform teacher professional development. In terms of student help-seeking, and as suggested
by the   conceptual  understanding     achievement   tests administered    in this study,  it seems     that environments
providing ImplicitScaffolding may be providing the support that students need to achieve positive learning
results, while in environments where this type of support is missing students necessarily turn to teachers to find
that additional support necessary to complete the task.          Where the participating teacher was concerned, our
findings suggested that the framing of the task may have heavily influenced the teacher's perceptions of what
she was expected to do and how she should guide student inquiry; both tools and teachers' reflection-on-action
(Schon,   1983) are  necessary   to  help   teachers move     towards  improved    support  of   students'   self-regulated
behavior.     These  findings  highlight   the connections    between   collaboration   scripts,  teacher    cognition  and
scaffolding   and  bear  implications   about  students  and   teachers.   Future   studies   should  examine     the topic

© ISLS                                                                                                                 278
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                         Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

employing    different  methodologies    and   large sample sizes,    connecting analyses  to specific   tasks, and
investigating the issues in other contexts.

References
Aleven, V., & Koedinger, K. R. (2001). Investigations into help seeking and learning with a Cognitive Tutor. In
     R. Luckin (Ed.), Papers of the AIED-2001 Workshop on Help Provision and Help Seeking in Interactive
     Learning Environments. Available: http://www.hcrc.ed.ac.uk/aied2001/workshops.html
Aleven,  V., Stahl,  E.,   Schworm,  S., Fischer, F.,  & Wallace,   R.  (2003).  Help seeking and help   design   in
     interactive learning environments. Review of Educational Research, 73(3), 277-320.
Blumenfeld, P., Kempler, T. M., & Krajcik, J. S. (2006). Motivation and cognitive engagement in learning
     environments. In K. Sawyer (Ed.), The Cambridge Handbook of the Learning Sciences (pp. 475-488). New
     York: Cambridge University Press.
Butler, R. (2006). An achievement goal perspective on student help seeking and teacher help giving in the
     classroom: theory, research, and educational implications. In S. A. Karabenick & R. S. Newman (Eds.),
     Help   Seeking  in    Academic  Settings: Goals,  Groups,    And Contexts.  Mahwah,   New  Jersey:  Lawrence
     Erlbaum Associates.
Chi, M.T.,   De  Leeuw,      N., Chiu,   M.,   &  Lavancher,   C.   (1994). Eliciting  self-explanations improves
     understanding. Cognitive Science, 18(3), 439-477. doi: 10.1016/0364-0213(94)90016-7
Davis, E. A., & Krajcik, J. S. (2005). Designing Educative Curriculum Materials to Promote Teacher Learning.
     Educational Researcher, 34(3), 3-14. doi: 10.3102/0013189x034003003
Kobbe, L., Weinberger, A., Dillenbourg, P., Harrer, A., Hämäläinen, R., Häkkinen, P., & Fischer, F. (2007).
     Specifying  computer-supported      collaboration   scripts. International  Journal  of  Computer-Supported
     Collaborative Learning, 2(2), 211-224. doi: 10.1007/s11412-007-9014-4
Kollar, I., Fischer,   F., &  Hesse, F.  (2006).  Collaboration   Scripts ­ A   Conceptual Analysis.   Educational
     Psychology Review, 18(2), 159-185. doi: 10.1007/s10648-006-9007-2
Kollar, I., Fischer, F., & Slotta, J. D. (2007). Internal and external scripts in computer-supported collaborative
     inquiry learning. Learning and Instruction, 17(6), 708-721.
Levin, D. M., Hammer, D. & Coffey, J. E. (2009). Novice Teachers' Attention to Student Thinking. Journal of
     Teacher Education 60(2): 142-154.
Linn, M. C. (2006). The knowledge integration perspective on learning and instruction. In R. K. Sawyer (Ed.),
     The Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences (pp. 243-264). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Lu, J., Lajoie, S., & Wiseman, J. (2010). Scaffolding problem-based learning with CSCL tools. International
     Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 5(3), 283-298. doi: 10.1007/s11412-010-9092-6
Mäkitalo-Siegl. K., Kohnle, C., & Fischer, F. (2011). Computer-supported collaborative inquiry learning and
     classroom scripts: Effects on help-seeking processes and learning outcomes. Learning and Instruction,
     17(6), 257-266.
Nelson-Le Gall, S. (1981). Help-seeking: an understudied problem-solving skill in children. Developmental
     Review, 1, 224-246.
Newman, R. S. (1994). Adaptive help seeking: A strategy of self-regulated learning. In D. H. Schunk & B. J.
     Zimmerman (Eds.), Self-regulation of learning and performance: Issues and educational applications (pp.
     283­301). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Oortwijn, M. B., Boekaerts, M., Vedder, P., & Strijbos, J. W. (2008). Helping behaviour during cooperative
     learning and learning gains: the role of the teacher and of pupils' prior knowledge and ethnic background.
     Learning and Instruction, 18(2), 146-159.
Quintana, C., Reiser, B. J., Davis, E. A., Krajcik, J., Fretz, E., Duncan, R. G., Kyza, E., Edelson, D.C., Soloway,
     E. (2004). A scaffolding design framework for software to support science inquiry. The Journal of the
     Learning Sciences, 13(3), 337­386.
Schön, D. (1983). The Reflective Practitioner. How professionals think in action. London: Temple Smith.
Tabak, I. (2004). Synergy: A Complement to Emerging Patterns of Distributed Scaffolding. Journal of the
     Learning Sciences, 13(3), 305-355.
Yin, R. K. (2003). Case study research: design and methods (3rd ed.) Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications
     Inc.

Acknowledgments
This study was funded by the ``Science in Society'' Initiative of the Seventh Framework Research Programme
(FP7) of the European Community, under the PROFILES grant (266589). Opinions, findings, and conclusions
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the funding agency.  We would like to
acknowledge our appreciation of the teacher and students who participated in this study.

© ISLS                                                                                                          279
