CSCL 2013 Proceedings                     Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

       Dissecting Video Discussions and Coordination Strategies
 I-Han Hsiao, Manav Malhotra, Hui Soo Chae, Gary Natriello, EdLab, Teachers College, Columbia University
                                  ih2240, mm2625, hsc2001, gjn6@columbia.edu

         Abstract: Video technology has become one of the most powerful instructional techniques in
         modern     E-learning.  In  this  paper,  we   report  a   classroom   study   on using   online  video
         discussions    with  various   coordination    strategies. We     not only   reconfirmed   that  video-
         mediated    conversations    with coordination   strategies    were   effective and  aligned  with    the
         literature, but also   investigated   the  pattern    differences of  the  coordination   strategies  on
         students' engagement with online video discussions.

Introduction
The use of web based video technologies in education has increased dramatically in the past decade. These
applications are being adopted in an increasing number of educational contexts, including traditional face-to-
face classes, teacher blogs, school websites and distance learning courses. Benefits of using web-based video
technologies have been reported. They range from a) the opportunity to manipulate and interpret principles and
processes situated   in the   video  b) linking   content and   concepts   to  everyday  experience    c) self evaluating,
modifying, testing and revising one's own knowledge, d) learning from errors, evolving deep understanding
from initially flawed beliefs (Hannafin, et al., 1999) and e) increasing student motivation (Koumi, 2006). One of
the biggest challenges   in   current   online web-based   video    publishing  and   commenting    tools is  encouraging
persistent collaboration and active knowledge construction in distributed environments (Soller, et al., 2005).
However,  most   online  video   collaboration    tools only   support  posting comments    on   a discussion  board  that
reference the entire video instead of specific points within the video. This makes it difficult to understand other
users' comments due to the absence of context in the video and/or the conversation thread. Moreover, the task
of facilitation in these applications is difficult because 1) there is no facilitator, 2) the discussions are open to
everyone, and 3) there are no access/privacy controls to build a discussion for a particular group of people. In
many cases the purposes of the discussions and the expectations of the participants are not clear. This makes
these  applications  inappropriate    for  having  a    quality discussion,    giving rise to inappropriate    comments,
unhealthy interactions and uncontrolled conflicts in the community.
         In this work, we study an interactive, collaborative online video discussion tool called Vialogues.
Vialogues is a video discussion tool that leverages videos for learning by adding group interaction as part of the
viewing experience. Users can create "Vialogues", which are focused discussion environments that include
comments    time-coded   to   different parts  of the   video.  The design   and   case  studies have  been   presented in
(Agarwala   et al.,  2012).  In this  paper,   we design  a    semester long   study  to explore   the effects of  various
coordination strategies on students' discussion/participation patterns.

Vialogues
Vialogues allows users to comment directly on specific portions of a video, rather than posting comments in
discussion board fashion which reference the entire video. The video and threaded discussions are organized on
the left and right side of the screen respectively (Figure 1). All the comments are time coded to a specific point
in the video. They are mutually referenced and represented in the visualization, which addresses the problem in
many existing video-discussion tools where users are often unable to understand others' comments due to the
absence of context in the video and/or conversation threads. Vialogues provides a set of pedagogical tools to
assist teachers in   flexibly designing   and  monitoring    learning   activities as well as receiving   feedback   from
students based on instructional needs. Teachers can either ask survey questions, or devise poll questions at any
given moment in the video. Vialogues are also embedded with privacy control for moderators to effectively
control the quality of their discussion or tailor a discussion for an intended group of students. Vialogues are also
embeddable for external systems (i.e. personal blogs, learning management systems etc). It increases flexibility
in diverse settings to adapt to the relevant social, cultural, and pedagogical contexts.

                                        Figure 1. Vialogues, http://vialogues.com

© ISLS                                                                                                                273
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                      Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

Evaluation & Discussions
To explore the effects of various coordination strategies on students' discussion/participation patterns, we set up
4 coordination    strategies used  throughout    the semester  in  a graduate   course entitled  "Sociology  of Online
Learning". For each class meeting, a set of readings and a Vialogue are assigned in the syllabus. Students are
advised to read the material in advance and encouraged to watch and discuss it on the assigned Vialogues.          The
4 coordination strategies are: 1) Natural discussion: the instructor does not intervene in the student discussions.
2) Pre-structured discussion: instructor provides guidelines for the discussion but does not intervene in the
discussion process. This is done by having the instructor pre-plant the questions at different points of the video.
3) Coordinated discussion: the discussion is not pre-structured but the instructor coordinates student discussions
by responding to students' questions about the video, providing extended resources based on the discussions,
further prompting students to think and engage in the material. 4) Pre-structured and coordinated discussion
(Mixed): the discussion is both pre-structured and coordinated by the instructor. Based on (Salmon, 2000), we
hypothesize that coordinated and mixed conditions would achieve better learning effects, measured in terms of
discussion quality and quantity.
         We found that with coordination strategies, students were more engaged in the video discussions.
Students elaborated more for all three coordinated discussion strategies. This was as predicted, as the literature
shows that providing moderation during collaboration encourages more contribution. Our major goal in this
study is to understand how the coordination strategies work by analyzing the patterns of differences of students'
engagement. For 3) coordinated & 4) mixed conditions, the discussion lifetime was longer than the weekly
meeting of the class, regardless of the length of the video. On the other hand, discussions using 1) natural & 2)
pre-structured coordination happened only during the week of the class in which the material was assigned. For
2) pre-structured discussions, the coordination still had influence to some extent. However, the whole discussion
was not coordinated in an engaging way. Therefore, it did not yield a continuum discussion over time. Is a
longer discussion better or shorter one is better? We have to evaluate the content of the discussions.
         To assess the discussion quality, we applied a linguistic text analysis package, LIWC (Pennebaker et
al., 2007), to gauge students' emotions, cognition and structural components based on the categories of words
they used.  We    only considered     the  major psychometric   categories   and discarded  the  linguistic &   personal
processes. We particularly focused on the social, affective and cognitive processes. The results showed that 4)
mixed coordination provided the most social discussion environment, while the other coordination strategies did
not  differ from   no  strategies  at all. It confirmed   that the   mixed  strategy  (pre-structured and   coordinated
strategies  combined)  created    the  highest   engagement.   For   affective processes,  we  found  that  the 4) pre-
structured strategy yielded a more neutral discussion. Students showed less positive and negative emotions. The
possible explanations could be the discussions were explicitly structured to begin with, so students were focused
from the beginning. On the other hand, the rest of the conditions provide more room for students to explore in
the discussions. For cognitive processes, coordination strategies 2), 3), and 4) yielded similar results to 1) a
natural discussion.   Thus,   regardless   the  coordination   strategy, the   time-coded  discussions  around   videos
solicited a substantial amount of insight around the discussion topics.
         Based    on  these  preliminary   results,  in  addition to reconfirming    that video  discussions  could be
successfully facilitated by appropriate moderation, the findings also revealed that a pre-structured strategy was
effective for short-term focused setting. A mixed strategy was effective for long-term social settings. It boosted
high social energy among users and contributed to the high engagement in the discussion. In addition, the
discussion   can  be  carried  over   past  the  assigned  week   of  the  material.  Finally, a coordinated    strategy
successfully carried the discussion over than a regular course week. However, it did not appear to be either
social or particularly focused in our observation.

References
Agarwala, M., Hsiao, I-H., Chae, H-S. & Netriello, G. (2012) Videos and Dialogues based Social Learning
         Environment,    12th     IEEE     International  Conference   on   Advanced      Learning Technologies     and
         Technology-enhanced Learning, Rome, Italy, July 4-6, 2012,IEEE, pp. 629-633
Hannafin,   M. J., Land,  S.,  &   Oliver,  K.  (1999).  "Open    learning environments:   Foundations, methods,    and
         models". In C. M. Reigeluth (Ed.), Instructional design theories and models (Vol. 2, pp. 115-140).
         Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Koumi, J. (2006). "Designing video and multimedia for open and flexible learning". New York: Routledge.
Salmon G. (2000), A model for CMC in education and training, E-moderating, The key to teaching and learning
         onlineKogan Page, London
Soller, A., Martínez, A., Jermann, P. and Muehlenbrock, M. (2005). "From Mirroring to Guiding: A Review of
         State of the Art Technology for Supporting Collaborative Learning". International Journal of Artificial
         Intelligence in Education, 15(4).
Pennebaker,   J.,  Chung,    C.K., Ireland,   M.,   Gonzales,  A.  and   Booth.  R.J.  (2007)  The  Development     and
         Psychometric Properties of LIWC, LIWC.net, Austin, Texas 78703 USA

© ISLS                                                                                                             274
