CSCL 2013 Proceedings                    Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

 Using Social Media Behaviors to Design Language for Advancing
                                   Pedagogy and Assessment
       Tamecia R. Jones, Monica E. Cardella, Senay Y. Purzer, Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana
                 Email:   tameciajones@purdue.edu, cardella@purdue.edu, spurzer@purdue.edu

         Abstract:   As   engineering    education    propagates into   K-12 education,   questions    surround
         pedagogy,   curriculum,   and   assessment    and  instructors  are challenged    when    it comes    to
         measuring and documenting learning.        This project uses captured video observations to model
         social media     interaction behaviors    and  use them     as the  infrastructure  to  design   a text
         messaging/IM language for classroom use between students and teachers.              The language will
         serve as both a pedagogical and assessment tool.

Introduction and Theoretical Framework
Engineering  education    integrates  pedagogical   techniques   from   technology   education,   science education  and
design education.   The studio critique and design notebook are two components of design education employed
in an applied science/engineering summer course for rising high school seniors.          The dialogue between student
and design notebook, with each other and teacher create a rich medium for evaluating student understanding
(Svarovsky & Shaffer, 2006) and can be seen as an epistemic triangle where dialogue can be analyzed because
reasoning occurs (Atwood, Turnbull, & Carpendale, 2010).
         Research shows that when comparing various forms of media (paper, photographs, in situ video), that
students do not write down everything that might help instructions trace their rationale and thought processes.
In situ video   reflected evidence    of valuable  reflection  and   iterations in   brainstorming sessions    and studio
critiques through natural verbal language that written language could not capture (Author, 2012).            The natural
extension of the research is to review video and take advantage of the ways youth use text messaging and IM to
make communication more efficient and interactions within a class and instructor richer.          Youth already use text
messaging, sending up to sixty a day (Lenhart, 2012).         Twitter and text-messaging tools have been shown to
increase motivation to write and interactions between students (Tomita, 2009) and instant messaging (IM) is
"real-time written discourse (Ferrera, Brunner, & Whittemore, 1991).         Text messaging and IM allows teens to
multitask (Nardi, Whittaker, & Bradner, 2000) and the delay in IM and text-messaging allows space teachers to
respond  and  react  to questions    or  ideas.  Use   of such   a tool  based   on   IM  and   text-messaging    offers a
synchronous, written communication that is culturally natural which that has a shorter turnaround time than
grading journals or teachers watching video to youth.
         If we viewed each individual classroom as a community of practice (Wenger, 1998), knowledge and
communication can be created within the community if students and teachers were given an infrastructure for
communication    and  documentation.     Rather  than  creating  a language     tool without   student participation and
superimposing it onto their natural tendencies, we use collected data reflecting their natural communication
patterns and behavior to increase authenticity and reduce the disconnect between the language that instructors
want students to use and the language students actually use.

Method and Preliminary Results
Twenty-two low SES public high school students participated in a four-year college preparation program for
disadvantaged students. These students are expected to be the first generation within their family to attend a
four-year university.   The  students    are first generation  immigrants    from    Africa, the  Caribbean,   and  South
America.  Most of them speak English, a native language, and a cultural dialect and come from homes where
English is not the primary language.     At the time the data was collected, students were rising seniors.
         Students matriculated from multiple cultural and language backgrounds, so switching between multiple
languages  occurred.      Because  this   group    of students   had  been   together  socially   and  academically    for
approximately   four years, they   reflected  a  community    of practice   because   of their shared  mission,   goal   of
college attendance, and   indoctrination of the programs' beliefs.      There was non-academic language because the
class was conducted as a reality show and students were relaxed and comfortable with ongoing video, but non-
academic language is not the concern of the research.
         This video data is analyzed using grounded theory (Strauss & Corbin, 1990) to identify communication
patterns and common language features.        The types of video scenes analyzed include brainstorming sessions,
small  group  work   sessions, and    final  presentations.   Themes    were    generated from    coding  that  form   the
categories of interactions that happen between students.       Initial coding results are shown (see Table 1) and we
expect to broaden the interaction categories as we validate these codes on new video clips in rounds two and
three.  Some    of the  categories   have   subcategories   because  there  were   examples    of more    than one  type.
Questions occurred many times but had different purposes and motivation.

© ISLS                                                                                                               277
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                 Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

Table 1: Categories of Interaction Behaviors

          Interaction Behavior                                              Type
                 Question                    Why interrogative, how interrogative, redirect question,
                                             clarifying question, reconsider question
              Mind change
                Reasoning                    Layering idea (broadens idea), deepening idea (digs into idea),
                                             constraint, consideration,
             Identify problem
                 Decision                    Confirmation, selection from options, Completion
                 Choice                      Binary selection, range
                Action plan
                    Fix                      A response
                Checklist
          Lightbulb recollection
                Uncertainty                  I don't know, I don't remember
                 Cancel                      "Nevermind"

Conclusion
The results of this study will offer researchers and educators interested in pedagogy and assessment an efficient
pathway for communication, interaction, and observation of classroom interactions using a cultural language
shared by both.  The experience and success of students using a cultural language in an environment where
cultural language is often unacceptable can be compared to students who are forced to continue to only express
their thinking using acceptable language. When the categories are defined and later tested, the data can then be
used to create an application, design rationale tool, or digital design journal for use in K-12 settings that allows
instructors to see process knowledge. If the language is tested and proven as a valid medium for pedagogy and
assessment, it can be adjusted for application beyond STEM courses and formal classroom settings.      The next
steps beyond attaining access to process knowledge would be to identify ways to measure change and validate
those changes in overall assessment of student knowledge.

References
Atwood, S., Turnbull, W., & Carpendale, J. I. M. (2010). The Construction of Knowledge in Classroom Talk.
         Journal of the Learning Sciences, 19(3), 358-402. doi: 10.1080/10508406.2010.481013
Ferrera, K., Brunner, H., & Whittemore, G. (1991). Interactive Written Discourse as an Emergent Register.
         Written Communication, 8, 8-34.
Lenhart, A.  (2012). Teens,   Smartphones    &  Texting   (Pew    Internet  & American   Life Project,  Trans.).
         Washington, DC: Pew Research Center.
Nardi, B. A., Whittaker, S., & Bradner, E. (2000). Interaction and outeraction: instant messaging in action.
         Proceedings of the 2000 ACM conference on Computer supported cooperative work, 79-88.
Strauss, A., & Corbin, J. (1990). Basics of Qualitative Research: Grounded Theory Procedures and Techniques
         (2nd ed.). Newbury Park, CA: Sage Publications.
Svarovsky, G. N., & Shaffer, D. W. (2006). Design Meetings and Design Notebooks as Tools for Reflection in
         the Engineering Design Course. Paper presented at the 36th Annual Frontiers in Education Conference,
         San Diego, CA.
Tomita,  D. (2009).  Text Messaging    and   Implications for Its  Use   in Education.  Paper presented  at  the
         Technology, Colleges, and Community Conference, Honolulu, HI.
Wenger, E. (1998). Communities of Practice:   Learning as a Social System.  Systems Thinker, 9(5).

© ISLS                                                                                                       278
