CSCL 2013 Proceedings                   Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

        Transferring CSCL findings to face-to-face teacher practice
  Celia Kaendler, Michael Wiedmann, Institute of Psychology, University of Freiburg, Engelbergerstraﬂe 41,
                                            79085 Freiburg, Germany
            Email: kaendler@psychologie.uni-freiburg.de, wiedmann@psychologie.uni-freiburg.de
 Nikol Rummel, Institute of Educational Research, Ruhr-Universit‰t Bochum, Universit‰tsstraﬂe 150, 44801
                                     Bochum, Germany, nikol.rummel@rub.de
Timo Leuders, Institute for Mathematics Education, University of Education, Kunzenweg 21, 79117 Freiburg,
                                        Germany, leuders@ph-freiburg.de
Hans Spada, Institute of Psychology, University of Freiburg, Engelbergerstraﬂe 41, 79085 Freiburg, Germany,
                                        spada@psychologie.uni-freiburg.de

          Abstract: Collaborative learning is a well-researched instructional approach that is highly
          effective  and   often superior  to individual   learning. However,     the fruitfulness   of     the
          collaboration depends on the quality of the student interaction. What do teachers need to know
          to monitor the quality of the group interactions? We developed a model describing teachers'
          competencies for Implementing Collaborative Learning in Mathematics (ICLM). We illustrate
          here   how CSCL     findings may    inform   monitoring,  one  major facet  of   teachers'  ICLM
          competencies.

Collaborative    learning is a well-researched  instructional  approach  whose   effectiveness   is well    established.
However, this effect depends on the quality of the student interaction (Dillenbourg, Baker, Blaye, & O'Malley,
1996). Teachers play an essential role in ensuring that the student interaction in the classroom is beneficial for
learning.  In  the   computer-supported    collaborative   learning  (CSCL)    literature, methods      for designing,
monitoring, and supporting collaborative learning with computer-based tools are well-described. In face-to-face
teacher practice, teachers also need guidance for monitoring the ongoing student interaction similar to tools in
CSCL    environments.   We   present a  theoretical model  describing   teachers' competencies      for Implementing
Collaborative Learning in Mathematics (ICLM) and illustrate how CSCL findings may be beneficial for teacher
practice, especially   for monitoring   student  interactions. While  we   chose  to  situate   the ICLM     model   in
mathematics as the learning domain, the model may be transferred to other domains as well.

Theoretical framework
The  Implementing    Collaborative   Learning   in Mathematics   (ICLM)    model  is  based   on the    meta-cognitive
framework of teacher practice by Artzt and Armour-Thomas (1998) that describes teaching in analogy to a
cognitive process of solving a problem in three phases: a pre-active phase, an inter-active phase, and a post-
active phase.    The model describes which competencies are needed to successfully implement collaborative
learning in the respective phases. While planning is part of the pre-active phase, monitoring and supporting take
place during the inter-active phase. Additionally, an important element of the inter-active phase is consolidating
the groups' work. Finally, in a post-active phase, reflection is of vital importance in helping teachers to improve
the planning of collaborative learning situations in particular. In the current paper we focus on one facet of the
model in particular, that is, monitoring.
          While students are collaborating, the teacher has to monitor how they are working together to ensure
the fruitfulness of the collaboration and support the students if necessary. In the CSCL literature, monitoring
students' interactions  is often  supported by  a  teacher cockpit  that visualizes  live  data from    the interaction
processes (Roschelle, Rafanan, Estrella, Nussbaum, & Claro, 2009), for instance the different amounts of oral
and written contributions. The cognitive algebra tutor (Koedinger, 1998) that checks for students' errors in
finding the solution for the mathematics problem at hand can be extended by an additional feature that allows
for collaborative working on the cognitive tutor.      This collaborative extension helps to identify how students
behave in different roles, for instance as a tutor and tutee (Walker, Rummel, & Koedinger, 2009).
          Teachers in the classroom especially face the challenge of monitoring the interaction processes taking
place in several groups at the same time. Group awareness tools such as the "Lantern" (Dillenbourg & Jermann,
2010) are a simple implementation of a teacher cockpit that works for face-to-face collaborative learning. The
different colors of the "Lanterns" give the teacher an overview of the collaborative working phases the different
groups in the classroom are currently involved in and whether they need help.
          While other sophisticated technological solutions that monitor how students are working together are
not  so   easily implemented     in face-to-face   collaborative learning, the   indicators   underlying     successful
collaboration can be transferred. For instance, Meier, Rummel, and Spada (2007) developed a rating scheme to
evaluate the collaboration of dyads in a computer-supported learning environment on multiple dimensions.
Their indicators of successful computer-supported collaborative behaviors may help teachers to observe face-to-
face interactions   in the   classroom  as  well,  for instance  whether   students  engage   in argumentations      or

© ISLS                                                                                                             279
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                     Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

explanations of ideas. We thus propose that teachers could use checklists with behavioral indicators targeting
three dimensions of collaborative learning adapted from Meier and colleagues, namely collaborative, cognitive,
and meta-cognitive    activity.    A   successful collaboration for   instance requires  that all students are  actively
engaged and share information (Johnson & Johnson, 1998). Visible cognitive activities include asking targeted
questions  and  giving    elaborated   explanations   (Webb,    1989).  Meta-cognitive    activities are   indicated by
comprehension monitoring and checking for errors (Bannert, 2003). Teachers using such a checklist, based on
indicators of fruitful collaborative learning behavior described by the CSCL literature, may find it easier to
observe these relevant behaviors and not be distracted by aspects of the collaboration that are less determining
for its learning success.

Conclusion
We aimed to illustrate how CSCL findings targeting monitoring of student interactions may be informative for
teacher practice in face-to-face settings. We developed a theoretical model describing the ICLM competencies,
planning,  monitoring,    supporting,   consolidating,    and   reflecting collaborative  learning.    We  stressed  the
monitoring facet here because it is essential to assess the quality of the groups' interaction and their progress in
order to identify suboptimal collaborative, cognitive, and meta-cognitive activity. When suboptimal activity in a
student interaction is identified, for example insufficient explanations among students, the teacher may choose
to support the student interaction, which is also an important competence teachers should have to ensure a
fruitful collaboration. Our theoretical model serves as a base for developing a tool to assess these competencies
and for  designing   a  training   for teacher  students. The   teacher students  learn  to   use checklists of   fruitful
collaborative behavior for observing student interactions and we are interested to see how this training affects
the teacher students' monitoring competency.

References
Artzt, A.  F., &   Armour-Thomas,       E. (1998).   Mathematics   teaching  as   problem solving:   A  framework    for
         studying teacher metacognition underlying instructional practice in mathematics. Instructional Science,
         26(1/2), 5-25.
Bannert, M. (2003). Effekte metakognitiver Lernhilfen auf den Wissenserwerb in vernetzten Lernumgebungen
         [Effects  of  meta-cognitive   learning   aids on  knowledge   gain   in networked   learning  environments].
         Zeitschrift f¸r P‰dagogische Psychologie, 17(1), 13-25.
Dillenbourg,   P., Baker,  M.,  Blaye,    A., &   O'Malley, C.  (1996). The    evolution of   research on  collaborative
         learning.  In  P. Reimann      &  H.   Spada   (Eds.), Learning    in humans    and   machines.   Towards   an
         interdisciplinary learning science (1st ed., pp. 189≠211). Oxford, New York: Pergamon.
Dillenbourg, P., & Jermann, P. (2010). Technology for classroom orchestration. In M. S. Khine & I. M. Saleh
         (Eds.), New science of learning: Cognition, computers and collaboration in education (pp. 525-552).
         Springer.
Johnson, D. W., & Johnson, R. T. (1998). Cooperative learning and social interdependence theory. In R. S.
         Tindale,  L.   Heath,  J. Edwards,    E. J. Posavac,   F. B.  Bryant,  &  Y. Suarez-Balcazar     (Eds.), Social
         psychological applications to social issues; Vol. 4. Theory and research on small groups (pp. 9-35).
         New York, NY US: Plenum Press.
Koedinger, K. R. (1998). Intelligent cognitive tutors as modelling tool and instructional model. Paper presented
         at the NCTM Standards 2000 Technology Conference.
Meier, A., Spada, H., & Rummel, N. (2007). A rating scheme for assessing the quality of computer-supported
         collaboration processes. Computer Supported Learning 2(1), 63-86.
Roschelle, J., Rafanan, K., Estrella, G., Nussbaum, M., & Claro, S. (2009). From handheld collaboration tool
         to effective classroom module: Embedding CSCL in a broader design framework. In C. O'Malley, D.
         Suthers,  P.  Reimann,    &   A.  Dimitracopoulou    (Eds.), Computer    Supported   Collaborative  Learning
         Practices: CSCL2009 Conference Proceedings (pp. 395-403).
Walker, E., Rummel, N., & Koedinger, K. (2009). Beyond explicit feedback: New directions in adaptive
         collaborative learning support. In C. O'Malley, D. Suthers, P. Reimann, & A. Dimitracopoulou (Eds.),
         Computer Supported Collaborative Learning Practices: CSCL2009 Conference Proceedings (pp. 552-
         556).
Webb,   N. M.   (1989).   Peer  interaction   and learning  in  small groups.  International   Journal  of Educational
         Research, 13(1), 21-39.

© ISLS                                                                                                              280
