CSCL 2013 Proceedings                      Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

                             Learning About Ecosystems Through
                   Collaborative Augmented Reality Experiences
  Amy M. Kamarainen, New York Hall of Science, 47-01 111th St. Queens, NY, amkamarainen@gmail.com
                Shari Metcalf, Tina Grotzer, Chris Dede, Harvard Graduate School of Education,
                                        13 Appian Way, Cambridge, MA 02138
            Email: shari_metcalf@harvard.edu, tina_grotzer@harvard.edu, chris_dede@harvard.edu

          Abstract:    EcoMOBILE        is a new   middle   school science  research     curriculum  that  blends
          exploration   in   virtual  environments   with   augmented      reality experiences   in  real  world
          ecosystems. This poster presents examples from the design of EcoMOBILE activities that
          demonstrate affordances of augmented reality to support collaboration during and after student
          field trips.

EcoMOBILE      (Ecosystems     Mobile      Outdoor Blended   Immersive     Learning  Environment)    is  a middle    school
science curriculum that blends virtual environments in the classroom with field trips to outdoor environments
infused with digital resources. EcoMOBILE includes EcoMUVE, an inquiry-based experience in which students
explore immersive virtual representations of ecosystems, as well as a complementary set of learning experiences
using   mobile technologies     with   augmented    reality (AR)   during  field   trips to  a real ecosystem.     The   AR
experiences in EcoMOBILE help students to make connections between the models that underlie the virtual
environment    and the   real  world    around  them,   through  hands-on   activities   and   visualizations that   support
observation and real-world data collection.
          The ability to understand ecosystems is richly enhanced by experiences in real environments. Yet that
experience necessarily focuses on what is visible, at that time, in that place. Ecosystem processes are often
difficult for  students  to   understand    because they    are invisible, spatially  distributed,  and   take place   over
considerable   periods  of   time.   Augmented   Reality can    provide contextualized    instruction; visualizations  and
information triggered by geo-referenced physical locations; and self-directed, self-paced interactive activities,
with feedback on student actions and responses (Squire & Jan, 2007; Klopfer, 2008; Dunleavy and Dede in
press).
          During a     field trip, each student  or student  pair  is given a   smartphone;    students  log  in  to run an
EcoMOBILE app. The experience provides self-paced directions and structure, using location-based AR to
guide students to specific physical settings ("hotspots"). When students come to a hotspot, interactive content
pops up, including text, images, audio, video, and questions (Figure 1). Vision-based targets in the physical
environment    can also      trigger pop-up   3D   visualizations  or animated     models.   Students   may    be  assigned
complementary roles, using a jigsaw pedagogy with each role visiting a different set of hotspots, or there might
be opportunities for students to select which hotspot to visit next; in this way the activities allow for self-
directed exploration, while providing context and structure through the smartphone.

                               Figure 1. Students using EcoMOBILE; Example hotpot.

          EcoMOBILE's design includes two levels of AR experiences, customizable to specific locations and
ecosystem   features.   The   introductory   experience supports   students  in observing    their local  ecosystem   more
deeply, drawing their attention to relationships among organisms and their environment (e.g., biotic and abiotic
factors, habitats, food web), and causal interactions over time and across distance, which may happen at the
microscopic or molecular level (e.g., photosynthesis). The second experience focuses on students collecting data
about their local ecosystem, and making comparisons with the virtual world they explored with EcoMUVE.

© ISLS                                                                                                                 281
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                 Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

Design for Collaboration
EcoMobile pilot activities included AR affordances targeted to support student collaboration:
   Prompts for collaboration: In some experiences students worked with an assigned partner. In others, each
   student followed a different path, but at a certain point, their phones directed them to a shared hotspot, and
   prompted sharing the observations made with someone who had different experiences (Figure 2a).
   Roles and collaborative data: In some experiences students were assigned to scientific roles, such as
   "chemist" or "physical geographer" ­ each role was then responsible for specific observations and data. In
   order to unlock the next experience, student teams needed to collaborate across roles, sharing data among
   teammates.
   Sharing data in the classroom: Post-field trip classroom activities centered on students sharing the data
   they had collected. In some cases, this involved plotting data such as pH or dissolved oxygen on a graph for
   comparison and discussion. In other cases, students collected geo-referenced photos of their observations,
   which were shared with the class using Google Earth (Figure 2b).

                     Figure 2. a) prompts for collaboration; b) sharing with Google Earth.

         Preliminary results of pilot experiences  with EcoMOBILE          demonstrate how    AR  affordances can
provide support for collaborative learning through interdependent game mechanisms and role-based activities.
         When given the option, students naturally gravitated towards working together. One student explained
that, unlike traditional activities, "we went to our friends and classmates first because this was a new experience
for us and we are always kind of stuck in the classroom. Usually you go to your teacher because they know what
is going on, but because this was a new experience you could go to your friend and be like I can figure this out
with you."
         Interviews with pilot teachers found that the smartphones promoted student interaction both with the
ecosystem and with their classmates (Kamarainen et al., 2013). One educator commented, "It invited much more
student on student dialogue because they had to engage together to sort of figure out things that were coming
through to them on the smartphone. So it, in some ways, I thought that their dialogue probably deepened their
understanding." Another teacher described how the impromptu collaborations worked well for his class: "We
had kids group up at first with their friends, but then the hotspots would take them to different places, where
they would then collaborate with other people who they would normally never work with.        So you saw a lot of
blending of `middle school social castes,' you know, you've got the nerds and the popular kids, all working
together, it really kind of leveled the playing field for everybody."

References
Dunleavy, M., & Dede, C. (in press). Augmented reality teaching and learning. In M.J. Bishop & J. Elen (Eds.),
         Handbook of Research on Educational Communications and Technology. 4th edition, Volume 2. New
         York: Macmillan.
Kamarainen,  A.  M., Metcalf, S.,  Grotzer, T., Browne, A., Mazzuca,        D., Tutwiler, M.  S., Dede, C. (2013)
         EcoMOBILE:    Integrating Augmented    Reality and Probeware       with  Environmental   Education Field
         Trips, Computers & Education, Available online ISSN 0360-1315, 10.1016/j.compedu.2013.02.018.
Klopfer, E. (2008).  Augmented    learning: Research and  design       of mobile  educational games.  MIT   Press,
         Cambridge, MA.
Squire K.D., & Jan, M. (2007). Mad city mystery: Developing scientific argumentation skills with a place-based
         augmented reality game on handheld computers. Journal of Science Education and Technology, 16(1)
         5-29.

© ISLS                                                                                                        282
