CSCL 2013 Proceedings                Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

                Joint Reasoning about Gas Solubility in Water
                  in Modified Versions of a Virtual Laboratory
     Göran Karlsson, Thommy Eriksson, Chalmers University of Technology & University of Gothenburg,
                     Department of Applied Information Technology, SE-412 96 Göteborg
                             Email: goran.karlsson@ituniv.se, thommy@ituniv.se
      Maria Sunnerstam, University of Gothenburg, Pedagogical Development and Interactive Learning,
                                 SE-405 30 Göteborg, maria.sunnerstam@gu.se
     Michael Axelsson, University of Gothenburg, Department of Biological and Environmental Sciences,
                             SE-405 30 Göteborg, michael.axelsson@bioenv.gu.se

        Abstract: A virtual laboratory was designed to enable students to collaboratively discover the
        concept of gas solubility in water at different physiological conditions. The virtual laboratory
        was developed through a design experiment involving three successive versions with different
        guiding structures. Analysis of 13 dyads' reasoning about gas solubility in water revealed that
        the students' problem    was to   understand the   concept  of   solubility of gases.   It was  also
        observed  how    the guiding  structures  within   the  three different versions    influenced   the
        students' reasoning about the concept.

Virtual laboratories ­ digital, simulated laboratory experiments, debated and subject to methodical research ­
have been  used for  decades. It has been   proposed that   virtual laboratory  work   could   have  the potential  to
alleviate many of the problems connected with traditional hands-on experiments (Ma & Nickerson, 2006).
        Within  a joint  development  and   research venture    we  developed   a   virtual laboratory   (available at
http://esi.stanford.edu/gasesinwater/gasesinwater1.htm).    It  was   carried  out    through   an  iterative   design
experiment that included three loops of slightly altered versions of the virtual laboratory. To guide students in
their collaborative discovery process, the virtual laboratory was facilitated with several scaffolds (Gijlers, Saab,
& Van Joolingen, 2009; Vreman-de Olde & de Jong, 2006). A collaborative learning setting has been shown to
benefit learning from animated graphics about natural dynamic phenomena (Rebetez, Bétrancourt, Sangin, &
Dillenbourg, 2010). Especially in the area of computer-supported collaborative learning (CSCL), analyses of
knowledge building in small groups have developed into an important methodology (Stahl, 2006).
        This paper presents findings from the reasoning of 13 student pairs as they explore the solubility of gas
in water at different temperatures and water salinities in a set of virtual laboratory experiments. The purpose of
the study is to add to the understanding of students' collaborative construals of the concept of gas solubility in
water in modified virtual laboratory environments with different guiding structures.

Methods
In the development of the virtual laboratory, a formative iterative process was followed where the design was
revised and modified  in three   repeated cycles. Each version    contained   additional built-in  guidance   such  as
introduction films, gas meter, folding menu, educational texts and pop-up boxes suggesting alternative actions.
Changes of guiding structures within the virtual laboratory were based on observations, questionnaires, and
interviews with teachers and students from the previous evaluation.
        When    performing   the laboratory experiment,    the  students were   assigned    to work  in  pairs. From
observations of the efflux of bubbles when the water is heated and shaken and when salt is added, the students
were expected to draw conclusions about the dissolution of the two gases oxygen and carbon dioxide in water at
different conditions. The desired learning outcome is primarily that they shall acquire the insight that higher
temperature or salinity decreases gas solubility in water.
        The virtual laboratory was evaluated in the spring of 2008 at four upper-secondary schools in the area
of Gothenburg, Sweden and involved eight classes, totaling 180 students ages 16-19. The evaluation process
included interviews, discussions with focus groups and video recordings. In order to investigate the nature of the
students' reasoning, the video   recordings of 13  groups    discussing  the  virtual laboratory   experiments   were
transcribed and analyzed. Five groups worked with the first version, four each with the second and third version
of the virtual laboratory. The filmed groups were randomly selected from the four schools; they studied the
same program and were assumed to be of similar abilities.

Results
In the virtual laboratory, a burst of bubbles is seen when the water is either heated or salted, indicating that less
gas remains in the water. The results from the evaluation process indicated that the problem was not primarily
for students to realize that warmer water contains a decreased volume of gas, but rather to understand the

© ISLS                                                                                                           283
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                    Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

concept of solubility of gases in water in relation to bubbles emerging from the water. The analysis of the video
data corroborated this observation but also expose dissimilarities in the students' reasoning in relation to which
version of the virtual laboratory they were exploring.
        Among the five groups that worked with the first version, four discovered that an increased amount of
bubbles means a decreased volume of gas in water, whereas one group held an erroneous view. In terms of the
concept of gas solubility in water, all five groups held the erroneous view that more bubbles leaving the water
implies that more gas dissolves. It is noteworthy that the four groups that reached the insight that an increased
amount  of bubbles    means  a  decreased    volume   of gas in  water    nevertheless did not  discover the scientific
concept of gas  solubility  in  water.   Of  the four groups    that worked  with  the  second  version, all made   the
observation that more bubbles imply a decreased volume of gas in water. All groups also reached the intended
learning outcome that more bubbles imply that less gas is dissolved. It can be observed that in three groups, one
of the  interlocutors initially held an  erroneous    view, but  subsequently   after  discussing with  his/her  partner
became convinced about the scientific concept. The four groups that worked with the third version noticeably
differ from the other nine groups in their reasoning. In these groups the students were just reading off the gas
meter  and declared   that the  volume    of  gas decreases  when     the water is heated  and  there   was  no  further
discussion about the concept of gas solubility in water.

Discussion
The main purpose with the design of the virtual laboratory was to provide students with resources to discover
the relation between gas solubility in water and temperature. Analyses of the filmed groups reasoning disclose
that the problem might not be so much that the students did not grasp that the volume of gas in water decreases
when the temperature rises, but instead that they did not understand the link between the concept of solubility of
a gas in water and bubbling.
        Compared to traditional laboratory work, the virtual laboratory provided extra affordances in terms of
guiding structures. For example, in the second version of the virtual laboratory, a film showing molecular
reactions inside the soda bottle and an assignment box with educational questions was introduced. The results
show that while all four groups that worked with the second version discovered the scientific concept, no one of
the five group that worked with the first version did. In the four groups that worked with the third version, there
were no discussions of the meaning of more bubbles in terms of the concept of gas solubility in water, whereas
such discussions were frequent in the groups with the first two versions. A plausible explanation for this might
be found in the fact that these four groups explored a version of the virtual laboratory that was complemented
with a gas meter. It can be assumed that the gas meter, displaying the volume of gas in the water, immediately
made it clear for the students that the volume of gas decreased as the temperature increased, and that this fact
consequently made further discussion unnecessary.
        Thus, this study indicates that the affordances of computer-simulated laboratories might to a certain
extent enhance joint discovery of a scientific concept, but also that furnishing the instructional technology with
too complete guidance might risk quenching students' constructive discussions and their discovery process. It is
concluded  that the   decision  about  what   scaffolds  should  be  implemented   must    be made   in relation to the
students' pre-knowledge and to how much one intends them to discover by themselves.
        The  next     development    for this research   is  to focus   on  how   our  results  can  contribute  to the
improvement of the design of virtual laboratories and thereby complement traditional laboratory work.

References
Gijlers, H., Saab, N., & Van Joolingen, W. R. (2009). Interaction between tool and talk: how instruction and
        tools support consensus building in collaborative inquiry-learning environments. Journal of Computer
        Assisted Learning, 25 (3), 252-267.
Ma, J., &  Nickerson,   J. V.   (2006).  Hands-on,  simulated,   and  remote  laboratories:   A comparative  literature
        review. ACM Computing Surveys, 38(3), 1-24.
Rebetez, C., Bétrancourt, M., Sangin, M., & Dillenbourg, P. (2010). Learning from animations enabled by
        collaboration. Instructional Science, 38, 471-485.
Stahl, G. (2006). Group cognition: computer support for collaborative knowledge building. Cambridge: MIT
        press.
Vreman-de Olde, C., & de Jong, T. (2006). Scaffolding learners in designing investigation assignments for a
        computer simulation. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 22(1), 63-73.

Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank Johan Lundin and Jonas Ivarsson for valuable comments on earlier drafts of this
paper.  Support for   the  work  reported   here  has been   received  from  the   Linnaeus   Centre for  Research   on
Learning, Interaction, and Mediated Communication in Contemporary Society (LinCS). The Bio-HOPE project
was founded by the Wallenberg Global Learning Network (WGLN).

© ISLS                                                                                                              284
