CSCL 2013 Proceedings                     Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

      INKA-SUITE: An Integrated Test-Environment for Analyzing
                                         Chat Communication
     Prof. Dr. Andrea Kienle, Christian Schlösser, Philipp Schlieker-Steens, University of Applied Sciences
                           Dortmund, Emil-Figge-Str. 42, 44227 Dortmund (Germany),
                  Email: andrea.kienle@fh-dortmund.de, christian.schloesser@fh-dortmund.de,
                                     philipp.schlieker-steens@fh-dortmund.de

        Abstract: This poster is related to the field of chat evaluation. First eye-tracking and its
        limitations   in  the case  of   constantly changing   graphical user   interface (like in chats) are
        presented.    Then    the INKA-SUITE     that   enables  eye-tracking   of  changing graphical    user
        interfaces is introduced.

Introduction
To evaluate the usability of an application, studies and field tests are conducted. Such usability studies are often
based on eye-tracking, which records the eye movements of a test person, who usually is viewing exhibits,
projection screens  or   displays  (Duchowski,   2007).  The    eye  movements   provide  information   about  what  is
viewed  in what    order  for how   long.  Eye-tracking    is widely  used  for the evaluation  of  user  interfaces of
stationary single-user systems (Shneiderman & Plaisant, 2006), web applications (Nielsen & Loranger, 2006)
and in some cases also in CSCL studies (Nüssli et al., 2009).
        Existing eye-tracking systems are usually limited to static content like pictures (e.g., advertisements),
websites or programs. Those static contents are at the same position for all participants so that they can be easily
compared with each other. For this scenario the corresponding eye-tracking applications provide a large scale of
different displaying options to document the results.
        However, if this area of interest is not static, but changes its size, shape or position, the evaluation
becomes much more complex and requires a certain amount of manual analysis. This is especially the case in
cooperative applications such as chats. In particular, the difficulty is, that you can't predict the time of change,
because it is permanently caused by user input (e.g., new chat message, scrolling). So the dynamics of the area
of interest (AOI) in such applications cannot be foretold. Existing eye-tracking software is therefore not suitable
in this situation. They are typically limited to a subsequent definition of those dynamic AOIs, which can be a
huge and fault-prone manual effort.
        At   this  point, the  own   work    of the   research   program   "Informationsgestaltung   in   kooperativen
Anwendungen    (INKA)"     (Design   of   Information   in cooperative   Systems,   http://www.inka.fh -dortmund.de)
starts. Further on, this poster presents the INKA-SUITE as an approach for the eye-tracking of dynamic AOIs
(for further information   see (Schlieker-Steens    &   Schlösser,  2012)). This   software represents  a solution   for
tracking dynamic applications, e.g. chats in fields of the CSCL as widely known from the work of the virtual
math team (VMT) project (Stahl, 2011). Especially in the field of linguistics and usability questions about chat
communications could be answered.

INKA-SUITE
The base for the INKA-SUITE is the connectivity to the Tobii eye-trackers established with the Tobii SDK (see
http://www/tobii.com). With a direct connection between the eye-tracker gaze data stream and GUI (C# WPF),
the INKA-SUITE identifies AOIs at runtime, regardless of size, shape and position. In fact, every gaze data
record is complemented by the underlying GUI element, identified by names, ID's and/or references to other
database tables such as chat messages or users. A subsequent manual work is eliminated and the evaluation can
be started immediately.   This    direct identification of AOIs   is providing  further opportunities,  which  will  be
discussed  briefly in the  outlook.  This   profound    cross-linking between   analyses  related  functions   and user
software cannot be adapted by existing eye-tracking analysis software.

The INKA-SUITE is based on a three-part application:
        A server to control and manage clients
        A client application for user interaction, which is connected to an eye-tracker
        An analysis component for managing projects and analyzing the collected data

        To get a customizable interface, the client does not contain a chat interface. The interface is provided
by the server. This procedure is generally called as templating and offers the possibility of a simple way to
perform A/B testing with different user interfaces. To control and monitor the clients, a server component is
used. At that point, the templates are chosen and assignable and the status of eye-tracking for each participant
can be supervised.

© ISLS                                                                                                             285
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                  Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

         The analysis application processes the recorded data and is divided into three parts: Statistic, Replay
and Timeline.  In the Statistic tool, general information about the chat session  and also about    each  user is
presented. For example these are duration of chat, keystrokes per minute, time to first message and messages
per minute.
         Within the Timeline tool the entire chat session is presented on a timeline for each user (see Figure 1,
left). This ensures the comparability   between  users (e.g., Stellmach  et al., 2010). Each      users shortcuts,
keystrokes, chat messages and fixations are listed separately. Using annotations, important areas can be marked.
The displayed output is fully dynamic and can be adapted to the current problem.

                        Figure 1. INKA-SUITE Timeline and Replay (Analysis tools).

         For replaying the chat from the user's point of view, the so called Replay was developed (see Figure 1,
right). This tool is chronology replaying the chat, similar to a screen recording, but with options to select and
deselect the data that is output at runtime, also showing fixations and saccades as a scanpath. Because fixations
are represented by GUI elements, further information, such as fixation length and underlying AOI, can be
retrieved through tooltips. Both applications, Timeline and Replay, provide the opportunity to play back the
video of the user cam. Within the Replay a "Retrospective Think Aloud" can be recorded. Timeline and Replay
are linked together to jump into each instance to the same position as the active tool. From the Timeline,
multiple Replay instances can be started and played in sync to compare several subjects directly.

Outlook
The INKA-SUITE outlined above is a basis for a number of planned extensions. These include an enhanced
fixation filter, contextualized communication, extension of simultaneous chats and the internal project called
Chat++, which is feasible through the realtime AOI identification and could therefore support features like
reading awareness, eye-tracking-based referencing and activity and context-awareness.

References
Stellmach, Sophie; Nacke, Lennart; Dachselt, Raimund: Advanced gaze visualizations for three-dimensional
         virtual environments. In: Proceedings of the 2010 Symposium on Eye-Tracking Research &
         Applications. Austin, Texas, 2010 (ETRA), pp. 109­112.
Duchowski, Andrew T. (2007): Eye Tracking Methodology: Theories and Practice, 2nd Edition. Berlin:
         Springer Verlag.
Nielsen, Jakob; Loranger Hoa (2006): Prioritizing Web Usability. New Riders.
Nüssli, Marc-Antoine; Jermann, Patrick; Sangin, Mirweis; Dillenbourg, Pierre (2009): Collaboration and
         abstract representations: towards predictive models based on raw speech and eye-tracking data. In:
         Proceedings of CSCL, 2009.
Shneiderman, Ben; Plaisant, Catherine (2009): Designing the User Interface: Strategies for Effective Human-
         Computer Interaction, 5th Edition. Amsterdam: Addison-Wesley.
Schlieker-Steens, Philipp; Schlösser, Christian (2012): INKA-SUITE: An integrated test-environment for
         analyzing chat communication. FH Dortmund: Bachelor Thesis (In German).
Stahl, Gerry (2011): How a virtual math team structured its problem solving. In: Proceedings of CSCL 2011, pp.
         256-263.

© ISLS                                                                                                       286
