CSCL 2013 Proceedings                   Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

The effect of computer-supported independent and interdependent
                          collaboration on information sharing

                                     Kyung Kim, Roy Clariana, Amy Garbrick
           College of Education, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA, 16802 USA
                        Email: kxk997@psu.edu, rbc4@psu.edu, agarbrick@ist.psu.edu

         Abstract: As a way to look at how activity in the group influences individual cognition, this
         paper   reviewed three literature  on the  effect of interdependence     and    independent work   in
         computer-supported    collaborative   learning. Three    literatures show    the  positive  effect of
         interdependent   collaboration   on information   sharing    as the  opposite   results  of previous
         research.

The effect of interdependent collaboration on information sharing
Previous  research  has   identified two   counterintuitive  findings    for  collaboration  work.   First, individuals
remember less when recalling in groups, which is a well-known effect called collaborative inhibition (Hinsz,
Tindale, & Vollrath, 1997). Second, in a form of interdependent collaboration, group members mentioned more
pieces of common    (shared)   information   than unique   (unshared)  information,    which   is called hidden-profile
methods (Lu et al, 2012). These two startling finding for group work clearly suggest that group work would not
be as  effective as working   individually.  Therefore,  the  effects of  working     in groups   must be   qualified or
moderated in order for instructional designers to optimize collaborative learning for all members when they
design collaborative learning.
          Engleman   and    Hesse (2010)    investigated   interdependence    and    independent   work  in   computer-
supported  collaborative  learning.   All  the members     were   randomly    assigned    to the   Interdependent  and
Independent conditions and required to create a collaborative concept map regarding problem-solving task using
CmapTool. The Interdependent group on average spent more time on creating a fully elaborated concept map
before shifting focus to solving the problem, while the Independent group spent less times on elaborating their
map before focusing on solving the problem. Analysis of the content and structure of the group maps showed
that the Interdependent group maps were larger and more fully elaborated relative to the Independent group
maps.  These  findings  for the Interdependent    group  are  notable since   it  is the opposite  pattern  of  previous
research  regarding  common     and  unique    information   that group   discussion     tends to  focus   on   common
information than unique information (Stasser & Titus, 1985; Lu et al, 2012).
          The  following  two   studies (offline  & online   collaboration)   were   desired   to measure   the flow  of
information elicited as concept maps before (Premap), during (Group map), and after (Postmap) collaboration in
order to explain or reconcile this positive pattern (Clariana et al, 2012). First investigation (called as CAS 250)
was conducted in a face-to-face section of a large public University. Working alone as homework (Pre-maps),
participants in the Independent condition were asked to read and map all of Chapter, while participants in the
Interdependent condition were asked to read all of chapter but map only the first or last half of the chapter. After
that, all members were required to create group map of the chapter (Group maps). When done, they individually
completed a post assessment that consisted of creating from memory a concept map of the Chapter content
(Postmaps).

                    Figure  1.  The  average   flow of   Posttest concepts    for each   condition
                    across Premaps, Group maps, and Postmaps.

          As showed, for the Premaps, not surprisingly map sizes were on average about half as large for the
Interdependent condition. This is consistent with mapping half of the chapter versus mapping the whole chapter.
Group maps were approximately equivalent in terms of quality and size. Interdependent group agreement with
the expert was 49% compared to 51% for the Independent group maps. Regarding Postmaps, average Postmaps

© ISLS                                                                                                             287
                 Effect sizes
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                             Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

for each condition were approximately equivalent in terms of size but not in terms of quality, the Interdependent
agreement with the expert was 62% compares to 52% for the Independent group maps. These findings indicate
that interdependent group work does lead to unique (and quality) information sharing because they must have
learned the other half of the chapter that they had not studied through the group collaboration. In addition, what
they learned in the group tended to be of higher quality.
           Another            remarkable   finding is   the  fact that  21%   (0.6 terms) of  the terms   in the Interdependent
postmaps came exclusively from their Group maps while only 4% (3.5 terms) of the Independent postmaps
came exclusively from their Group maps. This suggests that the Independent group members paid less attention
to their group's map. In other word, independent Postmap was more dependent on their Premap and their own
unique knowledge than on their Group map. These finding suggests that collaboration more strongly influence
the learning in interdependent condition than in independent condition.
           Armed   with            information   from   this investigation,   a related follow-up   study  (called as IST   110)
underway now will replicate this approach (Preamp-Groupmap-Postmap) online and include video analysis of
the group collaboration in order to describe the collaborative group process. In this study, all members were
individually required to complete Post Lesson Quiz that consists of 20 fact-related items in order to more clearly
identify the effect of information sharing in collaboration. This investigation showed the effect of interdependent
group work on information sharing. Bellow figure 2 shows the result.

                                   0.20
                                   0.15
                                   0.10
                                   0.05
                                   0.00
                                -0.05           pp.509-527              pp.521-536            pp.527-544
                                -0.10
                                -0.15
                                -0.20
                                -0.25             Independent Quiz score             Interdependent Quiz score
               Figure 2. Quiz score of both interdependent and independent members.
           Given the results from three investigations, our current conclusion is that interdependent collaboration
work (1) may be an effective way to share unique information, and (2) collaboration strongly influences the
learning in interdependent collaboration condition than in independent collaboration.

Next step
The latter two investigations (CAS 250 & IST 110) are our beginning step to understand the flow of information
pieces (as structural knowledge) in group collaboration as a way to look at how activity in the group influences
individual cognition. As a next step, IST 110 study will further investigate the relational and associational
knowledge   beyond             the extent  of   knowledge    in computer-supported    collaborative problem-solving   task. The
main  premise  underlying             this  research    is that   different collaboration strategies, whether    independent or
interdependent, may influence different knowledge structure, which in turn engenders different performance. At
this time, our expectation              is that independent     collaboration strategy  may   be effective way   for knowledge
convergence, while interdependent collaboration strategy may be effective for information sharing as proven by
the research reviewed in this article.

References
Asino, T., Clariana, R.B., Dong, Y., Groff, B., Ntshalintshali, G., Taricani, E., & Yu, W. (2012). The effect of
        independent             and   interdependent    group     collaboration on   knowledge   extent,  knowledge   from  and
        knowledge              convergence.     Proceeding   of   the 2012   Association  for Educational    Communications  &
        Technology, November: Louisville, KY.
Engelmann,   T., &             Hesse,   F.W.    (2010). How     digital concept    maps  about   collaborators' knowledge   and
        information             influence     computer-supported       collaborative  problem    solving.  Computer-Supported
        Collaborative Learning, 5, 299-319.
Hinsz, V.B., Tindale, R.S., & Vollrath, D.A. (1997). The emerging conceptualization of groups as information
        processors. Psychological Bulletin, 121, 43­64.
Lu, L., Yuan, Y.C., & McLeod, P.L. (2012). Twenty-five years of hidden profiles in group decision making: a
        meta-analysis. Personality and Social Psychology Review, 16, 54­75.

© ISLS                                                                                                                      288
