CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                            Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

 Repurposing everyday technologies for math and science inquiry
               Sarah Lewis, Wendy Ju, Stanford University, 353 Serra Mall, Stanford CA 94305
                                     sarahl@stanford.edu, wendyju@stanford.edu

         Abstract: Students often have far more sophisticated scientific instruments in their pockets
         than  in their  physics  classrooms.   Today's  cell  phones  and  game    controllers offer sensors,
         cameras and communication technologies that can be used for in-depth exploration of physical
         phenomena. Because everyday toys and tools offer connections to children's social worlds,
         they are particularly useful for integrating classroom science with everyday intuitions and
         experiences. Drawing on data from a multi-year research project to help children hack gaming
         technologies for science inquiry, we examine both technological and social advantages that
         repurposing everyday technologies for offers for learning abstract STEM concepts. In light of
         trends towards increased decentralization of education, we extend these findings into a general
         discussion of the potential for embedding CSCL into the design of everyday things.

Introduction
In many communities kids live and grow in social worlds embedded with interactive technologies of a potency
rarely found   in classrooms.    Sensors in  toys, computers,   and  phones  capture  changes    in position,   direction,
acceleration,  location, and   proximity; data  streams     seamlessly between   devices;   screens,  lights,  and audio
represent this data locally or remotely. Together, these technologies enable more of us to spend increasing
amounts of time learning outside of schools. However, they also offer deep, yet often hidden, affordances useful
for classrooms.    Even  moderately-priced      cell phones,   game    controllers, stuffed  toys,  watches,    handheld
computers and workout equipment contain sensing technologies--such as accelerometers and infrared cameras-
--that could be tapped to reveal the science and mathematics that underlie and describe the workings of the
physical world. Because these objects are in everyday use, they also hold the potential to bring difficult concepts
in math and science into children's day-to-day social contexts.
         A handheld game controller is one such an inexpensive everyday device with components that lend
themselves   readily to  math    and science  inquiry.  The  Wii  Playstation  Remote,   which     features  a  three-axis
accelerometer, a gyroscope, an infrared camera, seven buttons, a speaker, a haptic motor and two-way wireless
Bluetooth communication, cost less than $20 USD at the time of writing. Affordable, powerful and hackable,
they are also pervasive in many children's social worlds. (Nintendo's survey data indicates 46% of Americans
aged 6 to 74 played a Wii or Nintendo DS in 2010 (Iwata, 2010).) Components in these devices measure
physical phenomena related to motion, such as distance, rotation, velocity and acceleration, common topics of
study in science classrooms. Given its ubiquity, the Wii Remote and devices like it could be as familiar and as
ready at hand for physics projects as a desk ruler.
         Numerous    teachers,   researchers,   hackers and   DIY    enthusiasts have   written    about hacking   game
controllers for learning in various contexts (Williams & Rosner, 2010; Lee, 2008; Hill, 2009; Pearson & Bailey,
2007; De Bruyn, 2008; Graves et al., 2007). Perhaps closest to our work, researchers focusing on high school
and college-level physics curriculum (e.g., Vannoni & Straulino, 2009; Somers, et al., 2009; Wheeler, 2011)
used game controllers to collect data related to phenomena such as the motion of a pendulum, simple harmonic
motion in a spring, and linear displacement on a track. Inspired by this work and interested in bridging the gap
between `hands on' project based learning and abstract concepts presented in lectures in middle school science
classrooms, we launched a multiyear research project to engage children in hacking game controllers to collect
and visualize data related to their design projects (described in detail in Lewis, Acholonu & Ju, 2012). We
anticipated that children would glean data from their projects and--perhaps more importantly--that they also
would gain a better sense of how physics and math relate to the technologies in their everyday lives.
         Throughout     the course   of  the project, we    noted consistent  talk  anchored  around     the  device that
traversed boundaries between children's `social worlds' of gaming and their classroom `science worlds.' In this
paper  we briefly  provide   a   description of activities  with  students, and  then  present  snippets  of   classroom
interaction that exemplify the overall technological and social affordances that contribute to the blending of
these worlds. We conclude with larger questions for CSCL about how the commonplace "smart" devices of
childhood might contribute to math and science learning across contexts. Currently everyday technologies are
designed  to  be  easy  to  use, their  very form    factor inviting the user how    to learn   to manipulate   them   to
accomplish   a goal  (Norman,     2002).  We   suggest  that,  with  more   people  learning  in   distributed, informal
contexts, the technologies around us, such as cell phones, depth cameras, GPS technologies, and other sensor-
driven personal devices, might be altered to lead people toward learning not only how to accomplish something,
but also toward more fundamental principles about why the world and its technology works as it does.

© ISLS                                                                                                               288
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                          Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

Project Overview
The interactions presented below are from a three-year design experiment (Brown, 1992) to develop software
and curricular tools to support the use of game controllers and mobile phones as inexpensive data acquisition
tools for middle-school-level physics activities. The design research (Edelson, 2002) goals of this project are
twofold: 1) to design activities and software to help students and teachers harness everyday technologies to
support scientific inquiry in science classroom labs and projects and, more broadly, 2) to develop activities and
software tools that encourage young people to repurpose these same technologies for their own interests and
pursuits in and   out  of  school. In the  spirit of  participatory design,   the project   was carried   out in close
collaboration with the faculty and students of our partner school, with the participants considered co-designers
of  the  overall program.   Researchers    programmed    the  software    and  ran  classroom    activities,  soliciting
suggestions and feedback for both. We refined designs in response to faculty and student input, as well as our
own   observations  of our  program's   impact    on classroom dynamics     and   learning. This cooperative    design
approach is similar to participatory and collaborative approaches outlined by Inkpen (1999), Druin (1999), and
others working in the realm of classroom technology research and design (Rode 2003).

Setting and participants
All activities took place  in a  `constructivist' sixth-grade physics   class at  a private school   for academically
talented students.  The   physics  teacher was    experienced at  leading  project-based    activities, and  alternated
between open-ended design projects, structured labs, and direct instruction, usually presenting abstract concepts,
algebraic formulas and graphical representations of data via interactive lectures only after related hands-on
projects. This site was chosen because of its instructional philosophy, because of its commitment to innovation,
and because the school issues and supports Apple laptops to all middle school students, enabling teams to easily
use the software we provided.
         One hundred and eighteen sixth-grade boys and girls, in three classes per year over two years, worked
with  us on this  project. Overall,  students drew   upon high   levels of  technological   experience,   with several
bringing engineering and programming skills from robotics clubs or mobile app programming classes. Surveys
indicated most had extensive experience with a variety of computational devices, with all having access to or
familiarity with computer and video game technologies at home.

Activities
Four hands-on activities with gaming technology were conducted during the course of each school year, all of
which were video recorded. After each activity as many teams as possible were interviewed using "artifact
based" techniques (Barron 2002). Students used two emerging interfaces that either harnessed data from the
force sensor,  showing    graphs  of changing  acceleration  over   time, or  tracked the   position and   duration of
interruption of infrared lights aligned with the game controllers IR camera.
         To engage students in a common experience and to better understand their prior knowledge, the project
started with a warm up activity that involved playing the "Wii Tennis" game in small groups, and followed by
group discussion on how they thought it worked. This was followed by a three-week "mousetrap car" design
activity (Figure 1) a fun project often conducted in middle school science classrooms. In this activity students
are tasked with designing and building a car powered by a mousetrap. They tinker with materials and their naive
understandings of the physics of motion to develop an efficient car with maximum acceleration that will travel
as far as possible under its own power. In the course of the project, students encounter concepts related to
forces, such as friction, mass, velocity and acceleration. Students strapped game controllers onto their cars to
visualize changes in acceleration over time and relate those to design factors. Some students disassembled the
game controllers to make them lighter. The classroom teacher followed up this activity with students presenting
and discussing their findings before offering several direct instruction sessions on Newton's laws of motion.

                                      Figure 1. Students mousetrap car with
                                      WiiMote suspended from chassis.
         Noting conceptual issues related to "negative acceleration" in students' explanations of their mousetrap
cars, researchers next presented students with a "punch" activity. Students were asked to predict the "shape" of

© ISLS                                                                                                            289
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                          Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

the acceleration graph of a single, extended punch and test their prediction over multiple trials. Students drew
their predictions on paper, and then, in groups of two, recorded their trials using camera phones. Holding a
string tied to a vertically suspended game controller (Figure 2), students punched and examined the line graph
of change in acceleration over time. Results were reported out, which led to a group discussion of `negative
acceleration.'

                               Figure 2. Students punch and watch the screen to explore
                               negative acceleration.

The school year concluded with a marble rollercoaster activity, also a common project in middle school science
classrooms.  Studying  kinetic  and   potential energy,  students built  a marble rollercoaster  (Figure 3) within
specified constraints. Using their knowledge of the workings of the gaming system, and infrared LEDs and IR
cameras from game controllers, they developed systems to track the marbles velocity at different points along
the track.

                                    Figure 3. Students aligning IR light with Wii IR
                                    camera on their rollercoaster track.

Findings
We found it notable that some of the most productive discussions involved students not simply analyzing their
team's data, but talking more broadly in conversations that forged a three-way link between the principles of
physics under study, the technical functioning of the game controllers components, and the social context of
gaming.    The  illustrative snippets below  were    taken from   video of  classroom activities and post   activity
interviews across two years of the project. As a whole, they suggest that the gaming origins of the technology
made a difference in how students participated in and talked about what they were doing in the classroom. This
influence is subtle and likely would have gone unnoticed except that it showed up on tape repeatedly across
classes, and often during gaps between more formally organized activities ­ such as during set up or testing of
technology as students were preparing to use the remotes in their projects. Classroom video was revisited and
coded for general reference to physics and the technology. Excerpts that contained direct references to gaming
were further coded, revealing six general ways repurposing helped link children's social and scientific worlds.

Linking technological affordances to core concepts in science
The tools used in these activities are ultimately useful because of the inherent deep connections between the
core functions of game controller components, the action on screen, and core curricular concepts. For example,
the force sensors in handheld game controllers such as the Wii Remote measure acceleration across three axes,
and take into account the force of gravity. Core mathematics skills involving graphing, algebraic functions, and
the mathematics   of change   are  deeply connected   to the data  stream  the game  controllers emit, as are core
concepts in physics such as position, velocity, and positive and negative acceleration.
        Most   importantly,   this data stream   is accessible and flexible. It can be  harvested  and   interpreted
according to students' learning contexts, and readily pairs with their own laptops or other Bluetooth-enabled
devices. While commercially available demonstration cars and other pre-formulated technologies display data
related to force and acceleration, this technology is expensive (at the time of writing, approximately $400 per

© ISLS                                                                                                        290
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                           Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

car) and its display output is limited. Data cannot be saved, aggregated or easily shared. By harvesting data from
the game controllers, we are not only able to use custom data visualizations to directly address issues students
were struggling with, but also take advantage of hidden `hooks' into the curriculum. For example, gravity is a
difficult concept in part because unless something is falling, students don't `see' it in action. Even after studying
gravitational force, students often base their explanations on their everyday intuitions that gravity is something
that `happens' when you drop something. The force sensor in the game controller measures gravity along the Z-
axis, of course  whether  or not    the device is  moving.  The  following  vignette  illustrates how  this offers an
accidental learning opportunity. In the interaction below, one student, while pairing the Wii remote with his
computer for the mousetrap car activity, noticed a line marking "1" along the Z axis:

         Student 1 (assuming he had paired with another team's Wii): "But I'm not moving it. Why
         does it say one? Wait, stop shaking the table. Maybe that is someone else's?"
         Student 2 (grabbing the Wii and shaking it): "No. Look!"
         Student 1: "It's stuck... no..."
         Teacher (passing by): "You aren't touching it, but are any forces acting on it?"
         Student 2: (after some time playing to figure out what the Z axis represented): "Gravity?"
         Student 2: "No, but it's not falling ..."
         Teacher (swinging the Wii like a tennis racquet): "Ok. The force sensor measures the force
         you move it with, so it can know how hard you hit it but also any other forces acting on it.
         Is gravity acting on it right now? ... What else is acting on it? Why isn't it falling?...

This interaction lead to a rich discussion of the force of the table exerted on the device, the general concept of
the `normal force,' and to how the Wii tennis game takes gravity into account. Exploration with the tool and a
mathematical representation of its data stream led students towards exploration of core ideas of physics and the
mathematics of change.

Linking social worlds to science worlds
Certainly other technologies, such as sensors attached to Arduino boards or photogate systems described in
physics education catalogs are also available and similarly useful for harvesting and representing data. Besides
the convenient form factor and cost savings, what is the advantage of using everyday familiar technologies such
as game   controllers in classrooms?    While  visualizations of   the  output of the technology's   components    led
students toward discussion related to math and science, the social gaming context of the device led to students
forging connections across contexts that we think led to further encounters with these ideas in action in their
everyday lives. The choice to repurpose a well-known game controller as the device to reveal data related to
force, acceleration, and velocity mattered to students' interactions. We have observed that while the activities
themselves  presented  students  with   data, graphs, and   `discrepant events'   (Nussbaum   &   Novick,  1982) that
helped them confront and develop their lay opinions and intuitions about physics, often the way in which they
came to interpret these events was by synthesizing their new observations with their prior experiences of using
the technology for gaming. This cross-contextual synthesis appears to have played a role in students' everyday
thinking with scientific principles. The following general categories emerged as relevant to the value of the
`everydayness' of these tools for math and science learning.

Expertise is connected to `felt' experiences and intuitions
Students' experiences with game controllers are for the most part felt experiences; they learn to swing an on-
screen tennis racquet by feeling the relationship between the motion of the controller in their hand and the visual
feedback they receive onscreen. Through felt experiences they develop intuitions about the way the game works
as well as the way the Wii Remote works. For example, in Wii gaming, expert players often make only small,
quick movements with the device, rather than the broad sweeping strokes of a novice swinging an on screen
racquet. While experienced players have a felt sense of the difference, they often don't "know" why their
techniques work. This presents rich fodder for discussions that link everyday intuitions and experiences with
core principles:

         Student: "No, it's like (flicking the Wii remote and pointing to the screen that shows a
         graph   of change  in acceleration   over time)... it's not   how far. It's like how  much   it's
         changing ... see... (moving hand steadily at a constant rate, producing a relatively flat line).
         See...  cause it's flat... cause it's not changing   it's just moving    steady. Like when   you
         swing... you know you can just go... (flicks it again, causing a sharp peak on screen) ...
         `cause it's not how big the swing is, it's just like, how hard you do it, how quick (flicking
         several times). Like, I mean in tennis, if you know what you're doing you just flick it to hit
         it hard."

© ISLS                                                                                                           291
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                          Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

Ready at hand, easy to use, and draws on familiar metaphors
Gaming technologies have been designed to be ready at hand for students' play. They are easy to set up, easy to
use, easy to remember. Students feel they "know" them, and are not concerned with breaking them or worried
about learning anything new to set them up. Because of their prior experiences, in general students had an
orientation towards   efficient set up and  troubleshooting.  Generally,  their familiarity with the metaphors   of
`pairing' and `sensing' provided anchors for getting everyone on board. However, some metaphors provided
fodder for rich discussion when they broke down. Although facilitating the practical set up of a game console,
some terms, like `sensor bar,' are misleading when it comes to science and engineering. Discussion of the
`sensor bar' provided an opportunity to analyze not only how the game worked, but the forces at play in its
marketing:

       Instructor: "So, what is this?"
       Students: "A sensor bar!"
       Instructor: "Sensor? What does it sense?"
       Student 1: "LEDs."
       Student 2: "Like, the position of the Wii thing."
       Instructor: "So, where is the LED?"
       Student 3 (eventually, after some disagreement): "In the sensor bar!"
       Instructor: "Ok, in the `sensor bar.' So where is the sensor?"
       Student 1: "In the Wii!"
       Instructor: "So, there is a camera in the Wii remote, and infra red LEDs in the `sensor bar.'
       Why do you think Nintendo calls it a sensor bar?"

While generally the culture of gaming provided analogies for students to draw on in their learning of physics, in
this case, terms used in the culture of Wii gaming obfuscated the functionality of the device. Metaphors, as
cultural tools, needed to be explicitly redefined in order for students to understand how the game and the photo
gate system worked. The students agreed to use the term "LED bar" in class rather than sensor bar. Several
students reported telling their friends outside of school not to call it a sensor bar as well, thus bringing ideas
from class back into a gaming context.

Socially situated and meaningful to students' interests
Handheld game controllers are `social' tools that students use in groups. They are closely connected to the
interests and concerns of students, and students spend a great deal of time learning the values and culture of
game play from each other. This gives them a positive social valence and connects `science' to students' social
worlds outside of school. Availability in out-of-school times and contexts helps blur the boundaries between
learning and play; students can hack their game controllers at home as well as at school. For those with strong
interests in gaming (or hacking), this can lead to discussions of the math or science of game controllers with
parents and friends in multiple contexts.
       While most gaming is social, `embodied' gaming via handheld game controllers is perhaps more social
than most. Students move dynamically in teams, often in direct or peripheral physical contact with each other.
They value being able to play well, and keep track of details of set up, scoring points, and techniques that show
expertise.  In classroom    conversations we    found this sociality bled into  physics talk ­ students frequently
referenced or mimed game play in the classroom while talking about science. In addition, students reported
talking about science with siblings, parents and friends while setting up or playing the game at home. This
blurring of boundaries between students' social and scientific worlds we think is likely productive for future
learning. If knowing the science behind gaming devices becomes part of their gaming cultures, students may be
more likely    to integrate science into  their everyday   worlds and  future plans. Examples  of this  blurring of
boundaries of time, place and social context show up repeatedly in video recordings of students' talk in class.
Two examples:

       Student: "Hey, maybe we could all come over to my house. I have a big TV and I live just
       over there. We could bring science class over and we could like, do Wii gaming and stuff at
       home after school. `Cause we'd have more time and it would be more fun to, you know, do
       it outside of here."
       Researcher: "That's an interesting idea. We could do some things after school here if you
       think kids would like that."
       Student: "Yeah, but at home we have snacks and my other friends could come. It would be
       more fun."

       Student: (smiling) "Hey, you guys kind of ruined the game for me. ..."

© ISLS                                                                                                       292
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                        Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

       Researcher: "Why?"
       Student: "Because now every time I swing, its like I don't really see the racquet move, I see
       acceleration in my mind. Like, I swing to hit the ball, but in my head a graph shows up. It's
       really distracting. And, like, my friends don't really want to hear all about acceleration
       when they're playing."
       Researcher: "Do you talk about it with your friends?"
       Student: "Well, I showed them on the laptop what we were doing and we played... They
       [thought it was] cool, like, that I could connect it to my laptop."

Event based and therefore evocative of storytelling
Things `happen' in games. Games have beginnings, middles, ends, as well as heroes and heroines. Experiences
of gaming are memorable and get repeated in stories of great achievements and defeats. Students draw on these
stories and memories of past experiences when encountering the technology in new contexts, providing rich
fodder as supporting analogies for learning.
       In the classroom, students told stories about their gaming achievements and adventures, occasionally
reinterpreting them using concepts they are learning in science class. These stories served as cultural resources,
so that the gaming technology supporting not only the goal of activity, but also ongoing cultural change as
dramatic stories played a role in knitting together students' social memories and emerging understandings.

       Student: "One time, when I was beating my brother, he came after me and threw it at my
       head. But, like when he did that, it whizzed across the room but in the right time, so like on
       the screen he scored the winning shot. My family always jokes about that... he had to throw
       it at me to win. I guess it, like, accelerated just right?"

Elicits more general `imagineering'
The act of repurposing itself is an inventive and creative act. It requires the re-envisioning of one thing for
completely new purposes.  This  kind of      deconstructive and     reconstructive thinking often leads to further
episodes of `imagineering' and design. Because the project-based classroom we were working in had a focus on
design, we conducted several brainstorming sessions with students, asking them to invent other ways they could
use the technology for their own ends. Students came up with creative answers such as using the IR camera for a
"mom detector," an "automated pet feeding mechanism," and a "Halloween candy counter." They used the
accelerometer to design a means of determining a pet's activity level, and a "little brother running in the house"
alarm, etc. Several technically minded students rewrote sections of our code to change the interface, and got
intrigued with the practical possibilities for building some of these `imagineered' designs. Sometimes students
expressed changing identities in relation to imagineering. For example, in a casual debriefing interview toward
the end of the school year, a student was asked what she learned:

       Student (laughs teasingly)...: well... to play the game better!
       Researcher (teasing): "Well, at least something we did together was useful then..."
       Student: Well, really I wasn't into it. I wasn't very good before. At tennis, I mean... (long
       pause)... I think I'll make a game one day. Do you know the light saber one?"
       Researcher: (shakes head no)
       Student: "I found it online. Like... well you can pair your Wii remote to this game a guy
       made. Then your Wii acts like a light saber. It's.. well real simple... like someone just made
       it. You don't have to be a big company, really, if you have you know, the stuff. I mean, if
       you know how to get into it... and anyone can download it online for free."

Reveals everyday invisible processes/ data
Games rely on the interpretation of a data stream to construct visualizations that enable play. Students who hack
gaming technology gain an understanding of what data is, how it is useful, and why it's valuable to be able to
collect lots of it over time. They start to `see' the data that drives much of the technology that makes up their
mediated worlds, and through looking at the computer code that processes it, start to understand why digital
things look and act the way they do. One simple example among many: A student asked, "So, what about the
remote control to my TV? Is that Bluetooth too? And what is it sending... like a number or something for the
computer in the TV to change the channel?"

Discussion
       These interactions illustrate why, in certain contexts, repurposing everyday devices for science and
math learning may make more sense than using specialized, unfamiliar technologies. This may be particularly
true for middle school age children, who generally are constructing and asserting both social and academic/

© ISLS                                                                                                       293
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                               Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

mathematical/scientific   identities  that  carry  through   into their high    school  years. By  bringing    artifacts  and
context from children's social worlds into the classroom, we are able to draw on their interests, cultural supports
and expertise to support inquiry. Of course, in so doing children begin to construct new cultural experiences,
ones  imbued    with  science, that  also   spill over  into their   social worlds   outside   of school.    Not only    does
harnessing familiar technologies offer students opportunities to informally synthesize prior experiences, but it
also offers them `prior' experiences to draw upon when they next encounter the tool in a gaming context.
Tapping  into   the game   controller   as  a cultural  as well   as scientific tool offers   cultural  groundings   for  the
scientific understanding of future informal gaming experiences. While the one student joked that we "ruined"
the game for him, his experiences appear to have opened up, or perhaps reinforced, pathways towards a socially
supported identity as not only a gamer, but also as someone who knows science and knows how to code.
         For those interested in learning design for CSCL, this raises questions about the plethora of devices
beyond game controllers that technological affordances and hold potential for tapping into social contexts to
support children's exploration of fundamental STEM concepts. With what supports and interfaces, and in what
contexts, could other everyday data-enabled devices be positioned to make science concepts more "culturally
available" (Roth, 1994, 1999) in everyday experience? Our study of learning with game controllers indicated
that  several factors   might  be worth     noting  when   considering   harnessing     other  everyday    technologies   for
learning. Engaging with tools that are socially situated, that tap into felt experiences, that draw upon prior
technical expertise and narratives, that bring hidden processes to light and that call these into future possibilities
via `imagineering' sketching and talk might offer children opportunities to more deeply connect their social
identities with math and science.
         Although this study indicates that adapting everyday technologies in the interests of math and science
curricula is useful, at a technical level it isn't yet easy. It is only recently that three forces have come together to
make innovation work. A growing number of manufacturers have opened up APIs to software developers, who
have  enthusiastically  developed    middleware    and  published    "how   to" videos  and    articles to   support a  more
general, and  growing,   DIY   (Do   It Yourself)   movement      that includes  creative individuals,   component      retail
outlets, art organizations, and tech enthusiasts. Open scripting languages such as Processing that facilitate the
rapid generation of code have helped interested people develop useful software quickly and inexpensively. Even
more  critical,  easily downloaded      middleware   such    as "Osculator,"    has  enabled   Bluetooth     pairing of  Wii
Remotes to a computer so data is accessible.
         While these efforts have launched a hacking movement that has started to be picked up by teachers,
there is still little ongoing communication between classroom teachers and those enthusiasts who are developing
tools that make     everyday   devices   accessible.    Having    spent several   years  conducting     these  activities in
classrooms with teachers and students, we would like to suggest that applying learning design, and not just
usability design, would help make it easier for classroom teachers to take advantage of the technologies that are
available in the interests of math and science. Several basic technical design considerations would be helpful for
supporting learning. Among these of course include prioritizing social and collaborative features; building with
transparency    in mind;  bringing   cultures   of science   (terms,   metaphors    and  analogies)     into `play'  to  map
affordances   to   core science   and   math   concepts;   and    offering  alternative  interfaces  to  support     multiple
representations of data, from game characters in motion to graphs that represent change over time.

Conclusion
One of the major struggles in science education is creating contexts in which all students, regardless of gender
or social background, can see themselves as connected to science. Facilitating "science talk" (Lemke, 1990) and
"transformative    conversations"  (Polman     &   Pea, 2001)   in   everyday   interaction   can help  students    forge an
identity as investigators and inventors in science and engineering. Using gaming or other social technologies for
scientific inquiry holds promise for integrating students' playful identities with their emerging identities as
scientific investigators, thinkers, and inventors. In addition to integrating their social worlds into gaming, they
also brought their experiences of science back into their social worlds. We see this as a kind of identity work by
which students expand their sense of possible future selves.
         We'd like to conclude by raising a large open set of possibilities for CSCL research. Computational
and sensing technology is increasingly embedded in everyday items. This means that everyday items contain
components with deep affordances for teaching science and mathematics. As increasing numbers of students are
learning outside of school, via online courses, via their own online research, or by tinkering and hacking on their
own, this raises large opportunities and questions for the field of technology design. If game controllers, with
the addition of learning design interfaces, hold the possibility to lead students toward physics, what about other
devices? What would a hammer look like that was not only designed for usability to be ready-at-hand for
hammering, but also designed for learning about kinetic and potential energy? What if it could lead a user not
only  how  to   hammer   efficiently,   but reveal  the fundamental     principles   of physics   on   which   such  motion
functions? Or, what design factors could be added to a merry-go-round to help riders understand centrifugal
force? What collaborative features could be built in? For DIY enthusiasts interested in learning, what interfaces

© ISLS                                                                                                                   294
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                        Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

and components   would   make   everyday  objects embedded   in our social  worlds  not only     usable, but deeply
conceptually and socially instructional? As core education is increasingly distributed in out of school contexts, it
is time to start considering how everyday things might lend themselves to teaching the fundamentals students
need to know. After all, they will be using science and mathematics to invent the next, newest everyday things.

References
Barron, B., Martin, C., Roberts, E., Osipovich, A., & Ross, M. (2002). Assisting and assessing the development
        of technological fluencies: Insights from a project-based approach to teaching computer science. In
        Proceedings of the Conference on Computer Support for Collaborative Learning, 668-669.
Brown,  A.L.   (1992). Design  Experiments:  Theoretical  and  methodological   challenges   in   creating complex
        interventions in classroom settings. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 2(2), 141­178.
De Bruyn, L., Leman, M., and Moelants, D. (2008). Quantifying childrens' embodiment of musical rhythm in
        individual  and   group settings. In  Proceedings   of  the 10th International   Conference       on  Music
        Perception and Cognition, 662-667.
Druin, A. (1999). Cooperative inquiry: developing new technologies for children with children. In Proceedings
        of the ACM conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 592-599.
Edelson, D.C. (2002). Design research: What we learn when we engage in design. Journal of the Learning
        Sciences, 11(1), 105­121.
Graves, L.,  Stratton, G.,  Ridgers, N.D., and    Cable, N.T.  (2007). Comparison    of  energy       expenditure in
        adolescents when playing new generation and sedentary computer games: cross sectional study. BMJ
        335(7633), 1282-1284.
Hill, C.S. (2009). Developing psychomotor skills the Wii way. Science 323(5918), 1169.
Hornecker, E., and Buur, J. (2006). Getting a grip on tangible interaction: a framework on physical space and
        social interaction. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems,
        437-446.
Inkpen, K.M. (1999). Designing handheld technologies for kids. Personal and Ubiquitous Computing 3(1), 81-
        89.
Iwata, S. (2010). Corporate management policy briefing semi-annual financial results briefing for FY ending
        March 2001. Public presentation, October 29, 2010, Tokyo Japan.
        http://www.nintendo.co.jp/ir/en/library /events/101029/index.html
Lee, J.C. (2008). Hacking the Nintendo Wii Remote. Pervasive Computing, IEEE, 7(3), 39-45.
Lemke, J. L. (1990). Talking Science: Language, Learning, and Values (Vol. 1). Ablex Pub.
Lewis, S., Acholonu, U., & Ju, W. (2012). Using low cost game controllers to capture data for 6th grade science
        labs. In Proceedings of the ACM 2012 conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work, 1115-
        1124.
Norman, D. (2002). The Design of Everyday Things. Basic books.
Nussbaum, J & Novick, S. (1982). Alternative frameworks, conceptual conflict and accommodation: Toward a
        principled teaching strategy. Instructional Science, 11(3), 183-200.
Polman, J.  L., &   Pea, R. D. (2001). Transformative    communication   as  a cultural tool     for guiding inquiry
        science. Science Education, 85(3), 223-238.
Pearson, E. and Bailey, C. (2007). Evaluating the potential of the Nintendo Wii to support disabled students in
        education. ICT: Providing choices for learning: Proceedings ascilite Singapore 2007.
Rode, J.A., Stringer, M., Toye, E.F., Simpson, A.R., and Blackwell, A.F. (2003). Curriculum-focused design.
        Proceedings of the 2003 Conference on Interaction Design and Children, 119-126.
Roth, W.M. (1994). Experimenting in a constructivist high school physics laboratory. Journal of research in
        Science Teaching, 31(2), 197-223.
Roth, W.M., McGinn, M. K., Woszczyna, C., & Boutonne, S. (1999). Differential participation during science
        conversations: The interaction of focal artifacts, social configuration, and physical arrangements. The
        Journal of the Learning Sciences, 8(3-4), 293-347.
Somers, W., Rooney, F., and Ochoa, R. (2009). Introductory Physics Experiments Using the Wiimote. Bulletin
        of the American Physical Society, 54.
Vannoni, M. and Straulino, S. (2007). Low-cost accelerometers for physics experiments. European Journal of
        Physics 28(5), 781.
Wheeler, M.D. (2011). Physics experiments with Nintendo Wii controllers. Physics Education, 46(1), 57.
Williams,  A.,  and Rosner,  D.K. (2010).  Wiimote   hackery   studio proposal.  In Proceedings       of the Fourth
        International Conference on Tangible, Embedded, and Embodied Interaction, 365-368.

Acknowledgments
We wish to acknowledge Terry Winograd and the Wallenberg Foundation for their generous assistance with this
research, as well as the teachers and students for their time, creative ideas and contributions.

© ISLS                                                                                                         295
