CSCL 2013 Proceedings                  Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

      Transforming the Learning Difficulties to Teaching Moments

  Mi Song Kim, Xiaoxuan Ye, Nayang Technological University, 1 Nanyang Walk, misong.kim@gmail.com

          Abstract:   This study aims  to uncover     what  knowledge    is  brought   forth in  an  embodied
          modeling mediated activity by prospective teachers (PT) and how these learning experiences
          are connected   with their teaching  practices   in an  informal    learning  context.  We   employ
          qualitative methodologies   to  investigate these   questions. Finding   shows     that based   upon
          learning-through-modeling experiences, PTs effectively transformed their learning difficulties
          to valuable teaching moments for their workshop participants. Implications of this study are
          discussed.

Introduction
Previous studies have shown that despite of affordances of modeling-based learning and teaching, most teachers
experience difficulties (Kenyon, Davis & Hug, 2011). Through adopting a design-based research, we have co-
designed an 'Embodied Modeling Mediated Activity' (EMMA) with an experienced teacher in informal learning
contexts to offer observation-based authentic experiences and related follow-up multimodal modeling activities
for prospective teachers (PTs) in informal learning contexts. We hope to not only provide PTs with modeling-
based learning experiences but also offer them opportunities to co-design and conduct EMMA activities. The
study specifically looks into what knowledge is brought forth in an embodied modeling mediated activity by
prospective teachers (PT) and how these learning experiences are connected with their teaching practices in an
informal astronomy workshop concerning the concept of size and distance.

Theoretical Background
The concept of size and distance has been under-researched and even under-taught (Lelliott & Rollnick, 2009).
Students' difficulty lies with their lack of life experiences related to vast distance and misinterpretation of their
observation   (Bakas  &   Mikropoulus, 2003).  Modeling-based     learning    has been   proved   to improve   students'
conceptual   understanding   (Kenyon,  Davis   & Hug,   2011).   Creating    opportunities   for students to   teach can
promote their content knowledge and pedagogical content knowledge as well as maximizing their potential
(Cortese, 2005). Our project has endeavored to provide the workshop participants with teaching experiences
based upon their learning experience in EMMA workshops.

Methods
Five  youth   volunteers  as PTs   (aged  17-18) were   engaged     in  this qualitative study.   The  commitment      of
conducting an astronomy workshop through participating in the EMMA I and II workshops motivated them to
equip  themselves    with  astronomy  content  and pedagogical      knowledge.    Their  learning   activities were    co-
designed by the research team and one expert physics teacher (HJ, pseudonym) with strong interests and rich
content knowledge in Astronomy. EMMA III was specifically designed toward authentic, embodied experiences
of sky observation and multimodal modeling activities situated in an overseas field trip. Finally, EMMA IV was
designed for PTs to conduct an astronomy workshop in a community center for facilitating 30 secondary school
students. For  deeper  understanding   of PT's   learning   and teaching  experiences,   multiple    data sources  were
collected such as videotaping of the workshops, artifacts, surveys concerning PTs' perceptions of the nature of
science and   metamodeling,    post-interview, and field   notes. Data   were  analyzed    using  constant  comparison
methods (Strauss & Corbin, 1990). Three researchers went through an iterative process of the following steps
using NVivo. First, modeling processes were identified in the EMMA III and IV workshops. Secondly, episodes
were  defined  based   on  astronomy  related  topics in  a   group discussion.   Thirdly,   micro-level  analysis   was
conducted to understand how PTs' learning experiences were connected with their teaching practices.

Findings
During the EMMA III workshop, the mentor, HJ, intentionally put forward a geocentric model argument and
asked PTs to construct their models to prove that his geocentric model of planets was wrong. While constructing
their planet  models,  PTs   faced two   main  difficulties and   their actual  teaching   indicated  their  abilities to
transform their own learning difficulties to teaching moments, as elaborated in the following findings.

Making both Distance and Size on the Same Scale
In EMMA III, HJ purposefully encouraged PTs to combine both the distance and size of the planets on the same
scale for constructing the model. PTs' initial model was poorly scaled (Figure 1). After receiving feedbacks
from HJ, they started to appreciate the vast celestial scales and applied the strategy of eliminating oversize or
distant objects to make their scaling model feasible for construction (Figure 2).

© ISLS                                                                                                               289
CSCL 2013 Proceedings               Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

       Figure 1. PT's initial model in EMMA III.           Figure 2. PT's revised model in EMMA III
This allowed them to pay more attention on the accuracy of distance and size, which in turn decided to create a
guided modeling activity for their own students in which the topics of `size' and `distance' were separately
introduced rather than combining them in a same scale. PTs guided the workshop participants by questioning
about the accuracy of their models. Hence, the workshop participants improved the accuracy in scaling (Figure
4) compared to their initial model of the planets arranged at a same distance from each other (Figure 3).

   Figure 3. Participants' initial poorly-scaled model   Figure 4. Participants' revised better-scaled model

Using models to explain observations from different perspectives
To debate with HJ's argument of the geocentric model, PTs needed to reconstruct their initial model (Figure 5)
that simply represented the alignment of planets that appeared in the sky photo. HJ advised PTs to use a red pin
to represent their position on the Earth so as to help them perceive 3D spatial perspectives. PTs eventually
revised their model that was able to explain why the Moon appeared higher and bigger than Jupiter (Figure 6).
The revised model showed they have transformed the 2D representation with 3D spatial reasoning.

Figure 5. Planetary alignment model before revision    Figure 6. Planetary alignment model after revision
Based on their own hands-on modeling learning experiences, PTs effectively employed a real-time simulated
observation picture to generate an argument and requested the workshop participants to argue each other using
their own models. Although most workshop participants tended to pay more attention on displaying factual
information without making connections with their models explicitly, it is worth mentioning that PTs noticed
the explanatory power of models and explicitly asked the workshop participants not only to use the model to
explain their reasoning but also to address the limitation of their own models.

Discussion and Implication
Modeling of   planets required PTs to understand  the  complex   interrelationships  among  distances, sizes and
positions of celestial objects, as well as viewing them in different perspectives. Hence, this study demonstrates
that observation integration in multimodal modeling affords PTs to overcome their learning difficulties and
develop spatial reasoning. As indicated above, PTs designed activities for engaging participants in experiencing,
collaborating and arguing through  modeling   rather than direct teaching. This    implies the important   role of
teachers' authentic learning experiences.

References
Bakas, C., & Mikropoulos, T. A. (2003). Design of virtual environments for the comprehension of planetary
       phenomena based on students' ideas. International Journal of Science Education, 25(8), 949-967.
Cortese, C. G. (2005). Learning through teaching. Management Learning, 36(1), 87-115.
Kenyon, L., Davis, E. A., & Hug, B. (2011). Design approaches to support pre-service teachers in scientific
       modeling. Journal of Science Teacher Education, 22, 1-21.
Strauss, A. and Corbin, J. (1990). Basics of qualitative research: Grounded theory procedures and techniques.
       Sage Publications.

© ISLS                                                                                                       290
