CSCL 2013 Proceedings                  Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

  Supporting Student Choice and Collaborative Decision-Making
                           During Science Inquiry Investigations
    Jennifer King Chen, Graduate School of Education, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA,
                                              jykchen@berkeley.edu

          Abstract:   This study investigates the  impact of providing   students with opportunities  for
          collaborative choice-making   during  inquiry learning with Investigating  Seasons, an    online
          curriculum module. Two versions of Seasons (no-choice and choice) was implemented with
          ten classes of high school students (N = 207). Study findings indicate that students in the
          choice condition demonstrated greater gains in their conceptual understanding of seasons as
          well as   a higher increase  in normative  written explanations   compared   to the no-choice
          students.

Introduction and Rationale
Despite research documenting the tremendous benefits of introducing more authentic forms of inquiry into the
classroom (e.g., White & Frederiksen, 1998), most science teachers do not have the adequate classroom time or
resources to involve their students in independent inquiry investigations and are forced to turn instead to the use
of linear step-by-step "cookbook labs" that bear little resemblance to authentic inquiry practices.
          The Seasons unit aims to strike a balance between rigorously structured "cookbook" inquiry (lacking in
rich learning outcomes but easier to implement) and inquiry that is more authentic and open-ended (highly
challenging to  implement    but with  potentially more  powerful  learning outcomes)   by incorporating   student
choice. Allowing students to choose and decide upon their own inquiry paths "accommodates and values the
diversity" of learners; "by allowing for multiple entry points and multiple paths, all students ultimately come
into proximity to core learning goals, with richer and deeper learning experiences" (Murata, 2012, p. 20). In
addition, in making their choices, student pairs are given the opportunity to collaboratively discuss and compare
their developing ideas together.
          This study explores the effect of providing choice during inquiry and considers research questions such
as: How does providing students with the option to choose their own path of inquiry investigations affect their
learning  and  conceptual  understanding  of  seasons?  Does instruction that scaffolds students'   choice-making
result in improved learning outcomes for students? If so, why is providing choice effective for learning?

Theoretical Framework
This research work adopts a constructivist perspective towards learning, in which the pre-existing ideas that
learners have are viewed as productive starting points for instruction to leverage towards more scientifically
valid and integrated understandings of challenging science ideas and concepts (Smith, diSessa, & Roschelle,
1993). For example, while changing distance between the Earth and the Sun is the primary misconception about
seasons cited in the research literature, it is not the only strongly held misconception. A survey that this author
administered to 9th grade earth science students (N = 102) revealed that nearly just as many students cite
Earth's orientation towards or away from the Sun as the primary cause of seasons (N = 30; 29%) as those who
mention the changing Sun-Earth distance (N = 32; 31%), suggesting that inquiry instruction on the seasons
should be flexible and adaptable enough to acknowledge and address the variety of starting prior ideas across all
students.

Methods
Investigating  Seasons,  a   ten-hour WISE    (Web-based   Inquiry Science    Environment)  curriculum     module,
incorporates interactive dynamic visualizations and instructional scaffolding to support students in conducting
experiments, collecting data, and integrating their diverse ideas for explaining seasonal temperature changes.
The unit contains five inquiry investigations covering key concepts central to understanding the phenomenon of
seasonal temperature changes.
          For this study, two versions of Seasons (no-choice and choice) was used with ten classes of ninth-grade
earth science students (N = 207) at a socially and economically diverse high school in California. Students
worked through the unit in pairs. The no-choice version of Seasons presented students with the five inquiry
investigations in a preset order. The choice version of the curriculum, in contrast, allowed student pairs to
decide upon and choose their next investigation together. In particular, students in the choice condition were
encouraged to discuss their ideas with one another in order to come to an agreement as to which of the five
investigations to complete next (see Figure 1).

© ISLS                                                                                                        291
CSCL 2013 Proceedings               Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

  Figure 1. Student pairs were encouraged to discuss and decide together which investigation to choose next.

Results
Students were administered individual pre- and post-unit tests. Explanations were scored on a scale from 0-4
using a knowledge integration (KI) rubric which rewards the number of valid scientific connections present in
the explanation (Linn, Lee, Tinker, Husic, & Chiu, 2006). Analysis of pre- and post-test explanations revealed
higher levels of knowledge integration for students in the choice condition. Students in the choice condition
made moderate, significant pre- to post-test gains (M = 1.49, SD = 0.79 (pre); M = 1.91, SD = 0.92 (post);
t(109) = 3.70, p < 0.001, d = 0.49) while students in the no-choice condition demonstrated small pre- to post-test
gains (M = 1.46, SD = 0.70 (pre); M = 1.69, SD = 0.83 (post); t(76) = 1.84, p = 0.07, d = 0.30). Furthermore,
students in the choice condition demonstrated a greater percentage in both increase of normative explanations
(from 24%  to 41%)    and decrease of non-normative    explanations     (63%  to 50%)  compared    to their study
counterparts; for the no-choice students, the percentage of both normative explanations (from 29% to 32%) and
non-normative explanations  (63%   to 58%)  remained   roughly      the same  pre- and  post-unit. One   possible
explanation for these findings is that since choice students were encouraged to discuss their ideas together
before deciding on their next investigation, they may have more actively engaged in comparing and reflecting
upon their developing ideas about seasons. Further in-depth analyses using other collected data sources (e.g.,
videotaped data of student pairs working together) may help to further inform and contextualize these findings.

Significance of Study
Research indicates that the benefits of successfully engaging students in more authentic and open-ended forms
of inquiry are numerous. Providing students with the opportunity to make choices during their own inquiry
learning can help to support diverse and unique paths of learning for different students while also encouraging
the collaborative exchange of ideas between students during choice-making. Hopefully the findings from this
study will in turn spark rich and productive discussions among session participants about how to design science
instruction that can effectively promote student choice and collaborative discussion during inquiry and learning.

References
Abd-El-Khalick, F., Boujaoude, S., Duschl, R., Lederman, N. G., Mamlok-Naaman, R., Hofstein, A., Niaz, M.,
        Treagust, D., Tuan, H.-L.  (2004). Inquiry  in science   education:  International perspectives. Science
        Education, 88(3), 397-419.
Linn, M. C., Lee, H. ­S., Tinker, R., Husic, F., & Chiu, J. L. (2006). Teaching and assessing knowledge
        integration. Science, 313(5790), 1049-1050.
Murata, A. (2012).  Diversity and   high   academic  expectations     without tracking: Inclusively   responsive
        instruction. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 1-24.
National Research Council (NRC). (2012). Next Generation Science Standards May 2012 Public Draft.
Smith, J. P., diSessa, A. A., & Roschelle, J. (1993). Misconceptions reconceived: A constructivist analysis of
        knowledge in transition. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 3(2), 115-163.
White, B. Y., & Frederiksen, J. R. (1998). Inquiry, modeling, and metacognition: Making science accessible to
        all students. Cognition and Instruction, 16(1), 3-118.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported in part by a National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship. In addition, I
would like to thank Marcia Linn, the members of the Linn Research Group, Barbara White, and the Concord
Consortium for their assistance and contributions to this research.

© ISLS                                                                                                       292
