CSCL 2013 Proceedings                    Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

       Treasure-HIT: Supporting Outdoor Collaborative Activities
                              with Mobile Treasure Hunt Games
  Dan Kohen-Vacs, Miky Ronen, Shavit Cohen, Holon Institute of Technology, 52 Golomb Street, POB 305
                  Holon 58102, Israel, mrkohen@hit.ac.il, ronen@hit.ac.il, shavitc@hit.ac.il

         Abstract: Treasure-HIT is an environment that aims to support the design and enactment of
         location based games conducted via mobile phones. The system allows teachers to define a set
         of  locations (using  Google    Maps  and  Google  Street   APIs), to attach clues that  direct  the
         players to the locations and to conduct specific activities at each location. The system will be
         tested with teachers designing outdoor learning activities for the subject My Village as part of
         the national curriculum for elementary schools. In the poster session we shall demonstrate the
         functionalities   and potential of   the system  for designing  outdoor   collaborative  activities,
         present examples of games designed by teachers and discuss insights gained from the pilot
         study with teachers and students.

Introduction
Recent   advancements    in mobile  technology     provide new   opportunities  to  design  innovative    pedagogical
activities that expand beyond the boundaries of the traditional classroom (Sébastien & Audrey, 2011). These
activities could be enacted across learning planes and include sequenced interactions performed across various
physical  spaces involving     different group    size of  participants  (Giemza,   2012;   Vavoula  et   al., 2009).
Technological support could be enabled across these activity planes providing students with a meaningful and
seamless learning experience (Chan et al., 2006).
One of the approaches of combining the outdoor space in learning is by treasure hunt type games. In such
games,   participants  are challenged  to  identify  specific sites  according  to clues  and to  reach   these sites.
Educational treasure hunt games represent a cross plane pedagogical approach that introduces students with
location based learning experiences (Kukulska-Hulme, 2008). This approach was traditionally enacted without
any technological support (Eliot, 1926). Recent developments of mobile technologies offer new opportunities to
provide direct support for such games by: tracking participants' locations in real time, presenting the game clues
in various multimedia formats, enactment of pre-planned interactive activities related to the sites, collecting and
sharing digital information contributed by the participants,     communication between participants and with the
game's instructor and controlling the activity by the game manager. This potential was recently exploited for the
design of  educational   treasure hunt   type games,   supported by   mobile   technology (Spikol  &  Milrad,   2008;
Hooper & Rettberg, 2011; Tol, 2008).
We present an attempt to design and develop a pedagogical treasure hunt environment enabling teachers to
design cross planes activities taking advantage of the mobile devices commonly available to students.

Design a Game with Treasure-HIT
Treasure-HIT is an authoring system aimed to enable teachers to design and enact outdoor activities that are
supported  by GPS     enabled  mobile  devices.    These  activities may resemble   the  classic treasure hunt  game
presented as a competition between teams or as a collaborative effort of teams to identify and reach a final
destination.
         The system includes two main components: an authoring web environment used by teachers to design
activities and the player's mobile application environment used by the participants (students) during the game
enactment.
  The author web interface provides the ability to define a set of landmarks (stations) by using embedded
Google Maps and Google Street View API features and to present clues leading the players to the station. The
clues can be formulated using any type of media: text, image, video, website and sound.     In addition, the teacher
can attach specific tasks to be performed by the players at each station, as a condition for advancing in the
game. The tasks may include quizzes of various kinds and data collection for further collaborative use. Figure 1
presents an example of the station authoring interface.    In this example, students will be offered with two clues:
some textual information about the station and a visual hint.       When arriving at the station the players will be
presented with two quiz questions and a task to be performed on site, aimed to collect and share information
with other participants.
         The player application supports most popular mobile operating systems and has to be installed in the
personal device prior to its use.  Players access a specific game by using unique code provided by the teacher.

© ISLS                                                                                                           295
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                 Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

Initial instructions will be presented and clue/s leading to the first station. The player checks if he arrived at the
desired location by activating the GPS tracking (Fig. 1). If detected within the tolerance range from the defined
location the game continues according to the designed scenario: tasks attached to this station are presented, and
after their completion the system will provide clues to the next station.
       The teacher can define the game scenario by setting the order of presentation of the stations to the
groups. The order can be identical for all identical of different. For instance, if the game is played across ten
stations, the route of each team may include only four different stations, while the end station is identical to all.
The author environment allows teachers to share games and use them as pedagogical resources. Teachers can
view games created by other authors and adopt each other's games.

        Figure 1. The station authoring interface and an example of a mobile display during the game.

The first version of Treasure-HIT will be tested with teachers and students during the current academic year.
The system  will support   outdoor activities designed  for the subject    "My    Village", a topic included in the
national curriculum for elementary schools.    Teachers will design games adapted to their villages, aiming to
familiarize students with important sites of interest in their close vicinity.
       In the poster session we shall demonstrate the functionalities and potential of the system for designing
outdoor collaborative activities, present examples of games designed by teachers and discuss insights gained
from the pilot study with teachers and students.

References
Chan T.W., Roschelle J., Hsi S., Kinshuk, Sharples M., Brown T., Patton C., Cherniavsky J., Pea R., Norris C.,
       Soloway E., Balacheff N., Scardamalia M., Dillenbourg P., Looi C.K., Milrad M. & Hoope U. (2006).
       One-to-one technology enhanced learning: an opportunity for global research collaboration. Research
       and Practice in Technology Enhanced Learning 1, 3­29.
Elliott, H. (1926). The Educational Work of the Museum. The Metropolitan Museum of Art Bulletin, 21(9),
       202-217
Giemza A.,  Verheyen   P., Hoppe   H. U. (2012).   Challenges   in  Scaling     Mobile Learning  Applications:  The
       Example of Quizzer, IEEE International Conference on Wireless, Mobile, and Ubiquitous Technology
       in Education, 287-291.
Hooper, C. J. and Rettberg, J. W. (2011). Experiences with Geographical Collaborative Systems: Playfulness in
       Geosocial Networks and Geocaching. In: Please enjoy workshop at Mobile HCI.
Kukulska-Hulme, A., & Traxler, J. (2005). Mobile Learning: A Handbook for Educators and Trainers. Great
       Britain: The Cromwell Press.
Sébastien, G., Audrey,   S.,  Introducing.    (2011). Mobility  in   Serious     Games:  Enhancing    Situated  and
       Collaborative Learning, in J.A. Jacko (Ed.): Human-Computer Interaction, Part IV, HCI.
Spikol, D., & Milrad, M. (2008). Physical activities and playful learning using mobile games. World Scientific
       Publishing Company & Asia-Pacific Society for Computers in Education. 3(3), 275­295.
Tol, R. (2008). The Mobile City Conference: Architecture, Politics, Paranoia and Art, 8.
Vavoula G., Sharples M., Rudman P., Meek J. & Lonsdale P. (2009). Myartspace: Design and evaluation of
       support   for learning with  multimedia    phones   between   classrooms     and museums,    Computers   and
       Education, vol. 53(2), 286-299

© ISLS                                                                                                          296
