CSCL 2013 Proceedings                   Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

 Evaluating Virtual Collaboration Over Time ­ A Pilot Field Study
       Birgitta Kopp and Heinz Mandl, Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Leopoldstr. 13, 80802 Munich,
                            Email: birgitta.kopp@psy.lmu.de, heinz.mandl@psy.lmu.de

       Abstract: This pilot field study investigated the evaluation of virtual collaboration and of
       support    methods    over  time asking  32   undergraduates  studying pedagogy    with a   survey
       questionnaire at three points of time. Results indicate a specific evaluation pattern showing
       that  at   all three points of time,   taking responsibility was  evaluated  lowest. Furthermore,
       correlation    analyses   showed  that  the   support of designing  group    work was   connected
       significantly with taking responsibility indicating a positive influence for supporting virtual
       collaboration.

Introduction and Theoretical Background
In CSCL research, there is insufficient discussion on learners' subjective perception of the collaboration process
and of support methods. Furthermore, the question is how learner's evaluation on these two dimensions changes
over a period of time. Another issue is to look at the correlations between virtual collaboration and support
methods. Therefore, this paper deals with these three issues.
       Looking at the collaboration process first, main dimensions include the task and the social level of
collaboration. The task level involves goal orientation and task completion, the social level group cohesion and
taking responsibility (Kauffeld, 2001). The main issue is to see how these dimensions develop in evaluation
over time.
       Second, as virtual collaboration needs support we included two support methods, namely the design of
group work (the assignment of roles and group rules), and providing feedback on the performance and worked
examples to see, how these means are effective for online collaboration.
       Third,   looking   at the  theoretical and  empirical  background,  there is no  indication on how   group
members themselves evaluate their collaboration over time and whether there are changes regarding group
processes. Furthermore, the development of support on collaboration over a period of time has not yet been
investigated. Specifically, the question is whether support is more effective at the beginning than at the end.

Research Questions
Based on the theoretical background, we investigated three research questions, namely
   1.  How do students evaluate virtual collaboration and support methods?
   2.  To what extent do evaluations differ over time?
   3.  To what extent do the design of group work and feedback correlate with virtual collaboration over time
       in terms of goal orientation, task completion, cohesion, and taking responsibility?

Method

Object of Investigation
We investigated the seminar on "Attachment Theory". Didactically, the seminar followed a problem-based
approach   asking learners   to apply collaboratively  their theoretical knowledge   to  authentic problems     from
multiple perspectives and contexts in the field. To support online collaboration, we included two methods:
designing the group work (assignment of roles, and definition of group rules), and providing learners with
feedback (feedback on the individual group's solution, and worked examples).

Sample and Design of the Study
Thirty-two undergraduate students majoring in pedagogy took part in the survey study. They were divided
randomly into eight groups with four members. All students filled in an online questionnaire regarding support
methods and the virtual online collaboration at three points of measurement beginning five weeks after the start
of the seminar and continuing two more times every four weeks.

Data Sources
We developed a questionnaire focusing on online collaboration and support methods. To evaluate collaboration,
we used the questionnaire for teamwork by Kauffeld (2001) with four dimensions, namely at the task level, goal
orientation and task completion, and at the social level, group cohesion and taking responsibility. We used a six-
point Likert scale ranging from 1 ("do not agree") to 6 ("totally agree"). To measure support methods, we used
again a six-point-Likert scale from 1 ("not effective at all") to 6 ("very effective") asking how effective certain
support was for group work.

© ISLS                                                                                                          297
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                   Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

Data Analyses
In a first step, we calculated the descriptive statistics of the relevant dimensions at the three different points in
time. Second, we looked at differences between the single dimensions using t-tests for paired samples. In a third
step, we calculated the differences of the single dimensions between the three points of time using t-tests for
paired samples. Fourth, we correlated the dimensions on collaboration with the dimensions of support methods
using a Pearson's one-way correlation analysis. The level of significance was .05.

Results
Research Question 1
Students evaluated virtual collaboration and support methods on a very high level with low standard deviation at
all three time intervals. T-test analyses showed significant differences at all three points of time, showing that
taking responsibility was evaluated lowest, followed by goal orientation. Regarding support methods there was
only one significant difference at the first point of measurement (t(31)=2.57; p<.05).

Research Question 2
Looking at the development of the virtual collaboration, the evaluation remains homogenous. T-Test showed
one significant difference between the first and second point of time, namely between the evaluation of task
completion (t(29)=2.15; p<.05). Looking at the support methods, there was also one difference between the first
and second point of time in the evaluation of providing feedback (t(29)=-2.97; p<.01).

Research Question 3
Results show that group design positively correlates with all four dimensions of collaboration at the first and
second point of time, and with the two social dimensions of group cohesion and taking responsibility at the third
point of time. These correlations are significant. The correlation is on a medium to high level with the highest
scores at the second point of measurement. Providing feedback significantly correlates only once with taking
responsibility at the first point of measurement. There were no further correlations between support methods
and the collaboration process.

Discussion
There are  three main   results: First, the evaluation shows a  specific pattern. Looking   at collaboration, task
completion  was  evaluated  highest,    followed by group  cohesion, goal  orientation, ant taking  responsibility
indicating that possibly not all group members feel in the same way responsible to fulfill their joint group
solution, eventually due to the missing social presence in virtual learning environments. Nevertheless, the main
purpose of the virtual seminar to solve tasks together was very much internalized by the students. Regarding
support methods, the design of group work was evaluated higher than providing feedback, which also stayed
stable over time. A reason for this may be that group design affects the collaboration process itself, while the
feedback was given after the respective task completion which may be of interest for the next task solution, but
not for the direct collaboration process. Second, regarding the development of the virtual collaboration, the
evaluation of group processes and of support methods stayed almost stable over time. Third, group design
correlates almost always with all dimensions of the collaboration. The design of group work influenced directly
the group processes. Looking at the extent of the correlation numbers, they are highest at the second point of
measurement. This may be explained with the stages in group process by Tuckman (1965). Possibly, in the
middle of the semester, the groups were in the storming and norming stage, in which concrete rules how to
collaborate and a moderator who leads the group process, is of great relevance for the learners. Because of this,
support and group processes were highly related to each other.

Educational Significance
Results indicate that according to the subjective evaluation data, there is a positive relation between support
methods and group interaction which justifies the necessity of support for computer learning even based on this
subjective evaluation   data.  Especially   problematic social phenomena    are   strongly  related to the given
instructions of group design. Therefore, support that affects the collaboration process is an essential part in
virtual collaboration.

References
Kauffeld, S. (2001). Teamdiagnose. Göttingen: Verlag für Angewandte Psychologie.
Tuckman, B.W. (1965). Developmental sequence in small groups. Psychological Bulletin, 63(6), 384-399.

© ISLS                                                                                                        298
