CSCL 2013 Proceedings                 Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

      iSocial: Collaborative Distance Education for Special Needs
    James M. Laffey, Janine Stichter, Krista Galyen, Xianhui Wang, Nan Ding, Ryan Babiuch, Joe Griffin,
                                      University of Missouri, Columbia
       LaffeyJ@missouri.edu, SticherJ@missouri.edu, galyenk@gmail.com, xw7t4@mail.missouri.edu,
                ndtwb@mail.mizzou.edu, Babiuchr@missouri.edu, jggmr2@mail.missouri.edu

        Abstract:   iSocial is  an innovative   3D Collaborative   Virtual Learning  Environment      (3D
        CVLE) to provide access to educational programming for students with special needs who
        live in small and rural school districts. The research reported here is part of a design research
        process for developing virtual learning systems to improve learning for students with special
        needs who live in rural/small districts. A field test of iSocial with 11 students shows promise,
        but also identifies challenges for distance education with 3D collaborative virtual learning.

Introduction
Distance Education (DE) is a growing phenomenon in small and rural schools (nearly 10 million students attend
rural schools) as a means   for meeting student  needs for  courses  such  as foreign languages and      advanced
placement. DE also has the potential to bring specialized curriculum and teaching to students with special needs.
Unfortunately typical DE is limited in how it provides support for affective and social learning (Rice, 2006)
which is often critical to addressing students with special needs. A form of DE that can be highly engaging and
social is 3-dimensional collaborative virtual learning environments (3D CVLEs). With a grant from the Institute
of Education Sciences, the iSocial project is developing a 3D CVLE for building social competence for youth
with a diagnosis of Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) who do not have ready access to such interventions in
their local schools and communities. iSocial is a translation of a curriculum (Social-Competence Intervention
for Adolescents, SCI-A) delivered in face-to-face sessions with demonstrated efficacy for the target students
into a 3D CVLE for delivery over the Internet. In the process of undertaking this translation our team has
designed solutions for: (1) assuring fidelity between the 3D CVLE experience and the cognitive and behavioral
processes and   objectives of  the face-to-face curriculum  implementation,   (2) encouraging, supporting     and
sustaining appropriate social behavior and interaction in the virtual world, especially considering that our target
students have social limitations, and (3) building social competence on the part of the students in ways that will
improve their social functioning in school and in their community.

3D CVLE and youth with ASD
In 3D  CVLEs    students represented by an avatar   enter a 3D scene  with   objects and other avatars     using a
networked computer. Collaboration is supported by students being able to see each other's (and the teacher's)
avatars, manipulate objects in the VLE, interact through movement and gesture via their avatars, and use voice
to speak to each other. Through these mechanisms, the medium can support DE that brings students together for
peer interaction, experiential learning through collaborative effort, and guidance by an expert teacher.
        The iSocial VLE (Laffey et al., 2009) delivers the SCI-A curriculum over the Internet to allow youth
from small and rural schools to come together with an expert teacher in a DE course. The students take 34
lessons of 45 minutes each with lessons scheduled for 2 to 3 times per week. The lessons are packaged in 5
curriculum units: facial expression, sharing ideas, turn taking, feelings and emotions, and problem solving and
delivered in a series of 3D virtual worlds. Each unit is a sequence of collaborative activities to learn about and
practice new social competencies. The units culminate in a naturalistic practice activity that encourages and
requires the students to work together and use their new competencies to accomplish a task or solve a problem.

Methods
Three school districts worked with the iSocial team to identify qualified students, schedule an appropriate time
for instruction, provide on-site personnel for supervision and technology support, and resolve technology issues
such as providing sufficiently powerful computer stations and network bandwidth as well as providing access
through school firewalls. Eleven students, who met the target qualifications, were enrolled in one of 3 courses (n
= 4, 4 & 3). A standardized measure of social competency for youth with ASD, the Social Responsiveness
Scales (SRS; Constantino & Gruber, 2005), was completed 2 weeks prior to instruction and 2 weeks after
instruction.

Findings
The outcomes data for the SRS instrument are presented in Table 1 with improvement indicated by score
decreases from pre to post assessment. Keeping in mind that the total sample is small for statistical comparisons,
and that caution must be applied to any conclusions drawn, we find interesting variety in the distribution of

© ISLS                                                                                                        299
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                     Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

outcomes across the school sites. Schools 1 and 2 show substantial improvements in parent ratings, especially
when  compared     to  results for school  3. Schools  1  and  3  show   improved     teacher   ratings especially when
compared to school 2. The results show that social competence can manifest itself differently at school or at
home. For each school, and in turn each individual, the impact of iSocial may manifest itself differently. For
example one student at school 2 improved dramatically based on the parent rating but was rated more negatively
by the teacher from pre to post. We find these outcomes data to be promising in that they indicate that iSocial is
generally associated with improved social competence, and in some cases substantially improved outcomes.
However, the data also suggest that there is more to be understood about whether it is possible and under what
conditions we could expect consistently positive results.

Table 1. iSocial Field Test pre and post measures for learning outcomes.
Instrument                     School 1 - N=4                School 2 - N=3                 School 3 - N=4

                               Pre          Post             Pre           Post             Pre              Post

Parent SRS Total (a)               114.50          81.25           95.00          55.00            94.00           90.50
Teacher SRS Total (a)               90.50          62.25           77.67          76.33            106.50          95.50

Discussion
The successful implementation of iSocial (11 students completed the iSocial course via DE) and student gains
on measures of social competence show significant promise for using 3D VLE as DE for students in small and
rural communities.     Whether   students would   be social  and  whether  the online    teacher   could  manage   social
behavior in the VLE were substantial challenges for the project. Through a design research process we learned
and subsequently implemented design features for the VLE which support the forms of social practices needed
for implementing    the  curriculum   (Schmidt,   Laffey  &  Stichter, 2011).  While   results  of  our  pilot study  are
promising  we     have also identified substantial   challenges  to implementing      an innovative     technology-based
program    in small   and  rural schools.  For  example   technology    failures, some    minor    such   as brief audio
interruptions and some major including system crashes, were frequently encountered. Each student averaged 2.3
incidences    per lesson  (Laffey, Stichter   and Galyen,   2013).  In general    the incidences   were   fairly  quickly
addressed  and    students  were able  to complete   lessons, but   teaching and  learning    time  was   reduced, some
students became     frustrated with   the system  implementation,   and  vigilant  attention    to support   was  needed
(approximately 1/3 of TURIs required some form of technical assistance). Some of the technology issues can be
attributed to  the  pilot  nature  of our   software system,    but others   stem  from     the somewhat     fragile and
idiosyncratic  natures   of technology    infrastructures in  schools.  Each   school    in the  pilot  had  a   different
technology profile and a different level and set of technology issues Applications like iSocial require high and
consistently performing networks, graphics and processing capabilities. The potential for 3D CVLE to meet the
special needs of students is impeded by the limits of and variability across technology infrastructures of schools.
         More students need to participate in iSocial and be tested for outcomes before claims can be made
about the significance of outcomes. However, analysis of achievement on the standardized measure of social
competence shows the promise of addressing special needs through 3D CVLE using DE. The success of 3D
CVLE, as resilient learning systems for DE that resonate with the social, affective and cognitive needs of the
teacher and learners, however, will ultimately be determined by how well the various aspects of curriculum
translation, technology innovation and school infrastructure can be integrated for meeting student needs.

References
Rice, K. (2006). A Comprehensive Look at Distance Education in the K­12 Context. Journal of Research on
         Technology in Education. V38, #4, 425-448.
Laffey, J., Stichter, J., Galyen, K (2013). Distance Learning for Students with Special Needs through 3D Virtual
         Learning. Paper accepted for the annual meeting of the American Educational Research Association,
         San Francisco. (SIG ­ARVEL).
Laffey, J., Schmidt, M., Stichter, J., Schmidt, C. & Goggins, S. (2009). iSocial: A 3D VLE for Youth with
         Autism. Proceedings of CSCL 2009, Rhodes, Greece.
Schmidt, M., Laffey, J. & Stichter, J. (2011). Virtual Social Competence Instruction for Individuals with Autism
         Spectrum Disorders: Beyond the Single-User Experience. Proceedings of CSCL 2011, Hong Kong,
         China.
Acknowledgment
The research reported here was supported by the Institute of Education Sciences, U.S. Department of Education,
through Grant R324A090197 to the University of Missouri. The opinions expressed are those of the authors and
do not represent views of the Institute or the U.S. Department of Education.

© ISLS                                                                                                               300
