CSCL 2013 Proceedings                   Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

Toward a Qualitative Approach to Examining Idea Improvement in
                              Knowledge-building Discourse
  Ella L.F. Fu, Jan van Aalst, Carol K.K. Chan, The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong, China
                          Email: ellaflf@hku.hk, vanaalst@hku.hk, ckkchan@hku.hk

         Abstract: We report an exploratory study of discourse analysis, focusing on explaining the
         analytic approach. It is argued that most knowledge-building studies have taken a cognitively-
         oriented approach to examine collaborative discourse; therefore their findings do not shed
         light on  how  idea  improvement      is accomplished   socially. The   study  employs    thematic
         narrative analysis to address how idea improvement comes about. The paper ends with a
         discussion of the value of this approach.

Introduction
Among the theories of collaborative learning, knowledge building (Scardamalia & Bereiter, 2006) has unique
emphases    on enabling student  to  be  in control  of  their own   learning,  progressive inquiry    aimed at  idea
improvement, a shared goal to advance the collective state of knowledge in a community, and the use of a web-
based  knowledge-building   environment,    Knowledge    Forum®.     Due  to these  unique  emphases,   knowledge-
building discourse is progressive, which reflects the process of how community knowledge is improved over
time. van Aalst (2009) has hightlighted the importance of developing a clear account to characterize the nature
of knowledge-building discourse, which can faciliate the integration of CSCL into classroom practice. In the
past five years, a large scale project "Developing a Teacher Community for Classroom Innovation Through
Knowledge Building" (Chan, 2011), produced numerous Knowledge Forum databases; it has provided rich
resources for us to explore and characterize the nature of knowledge-building discourse.
         In this paper, we present an in-progress study of discourse analysis drawing from the aforementioned
project. The central problem we address is: how is an idea improved in knowledge-building discourse over time?
This problem   involves the   issues of socio-cognitive  dynamics    in a  community   and  relates to  some  of  the
fundamental questions in CSCL, such as group cognition (Stahl, 2003), and intersubjective meaning making
(Suthers, 2006b). To tackle this problem, we first characterize knowledge-building discourse along a number of
dimensions and then make abductive inferences to interpret variations of general patterns of interaction. Such
patterns reveal  sequential  organization   of  interactions   that are regarded   as productive    or  unproductive
collaboration. They are particular valuable for improving pedagogical designs of CSCL, as there are scant
instances of sustained productive interactions in computer-mediated discourse (van Aalst, 2009).
         Even though many prior studies on knowledge building measured the quality of idea in knowledge-
building discourse, this study argues that methods used in those studies do not allow researchers to fully take
into account   of  the  fundamental     assumption   of  knowledge     building theory:  collective    knowledge   is
progressively improved in a community over time. Therefore this study takes a different approach to analyze
knowledge-building  discourse.  Most    of  the   knowledge-building    studies that  closely examined    computer-
mediated  discourse have  taken  a   cognitive-oriented  approach.   They  examined   the  quality  of  discourse by
following the procedures of content analysis suggested by Chi (1997), in which discourse is segmented into
standardized units and then each unit is assigned to theoretically derived, mutually exclusive categories. The
coding scheme is the backbone of content analysis (Titscher, Meyer, Wodak, & Vetter, 2000), and the schemes
developed in those studies have revealed many important insights into the dimensions of discourse. After a
comprehensive review, coding schemes were developed around three major foci: subject matter (e.g. clothing
design, Lahti, Seitamaa-Hakkarainen, & Hakkarainen, 2004), theoretical framework (e.g. knowledge-building
principles, Zhang, Scardamalia, Lamon, Messina, & Reeve, 2007), and cognitive performance (e.g. depth of
explanation, Lee, Chan, & van Aalst, 2006). However, these coding schemes do not shed light on processes of
idea improvement because of the inherent limitations in content analysis. The limitations include discarding the
semantics, sequential, structural, and situational information about the process of collaboration, which have
been widely acknowledged (Stahl, 2002; Suthers, 2006a).
         This study takes a social-cultural approach to study collaborative discourse. In this approach, social
interaction constitutes the focus of the analysis, rather than retreats to the background of analysis (Arnseth &
Ludvigsen, 2006). The majority of CSCL studies taking this approach have employed conversation analysis (ten
Have,  2007).  For  instance, they   tried to  track the  process   of  convergence   (Roschelle,  1992), to  reveal
participants' methods to call something into doubt (Koschmann et al., 2005), to uncover how a small group
make use of the technological affordances of a dual-interaction space (Perit Çakir, Zemel, & Stahl, 2009), and to
study the verbal and nonverbal aspects of interactional patterns in group learning (Sawyer, 2006). Conversation
analysis is mainly  used in   synchronous,   small  group conversations,   with  special  transcription conventions
indicating non-verbal aspect of the interactions. However, Knowledge Forum is a text-based, asynchronous

© ISLS                                                                                                            30
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                 Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

discussion platform used by a whole class of students. Conversation analysis is an inappropriate method for
analyzing knowledge-building    discourse.  Instead, this study  employs     narrative     analysis to  configure  a
succession of interactions to produce explanatory stories of how idea improvement comes about.

Methodology
Research Context and Participants
The data in this study was taken from the aforementioned project. The data comprised asynchronous discourse
from three Knowledge Forum views from three classrooms: Grade 5 Science (matters and power; 38 students;
346 notes), Grade 10 Visual Art (community arts; 19 students; 292 notes), and Grade 10 Liberal studies (mixed
classes advanced discussion political engagement; 82 students; 126 notes). These views were created during
academic year of 2010-2011. Thus we employed purposeful sampling; the selection criteria were high build-on
levels and rich discussion content, as judged by the first author. The reason for such criteria was to select the
views that were likely to show productive collaborative interactions.

Research Context and Participants
This study has employed narrative analysis to examine knowledge-building discourse. Narrative displays human
projects as situated actions in which participants purposefully engage, and it configures a series of events and
actions into goal-directed processes (Polkinghorne, 1995). The focus of narrative analysis is on agency and
intention through close examination of each case (Riessman, 2008). Narrative typically involves an original
state of affairs, a series of events, and the consequent state of affairs (Czarniawska, 1998). The series of events
are connected chronologically and thematically by means of a plot. The plot provides the narrative structure that
describes the relationships between the events and their contributions to the consequent state of affairs. There
can be different types of plots to connect the events, for example how a group of students success or fail in
sustaining productive interactions. The data in this study did not come in storied form. The analysis composed
the data and produced them into storied form (Polkinghorne, 1995). This study strived to address the problem of
how idea improvement comes about. This study has employed thematic narrative analysis (Riessman, 2008),
focusing on what was said in the Knowledge Forum database. In other words, the analysis did not emphasize
how the discourse was produced in the classroom conditions and the non-verbal aspect of communications.
        The method comprised a two stages analysis with different levels of granularity in each stage. However,
before the analysis, the computer notes needed to be pre-processed for coding, and were arranged in inquiry
threads for the subsequent analysis. The first-stage analysis was a qualitative coding, in order to characterize
knowledge-building discourse along a number of dimensions. The unit of coding was an event (an action). The
second-stage analysis was narrative analysis, in order to identify meaningful patterns of interaction in relation to
idea development.   The unit of narrative was a collaborative episode, consisting of a series of temporal events
identified in the first-stage analysis. Each of the analytic steps is explained following.

Pre-processing the Collaborative Discourse into Inquiry Threads
Knowledge  Forum    supports asynchronous   conversation  for a whole   class of students      and  provides flexible
build-on functions; therefore, the discourse flow has incoherencies. For example, a threaded discussion may
contain multiple  inquiry  problems;  a  problem may  be  addressed   across  multiple     threaded discussions.  To
circumvent this problem, notes in Knowledge Forum database were restructured into inquiry threads.         Zhang et
al. (2007) have defined an inquiry thread "as a series of notes that address a shared principal problem and
constitute a conceptual stream in a community knowledge space" (p. 125). In other words, notes that addressed
a same problem were grouped to an inquiry thread, regardless of their original thread structure. We read the note
content several times to identify the major problems investigated in the views. We then grouped them together
accordingly. As the inquiry threads became the context for the subsequent coding and analysis, the sequence of
notes preserved the order in which the notes were created. The sequence of notes in an inquiry thread followed
semantic chronological order, in which notes were placed in sequence, first according to their thread structure
and second their   time of creation  (Wise &  Chiu,  2011). Therefore,  the  meaning       of an utterance could  be
interpreted within an on-going discourse, and the nuances and contextual resources used to sustain the inquiry
could be traced in the inquiry threads. The notes were carefully paced in sequence with annotations, assisted by
Atlas.ti (Computer Assisted Qualitative Data Analysis Software).

First-stage Analysis: Qualitative Coding
The coding process started with a theory-driven approach, and then followed by a data-driven approach. First,
the 7 major discourse dimensions in van Aalst (2009) study were adapted and they were further developed
theoretically. The 7 dimensions     were agency, community,   idea,   meta-discourse,      information, linking, and
question. Second, the theoretical ideas and the original coding scheme in van Aalst (2009) study were used to
guide the coding process assisted by Atlas.ti. The first author studied the inquiry threads one by one and focused

© ISLS                                                                                                            31
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                  Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

on coding one discourse dimensions each time. She started with the most well defined dimension (idea) and
ended with the least defined dimension (metadiscourse). As the coding process followed the qualitative tradition,
the collaborative discourse was not standardized to fix unit of analysis. Instead, the unit of analysis was an event:
an action or interaction. An event did not have a fix length, and it might contain a word, sentence, note, or
multiple notes, depending on the meaning of an event. The guiding idea was that an event itself needed to
contain enough  discourse   to be  meaningful     and  understandable   (Coffey   &  Atkinson, 1996).   While   events
included both collective actions and individual actions, the technique of simultaneous coding was employed,
which meant that events could be overlapped, nested, or embedded to one another (Saldana, 2009). This coding
technique  reflects the complex    and  intertwined    nature  of   social interactions. To  accurately  describe    the
empirical data, new events were added to the original coding schemes, while some sub-codes in the scheme
were deleted. Once there were changes in the event list, all of the data were coded again. When there were no
more changes to the event list, the similarities among coded segments in an event were identified and used to
develop the event descriptions. To ensure the accuracy of descriptions (credibility), the descriptions and coded
segments were given to another research student for "member check". In sum, the 7 discourse dimensions were
derived theoretically and 38 events were derived from the data. The events were developed based on all data in
this study, rather than only a small part of it.

Second-stage Analysis: Narrative Analysis
In narrative analysis, the aim is to explain why and how something has happened by means of configuring a
series of sequential   events that are consequential    for  what   happened    (Polkinghorne, 1988).   In this study,
narrative explanation   was developed   to account     for the cause   of  idea development.   The cause   referred  to
combinations  and   accumulations   of events    constituting  certain patterns  of social mechanisms.    The   unit of
narrative was a collaborative episode which involved multiple chronological events that were sustained enough
to show how an idea was evolved over time. One inquiry thread might contain more than one collaborative
episode, depending on the thread structure. Using a collaborative episode as a unit of analysis followed the idea
of group  cognition, according  to  which  knowledge       building emerges   from  group  interactions with  its own
methods and properties (Stahl, 2002). The narrative plots to configure the intentional and unintentional events
into a coherent whole   were   productive  and    unproductive  collaboration.   As  human   actions are  not entirely
replicable (Polkinghorne, 1995), there was a range of variations within each plot. The focus was on synthesizing
the collaborative episodes and preserving the unique characteristics of them. We first read the inquiry threads
one by one to identify collaborative episodes. We then assigned each collaborative episode to one of these four
groups: chat-chat, idea sharing, idea co-construction, and idea development. The episodes assigned to idea
development group needed to fulfill two criteria: (1) they at least contained one explanation event; (2) the
explanation event did not directly build onto the seed question of the thread. The reasons were that the thread
should contain rich content knowledge, and explanation event was the best type of idea in the code list, and that
the rich content should come out of collaborative interactions, rather than of an individual for answering the
seed question. This stage of analysis is work in progress.

Discussion
The study has taken the social-cultural approach to examine knowledge-building discourse, which has been
mainly  examined    by the cognitive-oriented     approach. The   study   has employed   thematic  narrative  analysis,
consisting of two-stages: qualitative coding and narrative explanation. Even though this study does not report its
findings, the analytic method allows the authors to conduct future studies. The direction of the future study is to
characterize the nature of knowledge-building discourse, in order to develop account of general patterns of
productive collaboration. The account is particularly valuable in pedagogical designs. As computer-mediated
collaborative inquiry   is widely   employed      in schooling,  the   conditions   and  mechanisms   for  productive
collaboration remind unclear. The patterns of productive knowledge-building discourse can inform researchers
where pedagogical supports are needed, and then they can design pedagogical supports to scaffold students
toward productive collaborative inquiry (Chan, 2011). And such patterns can also be taught to students as
criteria of formative assessment to monitor their process of collaborative inquiry (van Aalst & Chan, 2007).
Students are the agents in deciding how to react or respond as the inquiry unfolds; however, they may not be
aware of the collective nature of inquiry process as a whole. Students often only are aware of the quality of the
message they write, without being aware of where the line of inquiry is going. Thus, it is important to engage
students in formative assessment, so that they can continuously step back, assess, and reflect on the messages
they contributed to their community. The assessment criteria can help students to reflect on how their messages
affect the subsequent interactions and to decide what they should do in order to engage in knowledge creation.
This formative assessment is a promising tool to foster student metacognitive abilities.

© ISLS                                                                                                               32
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                    Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

Acknowledgements
The research was funded by a General Research Fund from the University Grants Council (Grant 740809H) in
Hong  Kong     entitled   "Developing  a  Teacher   Community   for   Classroom   Innovation Through     Knowledge
Building". We would like to express our thankfulness to the participating teachers and students of the KBTN
project.

References
Arnseth, H., & Ludvigsen, S. (2006). Approaching institutional contexts: systemic versus dialogic research in
         CSCL. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 1, 167-185.
Chan, C. K. K. (2011). Bridging research and practice: Implementing and sustaining knowledge building in
         Hong Kong classrooms. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 6, 147-
         186.
Chi, M. T. H. (1997). Quantifying qualitative analysis of verbal data: A practicl guide. Journal of the Learning
         Sciences, 6, 271-315.
Coffey,  A.,  &   Atkinson, P.   (1996). Making  sense  of  qualitative data: Complementary     research strategies.
         Thousand Oaks: SAGE Publications.
Czarniawska, B. (1998). A narrative approach to organization studies. Thousand Oaks: Sage Publication.
Koschmann, T., Zemel, A., Conlee-Stevens, M., Young, N., Robbs, J., & Barnhart, A. (2005). How Do People
         Learn?    In R.  Bromme,   F.   Hesse &   H.  Spada  (Eds.),   Barriers and biases  in computer-mediated
         knowledge communication (Vol. 5, pp. 265-294) New York: Springer.
Lahti, H., Seitamaa-Hakkarainen, P., & Hakkarainen, K. (2004). Collaboration patterns in computer supported
         collaborative designing. Design Studies, 25, 351-371.
Lee, E. Y. C., Chan, C. K. K., & van Aalst, J. (2006). Students assessing their own collaborative knowledge
         building. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 1, 57-87.
Perit Çakir, M., Zemel, A., & Stahl, G. (2009). The joint organization of interaction within a multimodal CSCL
         medium. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 4, 115-149.
Polkinghorne, D. E. (1988). Narrative knowing and the human sciences. Albany, NY: State University of New
         York Press.
Polkinghorne, D. E. (1995). Narrative configuration in qualitative analysis. International Journal of Qualitative
         Studies in Education, 8, 5-23.
Riessman, C. K. (2008). Narrative methods for the human sciences. Los Angeles: SAGE.
Roschelle, J. (1992). Learning by collaborating: Convergent conceptual change. The Journal of the Learning
         Sciences, 2, 235-276.
Saldana, J. (2009). The coding manual for qualitative researchers. Los Angeles: SAGE.
Sawyer, R. K. (2006). Analyzing collaborative discourse. In R. K. Sawyer (Ed.), The cambridge handbook of
         the learning sciences. Cambrige: Cambrige University Press.
Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (2006). Knowledge building: Theory, pedagogy, and technology. In R. K.
         Sawyer    (Ed.),  The  Cambridge   handbook    of the learning  sciences  (pp. 97-115).  New    York, NY:
         Cambridge University Press.
Stahl, G. (2002). Rediscovering CSCL. In T. Koschmann, R. Hall & N. Miyake (Eds.), CSCL 2: Carrying
         forward the conversation (pp. 169­181). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Stahl, G. (2003). Group cognition: Computer support for building collaborative knowledge. Cambridge, MA:
         MIT Press.
Suthers,  D.     (2006a). A  qualitative   analysis  of  collaborative  knowledge    construction  through  shared
         representations. Research and Practice in Technology Enhanced Learning, 1, 1-28.
Suthers, D. (2006b). Technology affordances for intersubjective meaning making: A research agenda for CSCL.
         International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 1, 315-337.
ten Have, P. (2007). Doing conversation analysis. Los Angeles: Sage
Titscher, S., Meyer, M., Wodak, R., & Vetter, E. (2000). Methods of text and discourse analysis. London:
         SAGE Publications.
van Aalst,    J. (2009).  Distinguishing  knowledge-sharing,   knowledge-construction,    and   knowledge-creation
         discourses. Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 4, 259-287.
van Aalst, J., & Chan, C. K. K. (2007). Student-directed assessment of knowledge building using electronic
         portfolios. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 16, 175-220.
Wise, A., & Chiu, M. (2011). Analyzing temporal patterns of knowledge construction in a role-based online
         discussion. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 6, 445-470.
Zhang,   J., Scardamalia,   M.,  Lamon,   M.,  Messina,  R., &  Reeve,   R. (2007).  Socio-cognitive dynamics    of
         knowledge      building in the   work  of  9-  and  10-year-olds.  Educational  Technology  Research    &
         Development, 55, 117-145.

© ISLS                                                                                                          33
