CSCL 2013 Proceedings                  Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

           Supporting Self-regulated Learning with Moodle Forums
                Shiyu Liu, University of Minnesota, 56 East River Road, Minneapolis, MN 55455
                                             Email: liux0631@umn.edu
           Abstract: The present study investigates effective approaches to facilitate college students'
           self-regulated learning. Moodle forums were employed as a platform for students to develop
           metacognitive skills in the learning of psychology, and digital concept mapping was used to
           measure their conceptual knowledge. The findings suggest that discussions on Moodle forums
           enhanced students' awareness of their learning processes and facilitated the development of
           metacognitive  skills.  Active    participation  in  such  discussions    promoted     knowledge
           construction in concept mapping.

1. Introduction
Self-regulated learning is crucial in successful knowledge acquisition. It refers to self-directed actions in which
learners transform their mental abilities to attain goals (Zimmerman, 2000). To learn in a self-regulated manner,
learners need to monitor their effectiveness and improve their methods of learning accordingly. Since self-
regulated learning processes require in-depth reflection and sufficient motivation, they can be challenging for
individuals to achieve. Powerful learning environments can be facilitators for the acquisition of self-regulatory
skills (Boekaerts, 1999). Research has shown that technology-enhanced learning environments can help promote
self-regulation in structuring  knowledge    and  incorporating  new  information    (Dabbagh  &   Kitsantas,  2005).
However, it is still uncertain how we can effectively make use of them to facilitate self-regulated learning. Thus,
the present study aims to answer this question by employing a widely used online learning management system,
Moodle (Modular Object Oriented Dynamic Learning Environment).
           Based on the basic account of social constructivism (Bauersfeld, 1995), Moodle supports a variety of
online activities to make it easier for students to interact in real-time as a learning community, give each other
feedback   on  their learning  difficulties  and  provide   support  among  themselves    (Martin-Blas   &  Serrano-
Fernandez, 2009). While most previous work on Moodle mainly focuses on its usability, few studies have
evaluated Moodle's impact on students' learning processes. With an emphasis on self-regulated learning, the
present study   explores how   to  utilize  Moodle  to enhance   learners' metacognitive   skills and improve   their
conceptual learning. In particular, Moodle forums, an important tool for collaborative activities are used in this
study to   answer  two research   questions: 1)  How   do  students' self-regulated  learning strategies develop via
participating in Moodle forum discussions? and 2) How does the development of these learning strategies relate
to students' knowledge learning?

2. Methodology
Twenty-three college freshmen in a major Midwestern university participated in this study (mean age=17.5).
They were enrolled in an introductory psychology course and none of them had taken any psychology classes
before. All students were admitted into a special program in the university for being recent immigrants or from
low SES    families. The  majority  students  were   non-native  English   speakers  (18 Hmong,   2 Chinese,   and 3
African Americans). Over a span of 16 weeks, the students attended lectures twice a week, and each week they
learned one chapter in the textbook Psychology by David Myers (10th Eds). They were required to finish weekly
homework that consisted of two components: Moodle forum discussions and concept mapping. First, a Moodle
forum was designed each week for students to reflect on and share their study strategies as well as giving each
other feedback. Upon completion of the discussions, students were expected to construct a concept map (Novak
& Gowin, 1984) with the Cmap Tool (http://cmap.ihmc.us/download/) based on the content they learned in the
corresponding week.
           Students' self-regulated learning skills were measured by their discourses on the forums. The forum
posts were entered into a spreadsheet and analyzed with the grounded theory approach (Glaser & Strauss, 1967)
to identify the self-regulation strategies employed. To evaluate students' conceptual learning in psychology, the
weekly   concept   maps  were   analyzed    with the relational  scoring methods     (McClure  &   Bell, 1990).  The
propositions  were   entered into a spreadsheet   and  then  scored  based on  their completeness   and  correctness.
Computer-based concept mapping provides learners interactive access to knowledge elements and resources
represented by means of diagrams, and learners cognitive processes are thus exteriorized and visualized, which
makes   it more convenient   to   structure knowledge   and  regulate learning (Jonassen,  1992).   Therefore, using
concept maps as an assessment tool in this study can help obtain information regarding students' conceptual
understanding and levels of knowledge management.

3. Results and Discussions

© ISLS                                                                                                          303
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                  Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

On the basis of previous work by Zimmerman and Pons (1986), six strategies emerged from the analysis of
students' forum posts (see Table 1). Preliminary results reveal that, throughout their participation in the forum
discussions, students' self-regulation gradually  transitioned from  concerns  regarding   external factors (e.g.,
distractions in the environment) to internal factors (e.g., improving content learning skills). In particular, during
the first three weeks, most participant students initiated their discussions with a heavy emphasis on concerns
about time management and how to avoid external distracters. While a few students shared their strategies for
content learning, the majority showed uncertainty about applying effective basic study skills. This trend was
gradually replaced by increasing discussions that tap into the learning of course content. Starting from the fourth
week, students became apparently more aware of evaluating each other's study strategies, and sharing their own
experience in understanding a certain challenging topic or applying mnemonics to memorize vocabulary.
Table 1: Self-regulated Learning Strategies Used by the Participant Students
    Categories of Strategies                                     Example Responses
 Time Management                     I didn't have enough time to finish the reading. I should start early next
                                     time.
 Avoiding External Distractions      It's better that you go to the library to study as it is much quieter there.
 Seeking others' help                I want to join a study group as studying with others helps me understand
                                     the textbook better.
 Keeping Records                     I jot down things I do not understand during lecture and look them up later
 Rehearsing and Memorizing           I reread the textbook twice to help me remember the vocabulary.
 Using Complementing Materials       I'd suggest you use flashcards together with the study guide.

       Based   on the   frequency of   emerged self-regulation  strategies being discussed  in the  forum   posts,
students were categorized into two groups: High Self-regulation and Low Self-regulation. Preliminary analysis
of students' concept maps shows that, although there was no significant difference between the two groups in
the number of propositions included in the concept maps, the high self-regulation group scored significantly
higher than the low self-regulation students. In other words, students who more actively shared their study
strategies and evaluated others' learning showed better understanding of the concepts and their relationships. In
comparison, those who were experiencing difficulty monitoring their own learning or commenting on others'
posts tended to have more wrong propositions in their concept maps. Besides, the structure of their concept
maps showed fewer knowledge connections and hierarchy than the high self-regulation students.
       The present study takes a first step to exploring Moodle's role in facilitating students' self-regulated
learning. The findings, although preliminary, reveal how engaging in Moodle forum discussions may influence
the development of self-regulated learning strategies. More importantly, by introducing digital concept maps as
an assessment tool for learning outcome, this work provides important implications for postsecondary teaching
and learning in the subject of psychology.

References
Bauersfeld, H. (1995). The structuring of the structures: Development and function of mathematizing as a social
       practice. In L.P. Steffe and J. Gale (Eds.), Constructivism in education (pp. 137-158). Hillsdale. NJ:
       Erlbaum.
Boekaerts, M.  (1999).  Self-regulated  learning: where   we   are today.  International Journal of  Educational
       Research, 445-457.
Dabbagh, N., & Kitsantas, A. (2005). Using web-based pedagogical tools as scaffolds for self-regulated learning.
       Instructional Science, 33, 513-540.
Glaser, B.G., & Strauss, A.L. (1967). The discovery of grounded theory. Chicago: Aldine.
Martin-Blas, T., & Serrano-Fernandez, A. (2009). The role of new technologies in the learning process: Moodle
       as a teaching toll in physics. Computers & Education, 52, 35-44.
McClure, J.R., & Bell, P.E. (1990). Effects of an environmental education-related STS approach instruction on
       cognitive structures of peservice science teachers, University Park, PA: Pennsylvania State University.
Novak, J. D., & Gowin, D.B. (1984). Learning how to learn. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Zimmerman, B., & Pons, M. (1986). Development of a structured interview for assessing student use of self-
       regulated learning strategies. American Educational Research Journal, 23 (4), 614-628.
Zimmerman, B. (2000). Attainment of self-regulation: A social cognitive perspective. In M. Boekaerts, P.R.
       Pintrich,
       & M. Zeidner (Eds.), Handbook of self-regulation (pp. 13-39). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.

© ISLS                                                                                                       304
