CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                        Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

    Exploring Evolutionary Concepts with Immersive Simulations
                                          Michelle Lui, James D. Slotta,
                      University of Toronto, 252 Bloor Street West Toronto, Canada, ON,
                          Email: michelle.lui@utoronto.ca, jslotta@oise.utoronto.ca

         Abstract: This paper presents two iterations of our design of an immersive simulation and
         inquiry activity for exploring evolutionary concepts in a Grade 11 Biology course. Interacting
         with large projected displays of animated rainforest flora and fauna, students worked as "field
         researchers" to observe changes in life forms occurring over a 200 million year span. Students
         gathered   evidence of evolution    using   networked  tablet computers     that scaffolded their
         interactions with peers and with the room itself.   Improvements from the first to the second
         design iteration focused on (1) improving content-focused interactions within the simulation;
         (2)  improving  the integration  of  the simulation  activity into the overall    curriculum;  (3)
         improving   embodied   interactions  of  students working  within  the physical   space. Student
         explanations   from  the    second   implementation    demonstrated    increased     variation  in
         evolutionary topics compared to those in the first iteration. Key design features from the two
         iterations are discussed with respect to the observed interaction patterns.

Introduction
Evolution has been described as a central idea in understanding biology, accounting for fundamental issues
about how organisms came to their present form, explaining relatedness among different species, as well as how
certain traits are passed down and accumulated over many generations (Kampourakis & Zogza, 2008; National
Academies Press, 1998).  There are also strong links to understanding   evolution and learning about the nature of
science (Rudolph & Stewart, 1998). However, science topics of biological evolution are well recognized as
being challenging to teach, due in part to their complex systemic nature (Chi & Slotta, 2006), and students'
incoming ideas, which are often inconsistent with the scientific theory (Demastes, Good, & Peebles, 1995;
Mayr, 2002). The research literature on conceptual change in students' understanding of evolutionary biology
promotes a constructivist approach that takes into account students' epistemic positions (see for example, Alters
& Nelson, 2002; Anderson, 2007; Sandoval, 2003), yet it remains a challenge in determining how best to do
achieve this.
         One early example is that of the Biology Guided Inquiry Learning Environment (BGuILE), where
students were presented with a scientific challenge concerning a Galapagos island ecosystem, where the task
was to  find   out what was  killing some    of  the finches on the  island  (Reiser  et  al. 2001). A   technology
environment prompted students to formulate an evidence-based argument, helping them articulate questions and
support their explanations with data. BGuILE examined the causal claims made by students and how they
warranted these claims. Results showed that students were able to adopt explanatory goals and that scaffolding
students' attention to epistemic practices helped them to focus on evidence (Sandoval, 2003).
         Expanding on these ideas, Chinn and Buckland (2012) advocate a model-based inquiry approach, as
well as a stronger focus on macroevolution (i.e., evolution on a grand scale, as opposed to the smaller scale
processes within microevolution, such as allele frequency changes). However, such evolutionary phenomena are
not easily accessible to student manipulations within a classroom setting. The present study seeks to leverage
technology-enhanced learning environments in support complex and participatory forms of scientific inquiry
with macroevolutionary concepts.     Our research group at the University of [name withheld] has advanced the
concept of a "smart classroom," where the physical environment (e.g., walls, furniture, etc.) is infused with a set
of digital tools and materials to support student interactions across physical, social and curricular dimensions.
The room, together with various server and client technologies, serves to scaffold collaboration, enhancing real-
time face-to-face interactions, capturing and representing the collective contributions of the entire class. Inspired
by research in immersive virtual worlds, such as River City (Dede, 2009) and Second Life, we are investigating
an educative role for such immersive simulations, where students are immersed within a room-sized simulation,
and conceptual content is distributed across a spectrum of embedded technologies to support learning activities.
         Reminiscent of how students adopt "avatars" within online immersive environments, participatory
simulations also allow students to be embodied within particular roles. For example, students may become one
element  of  a complex  system, so   that the emergent  behavior  of   the system might    be  directly observed or
experienced (Wilensky & Stroup, 1999). Such participatory role-playing can be augmented with networked
technologies, such as wearable computers (e.g. "Thinking Tags") to help provide information to the participant
during the simulation (Colella, 2000; Resnick, 1996). In Colella's work, wearable "Thinking Tags" transformed
students into potential virus carriers whose mission was to greet as many people as they could without getting
"sick."  By participating in the process of viral transfer, Colella hoped that students could come to a deeper
understanding of the underlying concepts (i.e., of disease progression). In another approach called Embedded

© ISLS                                                                                                         304
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                            Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

Phenomenon, a persistent scientific simulation is embedded within the walls or floor of the classroom (Moher,
2008). Students are tasked with monitoring and manipulating the state of the simulation, requiring physical
interactions  within  their learning environment:    observing  and    measuring aspects  of   the simulation, forming
hypotheses, and gathering evidence to solve problem or answer questions
        Our own design of an immersive simulation builds upon this previous research, incorporating aspects
of participatory simulations     within our   learning  activities and  a sense  of full-body   immersion   though our
projected displays (together   with audio and  other ambient media).     The goal is to help students deeply engage in
scientific inquiry,  providing   them   with  opportunities to experience    evolutionary phenomena     that would  be
geographically   (Borneo)     and temporally  (200   million   years)  inaccessible to them,    otherwise.  This  paper
addresses the following research question: How can immersive environments and embodied interactions support
a co-located group of students to collaboratively develop their understanding of evolutionary concepts? We
designed EvoRoom, an immersive simulation of evolutionary biology in a Borneo rainforest, where students can
observe changes      in flora and  fauna  over  a 200   million    year time  period.  In addition  to  the  immersive
environment itself, we designed a set of learning activities for use within and outside the immersive simulation,
and worked closely with the teacher to tailor her curriculum so that the activities fit well in the sequence of topic
coverage (i.e., that the time spent in EvoRoom played a meaningful role in       the curriculum sequence).   The smart
classroom   technology    environment    served  to   orchestrate   our  complex    interaction design, delivering  all
materials, collecting student interactions, and supporting collaborations within EvoRoom as well as at home and
in the classroom. Here, we report on two iterations of our design-based research project, with findings from the
first incorporated into the second.     We report on students' inquiry experience, examine the content of their
explanations, and discuss the features of our environment and interactions that made it successful.

EvoRoom Design
To help students learn about evolution, we required a rich context that would engage them in the exploration of
macro-level evolutionary concepts while allowing enough flexibility to be tailored within our partner teacher's
curriculum. We decided on the context of a tropical rainforest, due to its clear connections to our target topics of
biodiversity and evolution, as well as the range of interesting features that would be well suited to an immersive
environment. Ultimately, we achieved EvoRoom (see Figure 1) where students enter a simulated rainforest as a
team of "field researchers," gathering evidence of evolution by comparing simulations from a range of time
periods. Working individually and in groups, students observed changes in life forms over time, consolidated
their findings as a collective community, and developed hypotheses about the evolutionary changes that might
have  taken   place. Students    observations (e.g., of ancestral  relationships or   patterns  amongst species),  their
consultation of field guides, their written reflections, and other activities were scaffolded throughout the activity
using  tablet computers     that and custom   software  application.    At the  front of  the  room  were  located two
interactive white boards, where we aggregated observations from all students, at all time periods, for purposes
of student reflection and teacher-led discussions.

   Figure 1. Large screen projections around the room displaying the immersive simulation, as well as audio
   tracks of natural rainforest sounds transform a smart classroom into a rainforest in Southeast Asia.

Methods
Following a design-based methodology (Brown, 1992; Design-Based Research Collective, 2003), the immersive
simulation was designed and evaluated over two iterations as part of a Grade 11 Biology course. Using a co-
design  method   (Penuel,     Roschelle, Shechtman,     2007),     our  team of  researchers,   designers,  technology
developers, and a high school teacher met regularly since January 2011 to develop curriculum activities and the

© ISLS                                                                                                             305
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                              Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

immersive simulation itself. The first iteration was evaluated in June 2011 as a pilot study, with the second
iteration implemented in the following Fall/Winter (2011-2012) semester as part of the Biology course.

Participants
The   first iteration was  conducted     with  eight   high-school student  volunteers  who  had  completed    Grade     11
Biology. The second iteration was an evaluative study, including 45 students from two class sections of Grade
11 Biology (taught by our co-design teacher). For both design iterations, students completed pre-/post-activity
questionnaires. During the activity, video recordings captured student interactions, while knowledge artifacts
created by students (e.g., notes) were collected as measures of the quality of student ideas.

Procedure
The first study was conducted in a single 2-hour session, which took part in the smart classroom one week after
the end  of  the academic     school    year, while  the second  study   lasted 12-weeks  and   included   three  visits to
EvoRoom, along with a set of in-class and homework activities (Table 1). The full design and expanded the
curriculum are detailed in a separate paper (AUTHORS, 2012). For the purposes of examining student ideas
about evolutionary concepts (and for linking ideas made in the first study), the present analysis focuses on the
relevant EvoRoom sessions, each of which lasted approximately 45 minutes.

Activity Design
Iteration 1 (implemented in June 2011) was quite basic, with students entering the smart classroom to find the
large displays set up as Sundaland, a region in Southeast Asia predating Borneo and Sumatra, about two million
years ago.   After    the premise    of the   activity was   introduced, and  the historical context    of the rainforest
environment explained, students were scaffolded by their tablets to observe individual species and use the Field
Guide application.
         After approximately 15 minutes, the teacher used her own tablet computer (with teacher controls) to
"accelerate time," revealing a sequence of geologic events that affected the Sundaland landscape over the span
of two million years.     On the interactive white boards at the front of the room, students observed changes in sea
level that   broke Sundaland's      central  landmass   into a peninsula  and   several islands, including   Borneo  and
Sumatra. When the teacher then set the room's timeline to "present day", the two sides of the simulation were
updated:    one side  of  the room   (3  large  projectors "stitched" together,   as shown   in  Figure 1)  now   showed
Borneo's    ecosystem,    while the    other  side showed    Sumatra's.  Students  spent  another   15  minutes   making
observations in this new context. At the end of the observation phase, students were divided into two field
researcher teams: Borneo and Sumatra. Each group answered a set of questions designed to have students
review and compare notes about their individual observations (e.g., in the Borneo group, students were asked
What common species were found in both Sundaland and Borneo?).
         In the final step, the two teams came together to collectively document evidence of evolution. Students
were encouraged to discuss their ideas with others and to post ideas about evolution concepts. The posts were
aggregated to the interactive white board, which served to visibly represent the collective knowledge base of the
students at the end of the activity.     The teacher was able to use the content of this display to lead a synthesis
discussion to close the activity.

Figure 2. Tablet computer screens for iteration 1 (left) and iteration 2 (right). Note the open-ended nature of
tasks given in the first iteration versus more structured format in the second.

         The    second    iteration of  the curriculum   was   informed  by our  observations   and analysis   of student
interactions within the first.      In particular, the EvoRoom activities were more deeply integrated within the
broader curriculum, and interactions refined to focus on topics of evolution and biodiversity (see Table 1).

© ISLS                                                                                                              306
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                              Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

Moreover, additional effort was placed in mapping particular inquiry objects to different areas of the room.
Students were assigned to one of four specialist categories (i.e. plants & insects, birds, primates, and other
mammals), which they held for the duration of the curriculum. Two EvoRoom sessions were developed.                       For
the first session, we greatly extended the timeline, such that students examined the Borneo rainforest as it may
have appeared at nine different time periods (i.e., 200, 150, 100, 50, 25, 10, 5, 2 million years ago and present
day), as opposed to just two (i.e., 2 million years ago and present day). Students were asked to go to each station
(from 200 to 2 million years ago) and look for their assigned specialty species as part of a larger team consisting
of different  specialists. If   the species  were   not    present,  they were    asked to  identify their    evolutionary
predecessors from a short list that popped up (scaffolded by a Field Guide application). Their answers were
recorded by the tablets and ­ via the smart room software ­ aggregated in real-time on the interactive white
board at the front of the room, resulting in an interactive cladogram (a diagram showing descendancy relations
amongst species over time). In the second session, students again focused on evolution, working as a team in
their assigned species groups on activities with similar goals as in the first iteration, but with more structured
and scaffolded tasks than had occurred in the first iteration (Figure 2).

Table 1. Summary of the activity sequence for iteration 2: in-class (I), homework (H), and smart classroom (S)
 Week          Description                                                Curricular goals
   1           Introduction (I)Assign groups and specialty categories (i.e., plants& insects, birds, primates, and other mammals; I)Review field guide (H)Zoo field trip group assignment (I)Become familiar with assigned organismsUnderstand scientific connections (e.g.taxonomy and phylogeny) between relatedspecies
                                                                          Understand relationships among a set of species
               Collaborative food web activity (I)                        (e.g., in the Borneo rainforest)
   2           Assign environmental impact variable (I)                   Understand how environmental factors (e.g.,
               Prediction analysis group assignment (H)                   high/low rainfall, tsunami, earthquake) affect
                                                                          ecosystems
               EvoRoom: Biodiversity activity (S)                         Improve understanding of complex
   3           EvoRoom debrief discussion (I)Personal reflection (H)      interrelationships within an ecosystem andimplications of environmental factors onbiodiversity
   4           Traditional teaching on the origin of life,contributions to the theory of evolution
   5           Traditional teaching on molecular evidence ofevolution and microevolution
   6           Traditional teaching on variation, selectiveadvantage, natural selection
   7           Traditional teaching on mechanisms of evolution,including sexual selection, gene flow, genetic drift
   8           Understanding of evolution survey (H)                       Reflect on personal understanding of evolution
   9           Relatedness of species in Borneo and Sumatraassignment (H)  Understand concept of "relatedness" and howassigned species are related to each other
                                                                           Make connections between evolutionary
               EvoRoom: Evolution processes day 1 (S)10Evolutionary mechanisms tagging (H)mechanisms (learned in class) to the organismsin a specific ecosystemImprove understanding of different organisms'
                                                                           lineages with respect to evolutionary forces
                                                                           over millions of years
   11          EvoRoom: Evolution processes day 2 (S)
   12          Personal reflection (H)

Findings

Student Observations
In iteration one,  students   were   asked  to make     free-form    observations  about   any organism      shown    in the
simulation. A total of 157 observations were made, with 49% about the species at two million years ago, 27%
about those in present day Borneo environment and 24% about the species in Sumatra. Students wrote an
average of 13 words per observation (SD=24). These notes were analyzed following Chi's (1997) method for
content analysis. Using the "observation posting" as a unit of analysis, we coded for content type and nature of
the content. An inter-rater reliability analysis using the Kappa statistic was found to be Kappa = 0.80 (p <
0.001), indicating substantial   agreement.    The  notes    tended   to  be about physical    characteristics  of    certain
organisms (41%) or about the animal's behavior (57%) ­ see Figure 3 for a complete distribution of coded

© ISLS                                                                                                                   307
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                         Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

categories. In iteration two, students made structured observations about whether their assigned organisms were
present at different time points, and if not, which ancient is most likely its predecessor. These observations were
scored for accuracy: with a total of 1047 entries, 81% (SD=10.33) were correct.

Figure 3. Content distribution of iteration one's observations may be categorized as Presence (e.g., about the
presence of species in a specific location), Physical characteristics, Behavior, or Evolution.

Students' Conceptual Learning: Explanations of Evolution
At the end of the activity, in both iterations, students were asked to contribute to the following question: What
evolutionary forces do you think were at play in this environment? Students were asked to choose an evolution
concept   from a predefined  list and   explain their answers    with sufficient evidence.    14 explanations  were
collected from  the first study,  while the second    yielded 43  (Table  2). Figure  4 shows    the distribution of
evolutionary concepts that the explanations attempted to address. Explanations from the first iteration were
predominately  about adaptation   (36%),  with  topics from   the "Other"   category  comprising     of: coevolution
(21%), sexual selection (21%), and reproductive isolation (14%). While explanations from iteration two covered
a wider range of evolutionary concepts, with the highest levels of explanations focused on natural selection
(33%)  and adaptation   (26%).   Topics from  the "Other"    category comprised   of: sexual   selection (12%),   co-
evolution (7%), reproductive isolation (7%), gene flow (5%), and miscellaneous topics (12%).

Table 2. Descriptive summary of student explanations to the question, what evolutionary forces do you think
were at play in this environment?
                                          Iteration 1 (n=8)                Iteration 2 (n=45)
           Number of explanations         14                               43
           Average word count             24 (SD=14.58)                    33.28 (SD=29.51)
           Average KI score               2.36 (SD=0.75)                   2.72 (SD=1.05)

Figure 4. Distribution of evolutionary concepts that the explanations from the first (left) and second (right)
iterations attempted to address.

The explanations  were    scored  using a 0-5   Knowledge    Integration (KI)  scale  that rewards   valid scientific
connections between concepts (Table 4; Linn & Elyon, 2011). The explanations from iteration two attained
higher average   scores (M=2.72,   SD=1.05)   than those    from iteration one   (M=2.36,  SD=0.75),     although no
significant difference was found.   In general, there was an increase in the complexity and sophistication of
explanations from iteration one (34%) to iteration two (43%). Figure 5 displays the distribution of explanations
based on their KI scores.

© ISLS                                                                                                          308
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                            Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

Table 4. KI rubric used to score student explanations. From Linn & Elyon, 2011.
 Score   KI level                      Description
    0    No answer
    1    Off task                      Response is irrelevant or "I don't know"Student writes some text, but it does not answer the question being asked
                                       Have relevant ideas but fail to recognize links between them
    2    Irrelevant/Incorrect          Make links between relevant and irrelevant ideas
                                       Have incorrect/irrelevant ideas
    3    Partial                       Have relevant ideas but do not fully elaborate links between them in a given context
    4    Basic                         Elaborate a scientifically valid link between two ideas relevant to a given context
    5    Complex                       Elaborate two or more scientifically valid links among ideas relevant to a givencontext

Figure 5. Distribution of student explanations' KI scores.

Discussion

From "Free Formed" to Structured Observations
When we first reviewed the observations from the first iteration, we noticed them to be rather basic. An example
of an observation that focused on behavior was, "There are two tapirs, one walking really slowly and one
drinking from a shallow pool." Observations that focused on physical characteristics were also superficial, e.g.,
"The fig wasp has purple wings, long antenna, and a striped body." To help promote deeper explanations, we
designed scaffolding for iteration 2, in the form of more structured observations.         For example, students to
answer simply yes or no to the question, "Is the organism present here?" and then reflect more deeply on the
larger patterns. Since they only observed their own assigned species, students relied on the work of their peers
to understand the complete picture of how all the organisms evolved over time. Their answers were aggregated
to the interactive white board at the front of the room (Figure 6) and reviewed in teams of four to six. With
students  providing   structured  observations, we   were able to  assess    more  easily whether    they were    paying
attention to the correct pieces and seemed to yield positive results (with over 80% accuracy).

Increased Variation of Evolutionary Topics
At first glance, the student explanations from iteration one do not differ significantly from the explanations
written from iteration two, given their comparable KI scores. However, improvements to the activity in iteration
two   may  be  demonstrated    in the  increased  variation in the     types of evolutionary concepts     that   students
addressed. Figure   7  demonstrates    the nature  of explanations     with  a  visual  representation (i.e., Wordle       -
http://www.wordle.net/), where words with the highest frequency are given greater prominence. The nature of
the explanations   in iteration   one tended   to be  about surface    features of the  species observed,     while  the
explanations in iteration two focused more so on the processes of evolution.

© ISLS                                                                                                              309
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

Figure 6. Interactive cladogram created from the collective inputs of 16 students' structured observations.

Figure 7. Wordle of student explanations from iteration (left). Words, such as camouflage (6x), curtain
figs (6x), different (5x), and wasps (4x), were most frequently encountered. Wordle of student
explanations from iteration two (right). Words such as evolved (19x), selection (14x), adapted (12x),
species (11x) appeared most.

© ISLS                                                                                                       310
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                            Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

Current Progress & Future Directions
At the time of writing, audio and video analysis of student interactions are in progress. We expect that results
will glean important insights about students' thinking behind their written explanations. We will continue to
analyze  students'    biological understanding  by  coding  the  various  elements,  particularly  from   our  second
iteration, which was embedded within a much larger curricular sequence.       From the early results presented here,
we are  already   making   progress  in designing  our next  iteration. We  understand   the need   to better address
students' preconceptions about evolution, as well as the need to encourage increased complexity of student
thinking. We will look for opportunities to incorporate these ideas into our designs in a more seamless and
meaningful manner.

References
Alters, B. J., & Nelson, C. E. (2002). Teaching evolution in higher education. Evolution, 56(10), 1891­1901.
Anderson,   R.  D.  (2007). Teaching    the theory of  evolution in social, intellectual,  and pedagogical    context.
        Science Education, 91(4), 664­677.
Brown,   A.L.   (1992).  Design   experiments:  Theoretical and  methodological     challenges in  creating complex
        interventions in classroom settings. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 2(2), 141-178.
Chi, M. T. H. (1997). Quantifying qualitative analyses of verbal data: A practical guide. The Journal of the
        Learning Sciences, 6: 271-315.
Chinn,  C.    A., &   Buckland,   L. A.  (2012).   Model-based   instruction:    Fostering change     in  evolutionary
        conceptions and in epistemic practices. In K. S. Rosengren, S. K. Brem, E. M. Evans, & G. M. Sinatra
        (Eds.), Evolution   Challenges:  Integrating  Research   and    Practice in  Teaching  and    Learning About
        Evolution. Oxford University Press.
Colella, V. (2000) Participatory simulations: Building collaborative understanding through immersive dynamic
        modeling, Journal of the Learning Sciences, 9(4), 471-500.
Dede, C. (2009). Immersive interfaces for engagement and learning. Science, 323, 66­69.
Demastes, S., Good, R., & Peebles, P. (1995). Students' conceptual ecologies and the process of conceptual
        change in evolution. Science Education, 79(6), 637­666.
Design-Based      Research Collective.  (2003). Design-based   research:   An emerging     paradigm   for educational
        inquiry. Educational Researcher, 32(1), 5-8.
National Academies Press, 1998
Kampourakis,      K., &  Zogza,   V. (2008).   Preliminary  evolutionary   explanations:   A   basic  framework   for
        conceptual change and explanatory coherence in evolution. Science & Education, 18(10), 1313­1340.
Linn, M., & Eylon, B. (2011). Science learning and instruction: Taking advantage of technology to promote
        knowledge integration. New York: Routledge.
Mayr, E. (2002), What Evolution Is. New York: Basic Books.
Moher,   T.   (2008).   Learning   and  participation  in a  persistent  whole-classroom    seismology    simulation.
        Proceedings of the International Conference of the Learning Sciences (ICLS) ­ Volume 2, 82-90.
Passmore, C., & Stewart, J. (2002). A modeling approach to teaching evolutionary biology in high schools.
        Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 39(3), 185­204.
Penuel, W. R., Roschelle, J., & Shechtman, N. (2007). Designing formative assessment software with teachers:
        An analysis of the co-design process. Research and Practice in Technology Enhanced Learning, 2(1),
        51-74.
Reiser, B. J., Tabak, I., Sandoval, W. A., Smith, B. K., Steinmuller, F., & Leone, A. J. (2001). BGuILE:
        Strategic and conceptual scaffolds for scientific inquiry in biology classrooms. In S. M. Carver, & D.
        Klahr (Eds). Cognition and Instruction: Twenty-Five Years of Progress, (pp. 263­305). Mahwah, NJ:
        Erlbaum.
Resnick, M. (1996). Beyond the Centralized Mindset. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 5(1), 1-22.
Rudolph,   J. &   Stewart,  J. (1998).  Evolution  and the  nature  of  science: On  the   historical discord and its
        implications for education. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 35(10), 1069-1089.
Sandoval, W. A. (2003). Conceptual and epistemic aspects of students' scientific explanations. The Journal of
        the Learning Sciences, 12(1), 5-51.
Slotta, J. D.   (2010). Evolving   the  classrooms  of  the future: The    interplay of pedagogy,     technology  and
         community.     In K.  Mäkitalo-Siegl,  F. Kaplan,  J. Zottmann,   &  F.  Fischer  (Eds.), Classroom   of the
         Future: Orchestrating collaborative spaces (pp. 215-242). Rotterdam: Sense.
Wilensky,   U.,   & Stroup, W.   (1999). Learning  through   participatory simulations:   Network-based    design for
         systems learning in classrooms. Proceedings of the conference on Computer Support for Collaborative
         Learning, Palo Alto, California.

© ISLS                                                                                                           311
