CSCL 2013 Proceedings                   Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

            Using a Graphical Interface to Address New Post Bias
                                in Online Discussion Forums

                         Farshid Marbouti, Purdue University, 701 W. Stadium Avenue,
                               West Lafayette, IN 47907, fmarbout@purdue.edu
                     Alyssa Friend Wise, Simon Fraser University, 250-13450 102 Avenue,
                                   Surrey BC, Canada, V3T 0A3, afw3@sfu.ca

         Abstract:   This study investigated    whether  students exhibited  different new-post   reading
         behaviors when using a graphical discussion forum rather than a traditional text-based linear
         forum. Detailed examination of clickstream patterns in seven case studies showed several
         differences in reading strategies between the two forums. Most notably, in the graphical forum
         students read new posts in connection with other related (new or existing) posts, while in the
         text-based forum new-post reading was disconnected and scattered.

Introduction
In the context of increasing online and blended courses in higher education, online discussion forums have
become   an important  component    of  many    university class experiences. Despite  the   potential benefits   for
supporting collaborative knowledge construction, online discussion forums have some typical shortcomings.
One problem in many online discussion forums is that participants tend to only read posts that are flagged as
new, and only reply to the most recent posts in the threads ("new post bias," Chan et al., 2009; Hewitt, 2003).
While it is important for students to read new posts as sources of new information, if students read only new
posts, they may not be able to connect the ideas in the new posts to the content of the posts they have read
previously. Thus, re-reading or skimming earlier discussion posts (even if read in a previous session) before
reading more recent ones can help students to understand lower-level posts in context and avoid problems such
as conversational drift, inadvertent thread death, and disregard for difficult questions (Hewitt, 2003).
         While multiple factors contribute to new post bias, several scholars have pointed to the standard linear
text-based discussion forum interface as a major cause (Hewitt, 2003; Swan, 2004). Following from this, Hewitt
(2003) suggests that redesigning the interface may help prevent new post bias and its negative educational
consequences. One promising redesign solution is a (non-linear) graphical interface that highlights the structure
of the discussion instead of the chronological order of posts and reduces the emphasis placed on new-post flags.
In this study, we investigated whether such a graphical discussion forum produced different student reading and
replying behaviors than a traditional text-based linear forum with respect to new post bias.

Graphical Interface
Figure 1 illustrates the  graphical forum used   in this study   (Marbouti &  Wise, 2013).   The screen     has been
divided into two main areas: the graphical area (on the left), which represents the posts and their reply structure,
and the content panel area (on the right), which contains the posts' content and the reply form. In the graphical
area, a node represents a post, and a link between two nodes represents the reply relation between two posts.
Node size has been used to represent different levels of posts. In this graphical presentation, the discussion
prompt and its top-level replies are presented by bigger nodes and more space is allocated to them, while lower-
level posts are represented by smaller and closer nodes (see Figure 1a). Thus the learner can focus on a part of
the discussion, while  other parts  are still visible. When  a learner chooses to explore    a branch    of posts by
selecting one, the selected post moves to the center and its replies are presented as bigger nodes (see Figure 1b).
In this presentation, the learner can see the entire discussion and easily visualize the relations between posts and
decide which posts to open, theoretically support more purposeful reading and replying behaviors by students.

Methods
Participants were seven masters students who enrolled in an offering of a graduate course in which students met
once a week and participated in online weekly discussions. This study took place two years after the course and
participants were asked to engage with the graphical discussion in two sessions (equivalent to discussion log-
ins). In the first session all posts were flagged as new. In the second session, a number of new posts were added
to the discussion but the ones participants had read in the first session were no longer marked as new. In each
session participants were asked to read some posts and make at least one post. A detailed log of all actions taken
and think-aloud data was recorded. Participants' log data during their participation in the same discussion in the
original course (text-based interface) was extracted from the archived system for comparison. Log-file data was
analyzed to produce microanalytic accounts of participants' reading behavior in the graphical interface in both
sessions and compare these with accounts of their behavior in two (comparable) sessions from their archived
linear discussion forum activity. For details of microanalytic approach and procedures see Wise et al. (2012).

© ISLS                                                                                                          305
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

                          (a)                                                   (b)
Figure 1. Graphical discussion forum including the graphical area and the content panel showing (a) the initial
        discussion prompt post and (b) a reply that has been selected to read (Marbouti & Wise, 2013).

Results
In general, students showed interest in reading primarily new posts, regardless of which interface they were
using. However, their strategy in reading new posts differed between the two forums, and also between students.
In the graphical forum some students made an effort to re-read higher-level posts that they had read previously
before reading their new  replies. For example, one  of the students,   David (pseudonym),      was    interested in
reading new posts; but as he described in the think-aloud, he decided to read the higher-level parent posts first
(to refresh his memory about their content) before reading their new lower-level replies. This shows attention to
reading posts in a connected fashion. In contrast, in his last session in the text-based forum David only read new
posts from end of the list in a linear pattern, showing a classic example of new post bias.
        There  were  also differences  between  the two interfaces   in students' reading     patterns even when
students only read new posts. In the graphical interface, some students read the new posts in a connected
fashion, viewing new top-level posts in each thread first and then their new lower-level replies. This suggests
that even though students were interested in reading solely new posts, they were aware of the structure of the
discussion and did not make their decision based only on the newness of the posts. In contrast, students in the
text-based forum who read only new posts consistently ignored new top-level posts, immediately jumping to
new lower-level reply posts. Thus their reading pattern was disjointed as they read posts in isolation from the
context of the discussion. While one student in the text-based interface did mostly re-read posts that he had read
previously, these posts were also scattered throughout the forum and not part of a connected series.

Conclusion
This study investigated differences in students' reading behaviors in graphical and text-based discussion forums.
The results documented the strong presence of new post bias in the linear text-based forum, instantiated as the
reading of new and scattered posts. In the graphical forum students still focused on new posts; however, this
often manifest as connected reading of new posts from higher-level to lower-level ones. This finding has led us
to refine our consideration of the problem of new post bias to focus on the connectedness with which any posts
(new or previously read) are accessed. In this respect, the graphical interface presents a promising mechanism
for addressing the negative educational aspects of new post bias.

References
Chan, J. C. C., Hew K. F., & Cheung, W. S. (2009). Asynchronous online discussion thread development:
        Examining growth patterns and peer-facilitation techniques. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning,
        25(5), 438­452.
Hewitt, J. (2003). How habitual online practices affect the development of asynchronous discussion threads.
        Journal of Educational Computing Research, 28(1), 31-45.
Marbouti, F. & Wise, A. F. (2013, April). Design, implementation and testing of graphical interface to support
        interactions in online discussion forums. Paper presented at Annual Meeting of the 2013 American
        Educational Research Association, San Francisco, CA.
Swan, K. (2004). Learning online: Current research on issues of interface, teaching presence and learner
        characteristics. In J. Bourne & J. C. Moore (Eds.), Elements of quality online education: Into the
        mainstream (pp. 63-79). Needham, MA: Sloan Center for Online Education.
Wise, A. F., Perera, N., Hsiao, Y., Speer, J., & Marbouti, F. (2012). Microanalytic case studies of individual
        participation patterns in an asynchronous online discussion in an undergraduate blended course. The
        Internet and Higher Education, 15(2), 108-117.

© ISLS                                                                                                         306
