CSCL 2013 Proceedings                  Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

        Navigating online learning environments in the classroom
                             Caitlin K. Martin and Brigid Barron, Stanford University
                                ckmartin@stanford.edu, barronbj@stanford.edu

         Abstract: Possibilities and challenges inherent in networked learning environments call for
         ways of looking at teacher use of online spaces. We share mixed method research of two
         teachers and their students in a citizen science program. Although the teachers had similar
         levels of success with the program, they interpreted the purpose of the online environment
         differently. One used it as a space for students to publish perfected work while the other used
         it alongside students to build knowledge and foster community.

Introduction
Online learning environments are rapidly becoming part of the education landscape for K12 (Queen & Lewis,
2011), including customizable platforms that incorporate social network forums. And although more research is
needed, studies suggest that interactions online in both formal and informal environments can lead to outcomes
related to learning and engagement (Fredericksen et al, 2000; Pawan et al, 2003; Guzzetti, 2006). However,
there is also a growing concern that new information technologies may contribute to further inequalities along
economic,   cultural, or gender lines  because  of   differential use, attitudes, or skill  (DiMaggio    et  al., 2004;
Hargittai, 2008). Given these potential outcomes and challenges, we need more ways to explore interactions,
learning, and engagement online.
         In this work, we use a blend of automated and qualitative data to look at middle school teachers and
their students within  Vital Signs,  a networked   citizen science   platform  specifically  designed    for use   in in
classrooms around Maine. Online citizen science environments have the potential for collaborative knowledge
sharing  and   community   building  around  ongoing    data collection    and    analysis. As   such    programs     are
incorporated   into classrooms,  can   teachers broker   global    collaborative  possibilities or   are they     simply
gatekeepers of usernames and passwords? What types and patterns of online interactions create opportunities for
and evidence of learning across multiple levels of analysis, including teachers, students, and community? This
work is part of a larger research effort to learn more about teacher and student practices and engagement in
cyberlearning environments. We use mixed methods to look at classrooms across space (school and online),
time (multi-month) and scale (community, class, and individual).

Methods
During the Vital Signs unit students go into the field and use digital cameras and GPS receivers to collect data
on native and invasive species in their local ecosystem. The website is designed to help users organize and
submit their own observations, analyze existing data, and view and comment on the work of others. Professional
and citizen scientists, considered species experts, confirm or question investigation data.
         We recruited two teachers (A and B) who had used Vital Signs in the classroom for two years and were
highly engaged with the program. We followed two classes for each teacher (N=98 students) monitoring online
activity and observing classroom and outdoor activities. Students of teacher A submitted individual work (48
accounts) while students of Teacher B submitted work as teams of four (12 accounts).
         Online data.  Participation data from  the  Vital Signs    site was  collected for  each  teacher,  including
personal investigations  submitted   and  missions   (investigation foci  for students),   resources, and    comments
posted. All comments made to or by students in the focal classrooms were captured and a visual representation
of the commenting patterns for each teacher and their students was created (see Figure 1).
         Teacher interviews. A semi-structured interview protocol was designed to provide teacher reflections
on their history as a science teacher and their personal and classroom experiences with the Vital Signs program.
The teachers were interviewed (35-55 minutes) at their schools.

Results
Teacher perceptions and participation. For teacher A, the Vital Signs site was an informal window into scientific
practice for both him and his students to post work, receive feedback, ask questions, and explore. He submitted
seven observations of his own and created ten different missions on the site to guide his students' observations.
Teacher  B, in contrast,  saw the Vital  Signs  site as a  formal   public presentation  space   for students  to  post
polished scientific work that had been critiqued, revised, and perfected in the classroom. She had not submitted
her own investigations and used missions predefined in Vital Signs.
         Teacher comments. Teacher A was a central hub of activity connecting to the students in the online
environment through encouraging comments on their work: "Your field notes are well detailed and tell the
whole story. I noticed that others have avoided the sketch as part of their submissions. Maybe you could be a

© ISLS                                                                                                             307
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                      Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

sketcher for hire. You have some artistic talent for sure." He commented on 44% of the submissions from the
focal classes, while teacher B did not comment on student work (see Figure 1).
       Student comments. Teacher A offered class time for students to view the work of others and leave
comments. Across his classes, 29% of user accounts posted comments on other students' work (including those
in other classes and schools) and 35% received peer comments on their own work: "Jamie! Nice job. I love your
pictures there really pretty :)." Teacher B did not introduce commenting in the classroom. Two user accounts
(17%) posted comments on work submitted from another class and none received peer comments. Although
Figure 1 does not show all expert scientist comments, it does show when students responded to an expert
scientist, which was the most frequent type of interaction for Teacher B classrooms (three instances, 25%),
which were often more formal in tone.
       Student science learning. We are in the process of coding the quality of student work submitted online
from both classrooms and looking at data from student survey measures to compare the classrooms in terms of
submitted work and engagement in the program and science learning more generally.

                                    classroom
                                    school
                                    teacher
                                    student account
                                    expert scientist

Figure 1. Visualization of comments to and from student Vital Signs accounts for teachers A and B. Filled nodes
        indicate at least one outgoing comment. Size of node indicates number of outgoing comments.

Summary and future plans
In this preliminary study, we find that teachers interpreted the public and scientific framing of Vital Signs
differently. One  saw   it                 as an      opportunity for students  to publish professional and depersonalized scientific
observations during a fixed classroom assignment and formative feedback was not public. Another saw the site
as a portal for himself and his students engage in a citizen science community of knowledge sharing and
building. He expected student work to improve over time and across multiple investigations and used online
comments to provide formative feedback and encouragement. Comparing investigation artifacts and survey data
from students in these classes is a next step in this work in order to explore potential implications of different
teacher approaches to online communities used in the classroom.

References
DiMaggio,    P., Hargittai,                 E.,      Celeste, C., &  Shafer, S. (2004). Digital inequality: From  unequal  access to
       differentiated use. In K. Neckerman (Ed.), Social Inequality. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Fredericksen, E., Pickett, A., Shea, P., Pelz, W., & Swan, K. (2000). Student satisfaction and perceived learning
       with on-line courses. Journal of Asynchronous Learning Networks, 4(2).
Guzzetti, B.J. (2006). Cybergirls: Negotiating social identities on cybersites. E-Learning, 3(2), pp. 158-169.
Hargittai, E. (2008). The digital reproduction of inequality. In D. Grusky, (Ed.), Social stratification: Class,
       race, and gender in sociological perspective. Boulder, Colorado: Westview Press.
Queen, B.,   &   Lewis, L.                  (2011).     Distance   Education Courses  for  Public Elementary  and Secondary  School
       Students: 2009-10. U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics.
Pawan, F., Paulus, F., Yalcin, S., Chang, C. F. (2003). Online Learning: Patterns of Engagement and Interaction
       among in-service teachers. Language, Learning, & Technology, 7(3), pp. 119-140.

© ISLS                                                                                                                         308
