CSCL 2013 Proceedings                   Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

             Design methods to study learning across networked
                          systems, co-located spaces, and time
                     Caitlin K. Martin, Brigid Barron, Véronique Mertl, Stanford University,
                     ckmartin@stanford.edu, barronbj@stanford.edu, vm.mertl@gmail.com

         Abstract: The 2013 CSCL conference theme--investigating learning across levels of space,
         time, and scale--has becoming an increasingly important issue with the proliferation of new
         types of networked learning environments. In this paper we share our approach to studying
         and designing for learning across settings and time, grounded in an investigation of a citizen
         science program that takes place in the classroom, outdoors, and online.

Introduction
Networked technologies have made new genres of learning environments possible, at least for schools that have
access to the Internet, computers, and professional development opportunities for teachers. Online learning
communities that connect participants with one another have generated the need for new design frameworks. In
particular, how we can best design systems to capture learning-relevant interactions, take advantage of tools,
and  develop design  approaches    that consider   how  varied users feel about the  online spaces  and  how these
feelings relate to their own biographies. In our project we develop both teacher and student learning biographies
as we know that even when access to tool and networks are provided, variability in how teachers and young
people use technologies at home may influence how tools are taken up at school (Forsell, 2012; Warschauer,
2008). In this paper we share our approach to studying and designing for learning across settings and time,
grounded  in an   investigation   of a  citizen science  program  where   learning  interactions take place  in   the
classroom, in outdoor settings, and in an online community.

Methods
To do this work, we partnered with Vital Signs, a networked citizen science project involving middle school
students, teachers, and amateur and professional scientists. During the classroom unit students go into the field
and use digital cameras and GPS receivers to monitor freshwater, upland, and coastal ecosystems for native and
invasive species. The website is designed to help students organize, upload, and analyze their data and to
connect them with scientists who confirm or question their investigations. Four science teachers were recruited
to represent a range of engagement with the Vital Signs work and school economic profile.
         Our multi-method study is guided by a learning ecology framework (Barron, 2006). Expanding our
notion of spaces for learning requires that we broaden our units of analyses to track a learner's participation in
learning activities not only   in school but    at home,  in the homes  of friends,  in  neighborhood  contexts,  in
community based organizations, and increasingly in online environments that offer new forms of activity and
resources for learning. We used four main empirical strategies to understand and contrast the system at multiple
levels: (1) Cohort studies using quantitative survey measures (N=217); (2) classroom case studies, using in class
and  online  observation;  (3)  individual teacher   (N=4)   and  student (N=16)    case biographies  documenting
interests, family life, and Vital Signs experiences; and (4) co-design methods that asked learners (N=27) and
their parents (N=11) to react to and redesign components of the Vital Signs online site. Due to space constraints,
we focus on our co-design methodology and share select findings to illustrate our approach.

Co-design methodology
Co-design methods are frequently used in human-centered software design (e.g. Norman & Draper, 1986). We
set up a collaborative model of design where groups of parents and students worked together on a design and
used this data to   guide our  understanding    of  the networked system   and  the people  who  use  it (similar to
"personas" in co-design work by Pruitt & Grudin, 2003). A small group after school workshop was developed to
invite youth as partners in the redesign of the original, rather basic, Vital Signs profile pages. Students from our
focal cohort attended and case learners participated in a later session with their parents. Materials included
paper-based profile page examples and blank profile templates (see Figure 1a) to guide discussion. Paper profile
page elements were generated based on student interviews about interests and behaviors online, including a tag
cloud of interests, a map of individual investigations, and visual documentations of work. These were cut out as
separate pieces and each student was given a set. Each group was provided post-it pads, markers, and glue
sticks. Groups discussed profile pages and likes and dislikes of particular features, then brainstormed their own
ideas, and sorted through the pre-designed features and pasted their choices onto their new profile designs with
additional ideas and annotation (see Figure 1b).

© ISLS                                                                                                          309
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                     Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

Figures 1a and 1b. Co-design workshop materials, including sample profile pages (1a) and a completed profile
                                     page "makeover" designed by a student (1b).

Results and an example of co-design partners: Laura and her mother
Our cohort data revealed students, on average, to be regular Internet users: 97% reported home Internet access
and frequency-of-use is similar to recent national surveys: at least once a week, 89% used the Internet to find
information,   68%   used   a social network    site, and 56%    played computer   games.    Although    the majority   of
students    (63%)  reported   that they looked  at plants around   them    differently after the   Vital Signs unit, few
revisited the website community after they submitted their investigation (12%). We were able to learn more
from    individual interviews.  The    Vital Signs  program    was intentionally developed      to engage  students  in a
scientific community of practice, but students saw the site as "an adult site, like adults would go on." Our
student design partners revealed a desire for a more personalized and social space, sparking ideas about the
development of more interesting and engaging profile pages. During the profile page design workshop, we
learned still more. Some students were on multiple social networking sites, but 22% of participants were not
involved in any. Ninety-four percent chose to have badges on their profile page to represent what they had done
in Vital Signs and 89% wanted their profile to include a geographical map of their investigations.
         One co-design case student, Laura, lived with her parents and three siblings in a rural setting. She
reported that she definitely could not see herself becoming a scientist when she grew up. Other indicators,
however, such as her stories about looking closely at the natural world around her, suggest a more complicated
picture of the role of science in her life. Laura enjoyed taking digital photographs and using Instagram. Some of
her design ideas for Vital Signs profile pages sites utilized photo-sharing site features such as, "different kinds
of filters." and "be able to adjust lighting + contrast to make photo clearer/better!" Others called on social
network components such as being able to "post on other people's walls like on Facebook" and "compare to
other people like you." Laura's mother had compelling ideas as well. Given a need for quality summertime
childcare and financial constraints, she suggested a free virtual camp where youth could collect and discuss
observations in their backyards and connect to scientists and resources.

Summary and implications
In this paper we argued that biographical and co-design methods are critical for understanding participation in
networked learning opportunities and for generating new ideas for the design of such environments. We shared
our approach to show exciting potential for learning within authentic activities as part of hybrid school-online
programs like Vital Signs and the importance of finding multiple ways to connect to learner interests and
families through cyberlearning.

References
Barron. B.   (2006). Interest and self-sustained learning as catalysts of development: A learning ecologies perspective.
          Human Development, 49, 193-224.
Forssell, K. S. (2011). Technological Pedagogical Content Knowledge: Relationships To Learning Ecologies And
          Social Learning Networks. Doctoral Dissertation, Stanford University, Stanford, CA.
Norman,     D. A., &  Draper,  S.   W.  (1986). User  centered  system  design: new    perspectives  on  human-computer
          interaction. Hillsdale, N.J.: L. Erlbaum Associates.
Pruitt, J., &  Grudin, J. (2003,   June). Personas:   practice and theory. In Proceedings    of the  2003  conference on
          Designing for user experiences (pp. 1-15). ACM.
Warschauer, M. (2008). Whither the digital divide? In Kleinman, Cloud- Hansen, Matta, and Handesman (Eds.)
          Controversies in Science & Technology: From climate to chromosomes. New Rochelle, NY: Liebert.

© ISLS                                                                                                               310
