CSCL 2013 Proceedings               Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

      Beyond sociograms inspection: What social network analysis
             (SNA) has to offer to measure cohesion in CSCL
Alejandra Martínez-Monés, GSIC-EMIC, University of Valladolid, Campus Miguel Delibes, 47011, Valladolid.
                                         amartine@infor.uva.es
Christophe Reffay, STEF, ENS-Cachan, 61, avenue Wilson - 94235 Cachan, Christophe.Reffay@ens-cachan.fr
         Chris Teplovs, University of Windsor, 401 Sunset Avenue, Windsor, Ontario, N9B 3P4 Canada,
                                       chris.teplovs@gmail.com
  
         Abstract: Social network analysis (SNA) has emerged as a widely used approach to
         study structural aspects of collaboration. However, its techniques have not been fully
         exploited yet in CSCL. This paper presents the main results of a survey that focused
         on identifying the existing approaches for the study of cohesion in CSCL using SNA
         techniques. It also points out some challenges and future research lines in this area.   

Introduction  
Social network analysis (SNA) has been recognized as one of the relevant methods within the multiple analytic
voices in CSCL (Suthers et al., 2011). The number of papers dealing with SNA presented in recent CSCL
conferences reflects this interest (Reffay & Martínez-Monés, 2011).
          SNA provides indicators and visualizations to gain insight into the structural properties of interaction,
as well as into the ways these properties affect the individuals. However, despite its apparently simple and
intuitive techniques, SNA is also a broad and complex research field in its own right. Researchers need to be
aware of the rules and conventions of SNA when applying it to their work.
          This work aims to shed light on how SNA has been used to measure cohesion based on empirical data
from educational settings and guide future research in the area.

Method  
We reviewed the literature on the use of SNA to analyze interaction in computer-supported educational settings.
The first finding was that researchers had paid relatively less attention to the study of cohesion than to other
network properties, such as centrality and position.
          Cohesion is considered in collaborative      learning   as an    important factor  for   motivation and
effectiveness. Dense and cohesive networks have the potential to facilitate fluid flow of information, ideas and
resources among participants, which in principle is conducive to collaboration. However, it is unclear whether
and how this is being studied in CSCL and to what extent these potential benefits apply to CSCL. In order to
delve into these issues, we focused this study in the following questions:
-     Which SNA methods have been proposed to measure cohesion in CSCL?
-     What are their main findings in terms of the influence of group cohesion in learning?

Results and findings
Once the focus and dimensions of this survey were set, we reviewed 143 papers to identify those dealing with
cohesion. A total of 41 papers were selected. These were classified according to the data source(s) employed to
build the network and to the technique used to measure cohesion. The detailed categorization of these selected
papers is available as an online appendix (1). Table 1 shows a summary of the number of papers found in each
category.
          We distinguished four main approaches to measure cohesion in SNA: (1) sociogram inspection to
analyze the network structure and groupings; (2) indexes such as cohesion index and network density and
centralization; (3) identification of cliques and clusters; and (4) cut-point analysis and identification of bridges.
The reviewed works posed research questions related to the relationship between group cohesiveness and the
quality of knowledge construction, as well as more specific questions, such as the existence of an homophily
effect, that assumes that similar people tend to join together. The research approaches varied from hypothesis
testing to more descriptive mixed-method studies, where SNA was used to complement other data sources.
          The data sources used to build the networks were predominantly asynchronous forum discussions and
collaborative knowledge building discourse. Many current tools used to conduct automatic SNA use forum data
as their input. Other data sources, especially those that characterize interaction in Web2.0 are rare. We also
found that there is a tendency to not specify sufficiently how the networks are built from the data sources. Many
studies take the meaning of the links almost for granted. Others, like Goggins (2010), show that many subtleties
exist and need to be made explicit, as they have an impact on the interpretation of the analysis.

© ISLS                                                                                                        311
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                   Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

Table 1: Number of papers found for each group of cohesion techniques and data source. Some papers count
more than once, if they apply more than one technique or/and deal with different data sources.

Data source \ Techniques        Sociogram         Numerical indexes:             Groupings:          Cut point
(Total of distinct papers =    inspection for   Density Cohesion and      Components, Cliques,       analysis,
41)                            cohesion (16)      centralization (24)          Clusters (19)        bridges (4)
Discussion Forum (21)                6                     11                       12                 2
Document sharing (8)                 5                     4                          2                2
Wiki (1)                             1                     0                          0                1
Blog / shared profiles (3)           2                     1                          2                1
CSILE or KF (7)                      3                     5                          2                0
Chat (1)                             0                     1                          0                0
e-mail (2)                           1                     1                          2                0
Twitter (2)                          1                     2                          0                0
Integrated data (2)                  1                     0                          0                1

Conclusions
SNA is becoming an accepted analytic approach in CSCL to measure structural properties of collaboration in
learning settings. This dimension is becoming even more prominent now, with the rising popularity of MOOCs
(Massive Open Online Courses) and other community-wide learning events. The first finding of our literature
review is that the vast majority of the reviewed papers deal with centrality and positions of individuals in the
network. Less than a third of them were studying cohesion.
         In terms of the interpretation of the results, we have found little consensus in the relevant literature on
the implications of cohesion for learning in general. Although it is regarded as a desirable characteristic of a
group, some of the reviewed works found out that cohesion indexes where negatively related to knowledge
construction variables, while other obtained positive results. This does not mean that SNA is inadequate for
studying these structural aspects of learning and collaboration, but that its findings need to be interpreted in the
contexts they were generated. It seems to us that there is room in this direction for research to better identify the
impact of cohesion on learning in its various contexts.
         This is related  to another   conclusion of our   work:  more  care should be  taken in considering the
implications of each particular network model on the interpretation of the results. Accordingly, we implore
researchers using SNA methods to pay special attention to describing the network models they are applying and
how they are built from the raw data. Despite the wide range of possible and emerging data sources (social
media, blogs,  tweets,   etc.), asynchronous    discussion forums    remain  the most   commonly   studied ones.
Furthermore,  even   if  different sources are considered  in   a number of  works, they  are mostly considered
separately. One specific aspect that has been neglected so far in the studies is how to combine them and use
multiplexity to gauge the strength of ties between people according the variety of relationships rather than
merely the quantity of interactions in a particular medium. Many CSCL interaction studies employ different
mediating tools, and this provides an excellent opportunity to study multiplexity as an index of the collaboration
in educational settings.

Acknowledgements
This  research   has   been  partially  funded  by   the  European    Union  (projects  526965-LLP-2012-1-GR-
COMENIUS-CMP) and the Spanish Ministry of Economy and Competitivity (project TIN2011-28308-C03-02).

Endnotes
(1) http://gsic.uva.es/docs/CSCL2013/MartinezReffayTeplovs_Appendix_CSCL2013.pdf

References
Goggins, S. P., Galyen, K., & Laffey, J. (2010). Network analysis of trace data for the support of group work:
         activity patterns in a completely online course (pp. 107­116). ACM.
Reffay, C., & Martínez-Monés, A. (2011). Introduction to Social Network Analysis theory and its applications
         to CSCL. Connecting Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning to Policy and Practice: CSCL2011
         Conference Proceedings. CSCL 2011, (Vol. III, pp. 1195­1196). ISLS.
Suthers, D., Lund, K., Rosé, C. P., Dyke, G., Law, N., Teplovs, C., Chen, W., et al. (2011). Towards productive
         multivocality in the analysis of collaborative learning. Connecting Computer-Supported Collaborative
         Learning   to  Policy  and  Practice: Proceedings   of the 9th International  Conference on Computer-
         Supported Collaborative Learning (CSCL 2011), (Vol. III, pp 1015-1022). ISLS.

© ISLS                                                                                                       312
