CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                            Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

                          Designing for Group Math Discourse
             Rachel M. Magee, Drexel University, Philadelphia, PA, USA, rachelmagee@drexel.edu
          Christopher M. Mascaro, Drexel University, Philadelphia, PA, USA, cmascaro@gmail.com
                 Gerry Stahl, Drexel University, Philadelphia, PA, USA, Gerry@GerryStahl.net

         Abstract:  We    are developing   a socio-technical  system   to support  group   cognition  among
         math    students in  the form  of   significant mathematical   discourse  about   dependencies      in
         dynamic-geometry     constructions.  Analysis   of a pilot trial in a   typical early cycle     of our
         design-based-research approach revealed barriers to group success from both software and
         mathematics   issues,  and   demonstrated  that  participants  "cycled"   between   these   types   of
         issues. We are responding by developing a curriculum to address the uncovered technical and
         cognitive issues. We present the findings of our pilot study and the curriculum design criteria
         that are emerging from continuing cycles of re-design, prototyping, testing and analysis.

Introduction
We  are  interested in promoting    group  cognition  (Stahl,  2006)   among   math   students  learning    high-school
geometry by enhancing their ability to engage in significant mathematical discourse. Recent research on math
learning points to the central role of language, enabling articulation and verbal reflection about mathematical
relationships (Sfard, 2008; Stahl, 2008). Because we want to exploit the computational power of computers and
the advantages of networking to support online collaboration incorporating math discourse, we necessarily face
the dual design constraints of technical software development and social-practice scaffolding.
         Increasingly, high school students are learning online, with home schooling, resources like the Khan
Academy of math YouTube videos and virtual high schools. The problem with online learning is that the current
models   for this are  often  lacking in social  interaction  and   collaborative  learning.  This   is, of  course  the
motivation for CSCL research and innovation.
         Discourse is fundamentally a group process, so we want to provide support for small groups of students
to engage together in math discourse. This is complicated in terms of both the discourse and the technology as
there are multiple facets to "significant mathematical discourse" (Stahl, 2013d). Furthermore, we are interested
in taking advantage   of  networked   computers  to allow   groups   of students   to discuss  math  and    to  work on
mathematical tasks together online. We want to supply computer support for their math work and computer
recordings   for maintaining  persistence  of their discourse--which      raises technological  barriers     to students
navigating the interface.
         As a research project, we approach this task with the idea of combining VMT (Stahl, 2009; Stahl,
Mantoan   &   Weimar,  2013)--a    generic   computer    environment for  collaborative   learning   by  "virtual  math
teams"--with GeoGebra (www.geogebra.org)--a popular open-source application for dynamic geometry. This
involves  enhancing   VMT     and transforming  GeoGebra    from  a  single-user  application  to  a multi-user   client
integrated into VMT. When developing a socio-technical system, in addition to the technical development we
need to guide the group-cognitive work by providing helpful resources and scaffolding group practices.
         To  get  a realistic sense  of how   groups  of   students will  interact within  the  environment      we  are
designing, we need to conduct pilot tests throughout our design process. In order to try out our system in
naturalistic settings as part of our socio-technical, design-based-research approach, as well as to provide a basis
for eventual deployment, we have developed relationships with two professional education schools, where we
will eventually deploy our system with practicing math teachers.
         In our preliminary stage, we have run informal pilot tests with available groups. Our findings showed
that these students encountered significant problems due to a lack of preparation for using the technology and
for engaging in the mathematics. As a result of the analysis of these sessions--as discussed below--we realized
that we would have to carefully craft a curriculum, which the teachers could follow and then adapt for their own
classrooms.  This  curriculum  would    need to incorporate   not only  math   lessons,  but also  tutorials   about the
technological environment. We started to sketch out a curriculum based on existing best practices and theories.
We were fortunate that the Common Core State Standards for Mathematics (CCSSI, 2011) had recently been
released and adopted by most states in the US. This provided an up-to-date, research-based outline of content
for a geometry course, which was widely accepted.
         As we looked at results of the initial trials analyzed below, we realized many problems needed to be
addressed. These involved design issues in extending VMT, in making GeoGebra multi-user, in supporting
collaboration around the activities, in teaching the deep conceptual ideas in geometry, in taking advantage of
computer-supported dynamic math and in promoting significant math discourse (Stahl, 2013d). We ran several
cycles of additional trials within our research group and with available college students. In each cycle, we

© ISLS                                                                                                               312
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                            Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

revised the curriculum, revised the software, ran the trial and analyzed the behaviors. Generally, there were clear
lessons from each trial, which led to the next cycle.
          Gradually, a set of design criteria for the curriculum was formulated and evolved. In this paper, we
report findings from the early session without curriculum to identify challenges faced by technologically adept
individuals when attempting to engage in significant math discourse within the GeoGebra environment. Then
we review some of the lessons for the technology and some of the aspects of the discourse that we believe are
important.  Based  on these    lessons,  we  are now   developing   a curriculum   based  around    online, small-group
activities. This paper discusses the criteria for the design of that curriculum, as it is emerging from testing of
trial curriculum drafts.
          From a socio-technical standpoint, the curriculum is central because it mediates between the people
and the technology. It tells the people what activities they should be engaging in while communicating through
and working within the technology. It also models for them how to talk about math. For an online course, in
which there is no teacher present to orchestrate activities and interaction, the textual curriculum provides the
major scripting of collaborative sessions and the primary scaffolding of the group cognition.

Relevant Literature
Our approach to online dynamic-geometry education is based on previous research by our own team and by
others in the fields of groupware design, collaborative learning and mathematics education.

Dynamic-Mathematics Software
The research on dynamic-mathematics software--such as Geometer's Sketchpad, Cabri and GeoGebra--is new
and limited. Much of it merely popularizes the availability and the novelty of the approach. However, there are
some important studies of aspects such as the dynamic dragging of geometric objects and the implications of
dynamic   visualizations   for student   conceptions  of proof. A   recent  review    of 37  publications   on  dynamic
mathematics summarized the research to date (Powell & Dicker, 2012). Dynamic geometry can be effective in
improving student understanding of geometry through support for visualization and exploration. There is a
trade-off between   having     students  do  their  own  constructions  versus    having  them   manipulate     prepared
constructions.  While the   construction    process may  deepen  understanding,    it takes  much   longer  and  can   be
distracting from curricular goals. The ability to manipulate constructions dynamically aides students in making
conjectures, exploring them and understanding their significance, but it can be seen as a substitute for deductive
proof and can lower student motivation to engage in rigorous proof procedures.
          The  utilization of  dynamic-math     environments  by  teachers  has  allowed   them  to  extend    traditional
materials found  in textbooks,    allowing   for better interaction with   their students  in  both the classroom    and
through technological mediation (Hohenwarter, Preiner & Yi, 2007). These dynamic-math environments have
been found to make mathematical tasks more efficient and allow for more interaction and application of the
theoretical knowledge    associated    with the  mathematical task  (Laborde,    2001;   Öner, 2008). This     success of
dynamic-math environments in the classroom setting is heavily influenced by the given tasks and the interaction
with the instructor who is leading the exercise (deVilliers, 2004; Mariotti, 2001; Sanchez & Sacristan, 2003).
The research in dynamic math is limited to specific pedagogical approaches and needs to be developed further.
In particular, previous studies focus on individual learning. This is at least in part because until now dynamic-
math applications have been designed for single users. Another weakness in the literature is the lack of focus on
dependencies, which we feel are central to understanding dynamic geometry (Stahl, 2013c).

Online Math Collaboration
The ability for students to co-construct knowledge using technology together has been studied for decades.
Depending on the context, the students and teachers play different roles (Jonassen, Peck & Wilson, 1999).
While technology adoption in the classroom has met with varying levels of success, using small groups for
learning and co-constructing knowledge has been illustrated to be productive through all levels of education
(Springer, Stanne & Donovan, 1999).
          Researchers have approached studying math discourse and cognition in face-to-face media through the
utilization of technology (Dion, Jank & Rutt, 2011). Research on Group Scribbles use in a primary science
classroom   in Singapore   illustrates a transitional stage between    the physical   classroom  and  a strictly   online
context (Chen   &  Looi,   2011). The    Group   Scribbles environment   provides    similar  capabilities  to the VMT
environment,   but  the    interaction occurs   in  a classroom   through   tablets.  The   students' interactions     are
technologically mediated, and the teacher in the classroom provides physical mediation, allowing for technology
problems to be quickly overcome so participants may focus on the problem at hand. In a series of tasks carried
out using Group Scribbles, it was found that students had more agency and were given more participation
opportunities compared to traditional approaches. This was found to particularly benefit passive students (Chen,
Looi & Ng, 2009).

© ISLS                                                                                                              313
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                             Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

         Technology has also taken the place of moderating a learning environment in an effort to facilitate
more discourse and reduce direct teacher involvement in student problem solving. In an attempt to automate the
support  of  group   math  cognition  in the   VMT  environment,     research has  been initiated to understand    how
conversational agents could be used (Cui et al., 2009). These agents are used to encourage academic discourse
and accountable talk (Michaels, O'Connor & Resnick, 2008), but have been met with only limited success so far
(Stahl, 2013a; Stahl et al., 2010).
         Understanding the technological environment of the student and how this contributes to successful or
unsuccessful learning is integral to the analysis of the learning and the design of an online system (Suthers &
Medina, 2010). As evidenced by prior research (Valentine, 2002) and our findings below, technology use in a
learning scenario can harm the experience of students, hindering communication as much as facilitating it.
Understanding the extent of barriers and modes of facilitation of math discourse in a dynamic-math environment
is still limited.

Math Discourse
The  theory  of    math   learning  through  participation    in math   discourse (Sfard, 2008)   specifies  important
mathematical discourse moves, such as encapsulation, reification, saming, routines, deeds, explorations and
rituals--all defined, systematized and passed down through the community, culture, tools, procedures, language
and traditions of mathematics. These interactional resources can traverse levels between individual learning,
group  cognition     and  community     knowledge   (Stahl,   2012;  2013b;  Stahl  &  Öner,  2013).    The  theory of
accountable  talk    (Michaels,   O'Connor  &   Resnick,  2008;    Resnick,  O'Connor   & Michaels,    2007) specifies
discourse   moves    that promote    accountability to    the group,  to  standards of  math  reasoning   and   to  the
characteristics   of the  math  objects. Speaking   meaningfully     in math  discourse "implies   that responses   are
conceptually based, conclusions are supported by a mathematical argument and explanations include reference
to the quantities in the problem context as opposed to merely describing the procedures and calculations used to
determine the answer" (Clark, Moore & Carlson, 2008, p. 298). Socio-mathematical norms include what counts
as  an acceptable,   justifiable, easy, clear, different, efficient, elegant  and sophisticated  explanation (Yackel,
1995; Yackel & Cobb, 1996). Mathematical practices emerge from interaction, are taken up by participants and
are applied repeatedly (Medina, Suthers & Vatrapu, 2009). Though Sinclair and Yurita (2008) study of how
dynamic geometry changes discourse began the process, research into the nature of mathematical discourse in a
collaborative dynamic-mathematics environment has yet to be conducted.
         While     the importance   of  collaborative  learning   for online  education   may be   obvious   to CSCL
researchers (Stahl, Koschmann & Suthers, 2006) and its possible advantages have been well documented in
cooperative-learning (Johnson & Johnson, 1989; Slavin, 1980) and CSCL research for decades (Sawyer, 2006),
support for collaboration is still not always designed into new educational platforms. For instance, the latest hot
approach to university instruction--massive open online courses or MOOCs--are generally based on the lecture
paradigm, in which students passively watch talking-head videos of famous professors and are not given any
sanctioned opportunities for interaction. Similarly, the acclaimed Khan Academy offers thousands of YouTube
videos explaining detailed topics in school mathematics, but students have no support for interactively exploring
the topics   themselves   or discussing   them  with  peers.   These  technological  opportunities are  generally   not
designed to incorporate constructivist learning principles (Bransford, Brown & Cocking, 1999).

Method
In Fall 2011, we examined four one-hour-long chat logs from information-science graduate students taking a
course on CSCL using the VMT environment. In these chats, the groups met online and attempted to solve a
geometry problem within the GeoGebra environment. The students had used the VMT environment to perform
collaborative writing exercises in previous weeks, but had not previously used GeoGebra. These students were
enrolled  in majors    related  to  technology,  suggesting    that  they were engaged    rather  than  nervous  about
technology use. As part of the exercise, there was no explicit introduction to the GeoGebra tool or further
instructions other than the assigned problem.
         We were interested in analyzing these groups' interactions and their strategies for navigating a new
online collaborative environment. Each log was examined independently using a thematic analysis approach
that revealed themes that were typical stages of conversation. These stages include: social niceties, problem
identification, technical discourse, math discourse, design suggestions and future planning. While these are
separate stages of conversation, we found that each group moved back and forth between technological and
mathematical discourse, behavior we termed "cycling."
         We examined the logs using our initial categories as a guide to further examine this process of cycling.
In our subsequent analysis, we identified the cyclical behavior triggered by individual statements distinctly
indicating technical issues (involving software usage issues or software problems) versus mathematical issues
and discourse (involving attempts to understand, represent and solve the geometry problem). By examining the
chat logs we are able to observe phases of group interaction, how technology affects each phase and how the

© ISLS                                                                                                             314
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                         Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

technology can both facilitate and inhibit successful completion of the task in an online environment new to
group members.

Findings
Analysis of the group chat logs illustrates the presence of a variety of stages of conversation by the members of
the groups in the context of the problem-solving task. Each of the chats begins with an orientation, including the
exchange of social niceties and resolution of unrelated issues, typically lasting two to three lines per group
member.
        Following the orientation stage, the groups identified the problem by either explaining it in the chat to
the other group   members   or by   referring to the posted  problem  in  another tab. This  typically involved    a
statement to orient the group:
     Quick summary ­ we have to work thru the problem (see topic). Summarize the process in the Summary
     tab and post a few sentences on the wiki too. We good? (Group 1, line 16)
This quote illustrates some    of the important  characteristics of this type of  focusing statement,  including   a
description of what the "speaker" is going to do with the statement, instruction and then a leading question to
ensure the team is on the same page.
        Table 1 illustrates the different stages identified in the chat logs of the four groups and the different
places in the discussion in which math discourse began. This varied for each group, and even when groups did
not start with technical issues, they arose very quickly.
                                Table 1. Stage identification of each of the groups
                     Group 1             Group 2                 Group 3                   Group 4
Opening Stages       Orientation; Problem Identification
Intermediate         Role                Math Discourse          Technical Issues          Technical issues
Stages               Assignment
                     Technical           Technical Issues        Math Discourse            Role Assignment
                     Issues
                     Math Discourse      Design Suggestions      Math Confusion            Math Discourse
                                                                 Technical Issues          Use   of    Alternative
                                                                                           Tools
                                                                 Technical Confusion
Concluding           Summarization of task/experience; social niceties; next steps
Stages
        Once Group 3 reached math discourse, they experienced confusion about the mathematical concepts,
further compounded by technical issues with the tool that further confused the participants in the group and
degraded the quality of math discourse:
     I'm trying to figure out how to delete this line... I kind of messed up... do you still see a line on the screen?
     (Group 3, line 24-25)
This quote highlights a number of issues that were common across multiple groups: not knowing how to delete
an object (an option expected by participants), and group members being unsure that they were looking at the
same objects as their fellow group members.
        Both Group 1 and Group 4 achieved significant math discourse as each of the team members attempted
to solve the problem, but did so with the help of outside tools. Group 1 used PowerPoint. Group 4 experienced
confusion because the VMT environment did not display the same screen to all group members, so one emailed
a screenshot to share the solution. This indicates that use of familiar tools or tools that work intuitively enables
groups to more quickly reach effective math discourse that achieves a solution.

Overcoming Technological Barriers
While the technological tool--multi-user GeoGebra--provided many opportunities and options, it often served
as a barrier for users. Barriers could be as simple as not being able to undo an action. However, even simple
barriers stopped the groups from engaging in fluid math discourse and sometimes even went unresolved as the
individuals found ways to work around issues. One example of this is the issue of not being able to easily
rename an object. The mathematical problem these groups were attempting involved making an angle ABC.
Groups began by playing with the system by adding objects to their GeoGebra screen. However, each group
discovered that they were unable to simply rename the points on their screen, and the names they needed (A, B
and C) were already in use by the system, though the objects they developed later in the process were better
suited to solving the problem. This meant that their refined objects were confusingly named (for example, J, K
and L), making math discourse about the objects in relation to the problem statement more complicated:
     One thing we can state is how the lettering got messed up... I think that is helping to confuse us. (Group 3,
     lines 58-59)
Each group experienced this issue; because of their lack of familiarity with the system, none were able to fix it.

© ISLS                                                                                                      315
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                           Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

         Other barriers were easier for the groups to work around creatively. When the tool put up barriers,
these groups were quick to try to work around the resulting issues, employing their understanding of other
technologies to inform their decision in the VMT environment or solve the problem and move forward to math
discourse. While it was unsuccessful, in the above barrier, the group attempted to rename an object when it had
difficulty, which is a common solution in other tools. Additionally, many groups wished for an undo option, a
common affordance in other tools:
      Is there an undo function... not that I could find. That would be nice. (Group 1, lines 97-99)
Because  of the   nature of   the work, as  groups  overcame    tool issues and  moved   into math    discourse, new
mathematical objectives (e.g., renaming a point, adding a ray) resulted in a return to the tool and often the
discovery of a new technological barrier. Even in the face of such issues with the tool, multiple groups managed
to achieve effective math discourse that led to solutions. Each successive cycle of math discourse and tool use
also led to difficulty with the mathematical concepts at hand, which we will now discuss.

Discourse about Math Difficulties
The goal of these chats for the students was to experience a new tool, but also to achieve math discourse around
the visualization and solution of a geometry problem. Reaching math discourse proved to take some time for
multiple groups, despite the fact that they were actively pursuing this goal, often within the first few lines of
chat. Typically,  the  first approach  involved  developing   a shared    understanding of what   the  mathematical
problem was, which we termed "problem identification" in our stage-identification process. Groups quickly
entered into discussion of technological issues with the tool, but had difficulty returning to the larger goal of
mathematical discourse.
         Participants often employed a question structure to encourage a return to math discourse, and usually
included words    like "okay,"    "well,"  or  "so" to bridge   from   the previous topic, which   was   typically  a
technological issue. In Group 4, one participant states:
      Ok, we are on the same page now... we need a point in the middle. (line 179-180)
In an attempt to move past the technological barrier of not being able to effectively rename objects and establish
common ground among the participants, one participant transitioned with:
      Well, anyway, do we all at least see i, j, k? (Group 4, line 83)
In addition to bridging words, participants also employed explicit questions to reorient the group, for example:
      Can i start by drawing two lines to create an angle? (Group 3, line 22)
These  structures  serve to  call attention to a reorientation, and  to give  other participants the  opportunity  to
request a pause in that reorientation to ensure they share understanding with the rest of the group.
         Reorienting questions also served to highlight an understanding gap, pulling the group back into math
discussion  to provide   an   explanation   or confirm   an understanding.   One  example   of   this math-question
reorientation comes from Group 2:
      If you try to construct a line EF trying to connect AB and BC, wouldn't that mean A=C. (line 94)
The use of reorienting statements rotates through group members, indicating that it was not always the same
participant to return the group to math discourse. Talking about technological issues could quickly grab the
attention of the group, but these reorienting statements were effective at refocusing the groups' attention on the
mathematical   issues. When    groups returned   to this higher level  of  math discourse, there were   a variety  of
approaches  employed     by   individuals.  Multiple   participants  displayed  something  akin  to   math  anxiety,
highlighting their lack of experience or inability:
      I haven't done geometry in a long time... I'll need the hints. (Group 1, line 18)
Often, members of the group shared in their confusion, as evidenced by Group 3's experience with making the
decision to look at the hints during a series of math discourse. The group looked at the hints as a whole, but each
member admitted to being more confused after doing so, imagining that it could be their unfamiliarity with math
causing the issue:
      I'm not sure if its cause I haven't done these types of problems in a while or the hints just aren't that good.
      (Group 3, line 95)
However, Group 1 and Group 4 were able to achieve math discourse and a solution, notably, with the use of
familiar outside technologies.

Cycles of Problems
The analysis of the pilot trial revealed cycles of problems, with the groups having to go back and forth between
confronting technical problems with the software and cognitive problems with the mathematics. The cyclic
nature of the alternation between technical and mathematical difficulties may have been an artifact of the task
and the preliminary state of the software prototype. Though the task was to work on a geometry construction,
within the online environment, software problems intervened and distracted the group. Groups tried to quickly
get around the technical problems and cycle back to the math. There, they found themselves poorly prepared to
tackle a geometry problem. Both the technical and the cognitive problems were consequences of the situation of

© ISLS                                                                                                           316
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                            Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

pilot-test participants in a design-based-research project. The socio-technical goal of the project was still in the
distant future and the necessary supports for the participants were not yet in place. Thus, it is not a surprise that
the subjects met with many serious difficulties. The point is to learn from the pilot trial: what are the most
important social and technical features to be developed next?

Discussion
The experiences of the groups highlight interesting aspects of group-cognitive processes and how tool and math
skills can hinder the ability to solve the problem by otherwise competent users. Clearly, while math discourse
was a goal of each group, it proved difficult to achieve in the face of tool issues and feelings of math anxiety.
When    faced  with a  technical issue, the  individuals   blamed  the tool  for the  inability to  solve  the problem,
because they felt they were technically competent in general:
     I'm an IT consultant and have to deal with various software programs meaning I'm familiar with how
     software should be designed and navigating my way around...this was definitely tough. (Group 4, lines
     310-313)
On the other hand, when faced with a mathematical concept that they were not familiar with, members of the
groups blamed themselves for not being mathematically focused:
     My High School Math teachers are furious with me right now I can feel it. (Group 3, line 96)
         This dichotomy between technical ability and mathematical inability was identified in each log. While
this is an interesting case in our specific dataset pertaining to mathematically oriented online-learning contexts,
we suspect that this phenomena may be evident in other collaborative-learning situations. Working to learn both
content and   the technology   used  to   deliver that  content  can  be   overwhelming   and   may  distract  from the
conceptual intent of the lesson. These difficulties are evident in our analysis as triggers of cycling and may be
applicable  to many    technologically  mediated     learning  situations. Because   of these   identified issues, it is
important  to  build   technological familiarity     into any   educational  groupware    environment      to  overcome
technological issues early in the process. We find that in the face of tool adversity individuals defaulted to tools
they were comfortable with such as PowerPoint, paper/pencil or screenshot/email. The use of familiar tools
allowed the members of the groups to focus on the actual math discourse and problem solving, and isolate the
effects of the tool on their productivity.
         One   of the  most striking elements     of our  analysis is the  concept   of cycling  in the group   process
between tool issues and math discourse. There was a salient presence of software functionality issues that when
coupled with gaps in knowledge derailed mathematical discourse. This derailment and the students' interest in
getting back   on task  led to   cycling.  Though    each  group  experienced  cycling,  the  groups   that   were most
successful were able to quickly manage technological barriers and return to math discourse for the majority of
their chats. We speculate that problems will exist in many groupware situations, including math learning, in
which there are gaps in ability to manipulate the technology used for the learning. We believe that these findings
may be transferable to other environments and contexts. As highlighted by one of the participants,
     The issue with our first attempts was the usability of the tools ­ and lack of familiarity of the capabilities
     available within GeoGebra (Group 1, line 109)
An increase in familiarity with the system may reduce cycling; however, further research into groups learning a
system is required to determine how this might manifest under different circumstances.
         In addition to our analytical findings, each of the groups had recommendations for ways to improve the
technology and the process of group math problem solving in the VMT-with-GeoGebra environment. These
ranged from calls for an undo option to hopes for a primer or tutorial to alleviate some technological issues.

Curriculum Design Criteria
In response to the analysis of the GeoGebra use sessions, we have been drafting a set of dynamic-geometry
curricular activities, interspersed with   tutorials of   the technology   features. Curriculum    activities have been
designed to promote collaborative learning, particularly as exhibited in significant mathematical discourse about
geometry. Collaborative learning involves a subtle interplay of processes at the individual, small-group and
classroom  levels   of engagement,   cognition    and  reflection. Accordingly,   the   activities are structured  with
sections for individual work, small-group collaboration and whole-class discussion. It is hoped that this mixture
will enhance motivation, extend attention and spread understanding.
         The goal of our set of activities is to improve the following skills in math teachers and students:
1.       To engage in significant mathematical discourse; to collaborate on and discuss mathematical activities
         in supportive small online groups.
2.       To   collaboratively  explore    mathematical    phenomena    and   dependencies;    to   make    mathematical
         phenomena visual in multiple representations; and to vary their parameters.
3.       To construct mathematical diagrams--understanding and exploring their structural dependencies.
4.       To notice, wonder about and form conjectures about mathematical relationships; to justify, explain and
         prove mathematical findings.

© ISLS                                                                                                              317
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                             Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

5.       To understand core concepts, relationships, theorems and constructions of basic high-school geometry.
         In other words, the activities seek a productive synthesis of the five areas of: discourse, visualization,
construction and argumentation skills applied in the domain of beginning geometry. The set of activities is
designed to provide an educational experience in basic geometry to math teachers and students, taking them
from a possibly novice level to a more skilled level, from which they can proceed more effectively without such
designed, scaffolded activities. By providing activities on different levels for each of the dimensions, we hope to
help math teachers and students to increase their relevant skills ­ in different ways for different people.

Conclusion
Our focus has centered increasingly on facilitating and supporting lessons involving geometric dependencies
(Stahl, 2013c). GeoGebra allows one to construct systems of inter-dependent geometric objects. Students have
to learn how to think in terms of these dependencies. They can learn through visualizations, manipulations,
constructions and verbal articulations. These can all be modeled and these skills can be developed gradually; our
pilot study   indicates that for   successful math   discourse to be achieved,    supporting   these skills  must be  an
explicit priority of the socio-technical system. We are now drafting and piloting versions of curricular activities
designed   to  develop  significant  mathematical    discourse focused  on   dependencies     among  geometric   objects
(Stahl &   Öner, 2013).   Concomitantly,     we  are implementing    software   support   for teachers  and  students to
explore the dependencies and assembling materials for professional development to prepare teachers to enact
this curriculum with their students (Stahl, 2013d).
         Our design work is guided by socio-technical implications of continuing pilot studies as the technology
and   pedagogy  of  our  project   co-evolve.  We  are  countering  the problems     that caused    negative cycling  of
technical  and  cognitive  distractions  by   improving  the software  and   testing the  curriculum.   The  curriculum
integrates  tutorials about  using   the  VMT    and GeoGebra     interfaces with  carefully   structured sequences   of
dynamic-geometry      activities for virtual  math teams.  The  activities   systematically   build up  the  background
knowledge, group practices and problem-solving orientation needed for engaging in mathematical discourse.

References
Bransford, J., Brown, A., & Cocking, R. (Eds.). (1999). How people learn: Brain, mind, experience, and school.
         Washington, DC: National Research Council. Web: http://books.nap.edu/html/howpeople1/.
CCSSI. (2011). High school -- geometry. In Common Core State Standards Initiative (Ed.), Common core state
         standards for mathematics. (pp. 74-78)
Chen,  W.,    & Looi,   C.-K.    (2011).  Active  classtoom  participation   in a Group    Scribbles    primary science
         classroom. British Journal of Educational Technology. 42(4), 676-686.
Chen, W., Looi, C.-K., & Ng, F.-K. (2009). Students' active learning leveraged by interactive technologies:
         Group Scribbles in a primary science classroom. Paper presented at the AERA. San Diego, CA.
Clark, P. G., Moore, K. C., & Carlson, M. P. (2008). Documenting the emergence of "speaking with meaning"
         as a sociomathematical norm in professional learning community discourse. Journal of Mathematical
         Behavior. 27, 297­310.
Cui, Y., Kumar, R., Chaudhuri, S., Gweon, G., & Rosé, C. P. (2009). Helping agents in VMT. In G. Stahl (Ed.),
         Studying virtual math teams. (ch. 19, pp. 335-354). New York, NY: Springer.
deVilliers, M.   (2004).  Using    dynamic    geometry  to expand  mathematics     teachers'  understanding   of  proof.
         International Journal of Mathematics Education in Science & Technology. 35(4), 703-724.
Dion, L., Jank, J., & Rutt, N. (2011). Computer monitored problem solving dialogues. Paper presented at the
         Research Experience for Undergraduates. Bloomington, Indiana.
Hohenwarter,    M.,   Preiner, J., &  Yi, T.  (2007).  Incorporating  GeoGebra     into  teaching   mathematics   at  the
         college level. Paper presented at the ICTCM. Boston, MA.
Johnson, D. W., & Johnson, R. T. (1989). Cooperation and competition: Theory and research. Edina, MN:
         Interaction Book Company.
Jonassen, D. H., Peck, K. L., & Wilson, B. G. (1999). Learning with technology: A constructivist perspective.
         Upper Saddle River, NJ: Merrill/Prentice Hall.
Laborde,    C.  (2001).  Integration  of  technology    in the  design  of   geometry     tasks with    Cabri-geometry.
         International Journal of Computers for Mathematical Learning. 6(3), 283-317.
Mariotti, M. A. (2001). Justifying and proving in the Cabri environment. International Journal of Computers for
         Mathematical Learning. 6(3), 257-281.
Medina,   R.,  Suthers, D.   D., &   Vatrapu,  R. (2009).  Representational   practices   in  VMT.   In G.  Stahl (Ed.),
         Studying virtual math teams. (ch. 10, pp. 185-205). New York, NY: Springer.
Michaels,   S., O'Connor,      C.,  & Resnick,    L.  B. (2008).   Deliberative   discourse    idealized  and   realized:
         Accountable talk in the classroom and in civic life. Studies in the Philosophy of Education. 27(4), 283-
         297.

© ISLS                                                                                                               318
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                              Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

Öner,  D.   (2008).  Supporting   students'   participation   in authentic    proof  activities in  computer     supported
         collaborative     learning  (CSCL)    environments.      International      Journal    of  Computer-Supported
         Collaborative Learning. 3(3), 343-359.
Powell, A. B., & Dicker, L. (2012). Toward collaborative learning with dynamic geometry environments. Paper
         presented at the 12th International Conference on Mathematical Education. Seoul, Korea.
Resnick,  L., O'Connor,    C.,  &   Michaels, S.   (2007).  Classroom     discourse,  mathematical   rigor,   and student
         reasoning: An accountable talk literature review: LearnLab, Pittsburgh Science of Learning Center.
Sanchez, E., & Sacristan, A. I. (2003). Influential aspects of dynamic geometry activities in the construction of
         proofs. Paper presented at the 27th PME international Conference. Proceedings pp. 111-118.
Sawyer,   R.  K. (Ed.).  (2006).  Cambridge    handbook     of   the learning  sciences.   Cambridge,   UK:     Cambridge
         University Press.
Sfard,  A.   (2008).  Thinking    as   communicating:      Human     development,     the  growth    of  discourses    and
         mathematizing. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Sinclair, N., & Yurita, V. (2008). To be or to become: How dynamic geometry changes discourse. Research in
         Mathematics Education. 10(2), 135-150.
Slavin, R. (1980). Cooperative learning. Review of Educational Research. 50(2), 315-342.
Springer, L., Stanne, M. E., & Donovan, S. S. (1999). Effects of small-group learning on undergraduates in
         science, mathematics, engineering, and technology: A meta-analysis. Review of Educational Research.
         69(1), 21-51.
Stahl, G. (2006). Group cognition: Computer support for building collaborative knowledge. Cambridge, MA:
         MIT Press.
Stahl, G.  (2008).  Book    review:  Exploring   thinking   as   communicating    in  CSCL.     International   Journal  of
         Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning. 3(3), 361-368.
Stahl, G. (2009). Studying virtual math teams. New York, NY: Springer.
Stahl, G. (2012). Traversing planes of learning. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative
         Learning. 7(4), 467-473.
Stahl, G. (2013a). Interaction analysis of a biology chat. In D. Suthers, K. Lund, C. P. Rosé & N. Law (Eds.),
         Productive multivocality. New York, NY: Springer. Web: http://GerryStahl.net/pub/multivocal.pdf.
Stahl, G.   (2013b).  Learning    across   levels. International     Journal  of   Computer-Supported       Collaborative
         Learning. 8(1), 1-12.
Stahl, G.  (2013c).  Poster:   Discovering  dependencies:     A  case   study of  collaborative    dynamic  mathematics.
         Presented   at  the International  Conference     of  Computer-Supported      Collaborative    Learning  (CSCL
         2013), Madison, WI. Web: http://GerryStahl.net/pub/cscl2013dependencies.pdf.
Stahl, G.   (2013d).  Translating    Euclid:  Creating     a  human-centered      mathematics:     Morgan    &   Claypool
         Publishers. Web: http://GerryStahl.net/pub/translating.pdf.
Stahl, G.,  Koschmann,     T., &  Suthers, D.  (2006). Computer-supported         collaborative   learning: An   historical
         perspective.   In R.  K. Sawyer   (Ed.),  Cambridge     handbook     of the  learning  sciences.  (pp.  409-426).
         Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. Web: http://GerryStahl.net/elibrary/global.
Stahl, G., Mantoan, A., & Weimar, S. (2013). Demo: Collaborative dynamic mathematics in virtual math teams.
         Presented   at  the International  Conference     of  Computer-Supported      Collaborative    Learning  (CSCL
         2013), Madison, WI. Web: http://GerryStahl.net/pub/cscl2013demo.pdf.
Stahl, G., & Öner, D. (2013). Resources for connecting levels of learning. Paper presented at the International
         Conference     of  Computer-Supported     Collaborative     Learning    (CSCL     2013).  Madison,     WI. Web:
         http://GerryStahl.net/pub/cscl2013resources.pdf.
Stahl, G., Rosé, C. P., O'Hara, K., & Powell, A. B. (2010). Supporting group math cognition in virtual math
         teams with software conversational agents. Paper presented at the First North American GeoGebra
         Conference. Ithaca, NY. Web: http://GerryStahl.net/pub/geogebrana2010a.pdf.
Suthers, D., & Medina, R. (2010). The temporal development of representational practices: Implications for
         theory and analysis of situated learning. Paper presented at the Hawaii International Conference on
         System Sciences.
Valentine,  D.  (2002).  Distance   learning: Promises,    problems     and possibilities. Online   Journal   of Distance
         Learning Administration. 5(3)
Yackel,  E.  (1995). Children's   talk in  inquiry  mathematics      classrooms.   In P.   C.  H.  Bauersfeld   (Ed.), The
         emergence    of   mathematical  meaning:    Interaction     in classroom    cultures.  Hillsdale,  NJ:  Lawrence
         Erlbaum Associates.
Yackel,  E.,  &  Cobb,   P.  (1996). Sociomathematical      norms,    argumentation,   and    autonomy  in  mathematics.
         Journal for Research in Mathematics Education. 27(4), 458-477.

Acknowledgments
This work is supported by the NSF Graduate Research Fellowship Program under Grant No. 2011121873.

© ISLS                                                                                                                 319
