CSCL 2013 Proceedings                    Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

      Collaborative Learning in Virtual Environments: Role-based
      Exploration of Causality in Ecosystems over Time and Scale

                        Shari Metcalf1, Amy M. Kamarainen2, Tina Grotzer1, Chris Dede1
                              1Harvard Graduate School of Education, Cambridge, MA
                               2New York Hall of Science, 47-01 111th St. Queens, NY
shari_metcalf@harvard.edu, amkamarainen@gmail.com, tina_grotzer@harvard.edu, chris_dede@harvard.edu

         Abstract:   EcoMUVE        is a middle    school  science curriculum  that  provides  an  immersive
         virtual eccosystem    in  which   students   learn about  complex  causality through   collaborative
         inquiry  activities.  We   describe case    study  research focused  on   EcoMUVE's    supports   for
         collaborative learning, including a jigsaw pedagogy and in-world supports such as chat and
         data sharing.

EcoMUVE, a research project funded by IES, has developed a curriculum for middle school students to learn
about complex    causal  relationships   in ecosystems     using Multi-User   Virtual Environments     (MUVEs).   This
poster presents exploratory research on the multi-user aspects of EcoMUVE ­ supporting student collaborative
learning in a model that blends face-to-face dialogue with interaction in immersive virtual environments.
         EcoMUVE     Forest    is a two   week,   inquiry-based  curriculum   unit centered  on an  immersive    virtual
ecosystem   that includes two     forested  islands.  Students travel in time  over  five decades   to see changes  in
populations and forest structure, and to figure out why fewer visitors are coming to one of the islands. The unit
uses a jigsaw pedagogy in which a team can succeed only if each student contributes data for which they are
responsible, and all team members collectively interpret that information. Students observe plants and animals,
shrink to view microscopic organisms, collect data, and graph changes in the populations of different species.
They work in 4-person teams, each choosing a role (e.g., botanist, bird watcher). Students work individually on
computers   on   role-specific learning   tasks and   data  collection, collaborating through   online  chat and  data
sharing, as well as face-to-face in team meetings. The unit culminates in each team creating and presenting to
the class an evidence-based concept map that represents their hypotheses of the ecosystem interrelationships.
         To look in depth at students' collaborative learning, we designed a case study around a science teacher
and four classes  of 7th grade    students  (N=91),   ages  12-13, who   used the  Forest unit over   two  weeks. Data
collected included pre- and post-surveys, chat logs, video, and team concept maps.
         The  key  features    we will   highlight on  the  poster focus  on  the  affordances  of the technology  for
scaffolding collaboration, including student roles, data sharing, and in-world chat. We will describe how the
concept maps that students create, as well their class presentations, demonstrate their collaborative learning.
Findings
         In post-surveys, 95% of students said that they liked their role, and 91% said they learned from their
teammates. Most students included descriptions of things they had learned from their teammates, for example, a
birdwatcher said "I learned from the Botanist about the changes in suitable bird habitats on the islands." A pre-
post survey of content learning found statistically significant (t(82)=8.38, p<.0001) mean score gains of 3.512
points, representing an effect size of 1.04 standard deviation units.
         Students used on-line chat with teammates (Figure 1) to ask for help ("wait how do u go to a different
island?", "what do small mammals eat?"), determine roles ("I call botanist"), share information ("red tailed
hawks are eating the other birds" "omg really???"), share data ("Everybody make sure to add everybody else on
data"), and plan their presentations ("maybe u can graph songbirds or other birds and show what they eat.").
         Teams primarily collaborated on their concept map face-to-face at a shared computer, inputting all
team member data and looking at the full dataset using multi-line graphs over time (Figure 2). Sample video
transcript:

         E: What do the wolves eat? Do they just eat deer, or do they eat small mammals too?
         F: We should check that out.
         [E opens small mammals page of online field guide, while A watches. E reads out loud.]
         E:  when  a single    wolf hunts   alone  it hunts and  eats smaller prey  such  as  rabbits  and other  small
         mammals
         [E switches to graph, they select deer, small mammals, and wolves to display over time]
         E: So small mammals and white tailed deer are affected by the wolves.
         F: [points] Yeah, when this starts going down this goes back up, when this starts rising this goes back
         down.

© ISLS                                                                                                            315
CSCL 2013 Proceedings               Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

         During team presentations, students projected their concept map using a document camera projector
(Figure 3, left) and took turns explaining the parts of the map pertaining to their role (colored, Figure 3, right).
Overlaps show related concepts that students learned collaboratively. For example, the population specialist
(yellow) discovered that without wolves the deer population increased. She worked with the botanist (green) to
identify the overpopulation of deer as the reason there were fewer shrubs. The        birdwatcher (purple) then
explained the impact of the lack of shrubs on birds who use the shrubs as habitat.

                                 Figure 1. Example of chat in EcoMUVE.

Figure 2. Sharing data interface (left), shared graph (center), student collaboration example from video (right).

    Figure 3. Example concept map, as drawn by students (left), colored to show overlapping roles (right).

© ISLS                                                                                                     316
