CSCL 2013 Proceedings                 Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

Puppetry as a Catalyst in Role-Play: A Device to Facilitate Gaining
                   New Insights into the Perspectives of Others
 Toshio Mochizuki & Ryoya Hirayama, Senshu University, 2-1-1 Higashi-mita, Tama-ku, Kawasaki 214-8580
                        Japan, Email: tmochi@mochi-lab.net & ne220151@senshu-u.jp
  Hiroshi Sasaki, Kobe University, 1-1 Rokkodai-cho, Nada-ku, Kobe 657-8501 Japan, sasaki@kobe-u.ac.jp
   Takehiro Wakimoto, Aoyama Gakuin University, 4-4-25 Shibuya, Shibuya-ku, Tokyo, 150-0002 Japan,
                                         wakimoto@irc.aoyama.ac.jp
    Yoshihiko Kubota, Utsunomiya University, 350, Mine-machi, Utsunomiya, Tochigi, 321-0943 Japan,
                                             kubota@kubota-lab.net
 Hideyuki Suzuki, Ibaraki University, 2-1-1, Bunkyo, Mito, Ibaraki 310-8512 Japan, hideyuki@suzuki-lab.net

         Abstract: Role-play is a powerful learning strategy that promotes the learners to broaden their
         perspectives, especially in complex situations like classroom teaching. Using puppetry creates
         a psychological distance from the player's identity, and the players' anxiety for the evaluation
         apprehension is reduced. The case study of the puppetry role-play in microteaching shows that
         the players can play various roles as though in a realistic situation. The possibility of puppetry
         as a catalyst interface for face-to-face CSCL systems is discussed.

Introduction
Role-play is widely used as a method to provide students the opportunity to fully engage in the learning activity,
and attain a variety of insights about the social, historical, or scientific phenomenon (Forsyth, 1999; Ladousse,
1989; Resnick & Wilensky, 1997). Role-play is also especially recognized as a suitable technique for the study
of dynamic, complex, non-routine situations; in decision-making training such as crisis management, nursing or
medical; and   in teaching  classrooms. One   interesting aspect     of these  kinds of role-play   is to emphasize
improvisation  rather  than scripted scenarios. Improvisation     in role-play is a  particularly powerful    learning
strategy to achieve, in that biases can be overcome through the development of new beliefs (Friedman, 2004).
This is because in such role-play, actors are sometimes required to behave counter-attitudinally,           and those
improvisations are often based on the role players' experience and reflections in part of their daily life.
         The importance of such improvisations can be explained in terms of Bakhtin's theory of dialogism.
According to Bakhtin (1986), all utterances can be seen as replies to the voice of another person who preceded
him, since the speaker will take into account the listener's background knowledge, previous utterances, gestures,
etc. in predicting the listener's likely refutation. In this way, one's utterance will be formed with the anticipated
words of the listener in mind, while at the same time the follow-up response of the listener will also be foreseen.
In this sense, it can be said that utterances themselves constitute dialogue. In this dialogic view, decision-
making and negotiations in the complex situation is nothing other than the process of forecasting the reactions
of the actors in the situation, engaging in hypothetical dialogues, and incorporating the results into how to deal
with the situation. Thus, involving improvisation is crucial because the role-play requires the ability to vividly
imagine a diversity of actors' voices that are rooted in the values and backgrounds of each participant.
         However, some of the participants still cannot play their roles very well due to being overly self-
conscious (Ladousse, 1989) or evaluation apprehension (Cottrell et al., 1968). For example, the microteaching
role-play in pre-service training requires the participants to play their roles collaboratively as a teacher and
young  pupils, and  to simulate an   actual classroom in  order   to  demonstrate   teaching in   a real-life context.
However, the reactions and feedbacks provided by colleagues acting as pupils are sometimes out of context,
since they must play the role of much younger people. Their reactions and feedbacks cannot be ensured to be
serious, honest, or realistic due to embarrassment or hesitation.

Puppetry as a Catalyst to Facilitate Gaining Perspectives in Role Play
In order to scaffold the effective dialogic imagination in role-play, puppetry can be a useful device for allowing
people to engage in the improvisation and elicit various reactions or responses from the participants.
         The most important function of puppetry is that it allows each participant to obtain participant-observer
balance and foster his/her participation by creating a clear separation between self (puppeteer) and non-self
(puppet) while creating a puppetry story. The non-self, or puppet, also contains recognizable elements of the self
which the puppeteer can identify with. Such projection in puppetry is considered to provide a `margin of safety'
manipulated by the puppeteer to achieve a balance between underdistance and overdistance (Aronoff, 2005). For
example, it is possible for the puppets to "talk" about sensitive topics that would otherwise be unacceptable for
an actor to discuss in a drama (Panford et al., 2001). Thus, puppets can be considered as a powerful distance
device to elicit much more inner emotions or unconscious experiences regarding a problematic situation.

© ISLS                                                                                                           317
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                  Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

A Case Study of Puppetry in Microteaching Role-Play
The case study was conducted in microteaching (which is ill-structured problem solving situation) role-play,
based on a "Desk top teaching simulation game" (Sakamoto, 1980) that took place on a table set up as a
miniature classroom with puppets. The players were acted out as actual students in real situations. The players
(two female and two male senior students) could not role-play realistic students very well in the microteaching
exercise in the university class - even after their internship in the actual schools. In the case study, we decided to
use animal dolls rather than human-shaped dolls in order to create a distance between the dolls and puppeteers'
themselves in the role-play (see Figure 1 for details).

                                     Figure 1. Scenes from the experiment
 (Left male wearing a tie played a teacher; two females played students and the supervisor (at the right front))

As a result of a detailed analysis of the video of the case study, it was shown that (1) puppetry can elicit various
roles that were not reflected the player's identity, such as slow or irregular students; (2) puppetry can duplicate
backchannel    in the classroom  that   sometimes    supports   student-centered knowledge      building or    fosters
cooperative reciprocal teaching that cannot appear in microteaching by self-role-play; (3) puppetry can foster
the players to conduct various roles using multiple dolls; and (4) puppetry can foster the players to express
possible non-verbal actions using verbal expressions that can be recorded by computers or videos.

Conclusion
We have    introduced the  new  possibility of puppetry    as a device  to facilitate  gaining new insights    on the
perspectives   of others  in role-play, for   learning   about  complex    situations. Using    puppetry  creates   a
psychological distance from the player's identity so that the players' anxiety for the evaluation apprehension is
reduced, and have presented empirically that the players can play various roles as if in a realistic situation.
Especially  in face-to-face  collaborative learning,  such as   the tabletop collaborative negotiation   (e.g. urban
planning in Sugimoto et al. (2004), etc.), this will be an indispensable interface that should be a catalyst to elicit
multivoice in inner emotional worlds or unconscious experience, and help learners to broaden their perspectives
that blend the experience, knowledge and beliefs of multiple imaginary actors.

References
Aronoff, M. (2005). Puppetry as a therapeutic medium. In M. Bernier & J. O'Hare (Eds.) Puppetry in education
          and therapy (pp. 109­115). Bloomington, Indiana: Authorhouse.
Bakhtin, M. M. (1986). Speech genres and other late essays (C. Emerson & M. Holquist, Eds.; W. McGee,
          Transl.). Austin, TX: University of Texas Press. (Originally published in 1979)
Cottrell, N.,  Wack,  D., Sekerak, G.,  &   Rittle, R.  (1968). Social facilitation of dominant   responses    by the
          presence of an audience and the mere presence of others. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
          9(3), 245­250.
Forsyth, D. R. (1999). Group dynamics (3rd ed.). Belmont: Wadsworth.
Friedman, S. (2004). Learning to make more effective decisions: changing beliefs as a prelude to action. The
          Learning Organization, 11(2), 110­128.
Ladrousse, G. P. (1989). Role play. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Panford, S., Nyaney M.O., Amoah, S.O., & Aidoo, N.G. (2001). Using Folk Media in HIV/AIDS Prevention in
          Rural Ghana. American Journal of Public Health, 91(10), 1559­1562.
Resnick, M., & Wilensky, Y. (1997). Diving into Complexity: Developing Probabilistic Decentralized Thinking
          through Role-Playing Activities. The Journal of Learning Sciences, 7(2), 153­172.
Sakamoto, T. (1980). Development and use of desk top teaching simulation game. In P. Race & D. Brook (Eds.)
          Perspectives on Academic Gaming & Simulation 5 (pp. 150­160), London: Kogan Page.
Sugimoto, M., Hosoi, K., & Hashizume, H. (2004). Caretta: A system for supporting face-to-face collaboration
          by integrateing personal and shared spaces. In Proceedings of CHI'04 (pp.41­48). Vienna: ACM Press.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant-in-Aids for Young Scientists (B) (No. 23700985) and
Scientific Research (B)(No. 23300295, 24300286) from Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.

© ISLS                                                                                                            318
