CSCL 2013 Proceedings                   Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

Understanding the Life of an Online Community through Analytics
Rucha Modak and Shawn Vashaw, The Pennsylvania State University, 210 Rider Building, University Park, PA
                                          rucha@psu.edu, sjv3@psu.edu

        Abstract: Online learning communities have existed and been studied for a long time now and
        changes    in the  nature of the  Internet   have changed   the   forms of these communities.  The
        present study proposes to understand a little-investigated side of online communities, long-
        term structural changes. To that end, we present preliminary data and a plan of analysis that
        will  uncover    six-year changes  in  participation, leadership   and  member   attitudes toward   a
        blogging community of amateur athletes.

Introduction
Online communities have been a staple of the Internet since its infancy and have only seen a mercurial rise in
the last decade in the form of social media, social networks, virtual worlds and many user-generated content
websites. A peculiar characteristic of many such communities is that they are informal or non-formal in nature,
created by an initiator or a small group of individuals who are joined by others over a period of time, to share,
discuss, learn and otherwise engage in a topic of interest. Concurrent with the rise of these communities has
been a rise   in academic  interest  in their structures  and outcomes.    Several different lenses may    be used  to
understand the mechanisms and culture of an online learning community ­ such as sociological, educational,
economic,   etc. The  goal of these  lenses   is to  understand the community's    content and   activity, patterns of
participation and the resultant sociological, educational, economical, etc. outcomes. However, rarely is an online
community    studied  over a  lengthy   period   to uncover changes    in content, participation and outcomes.   The
present study proposes to do just that.

Study Design and Initial Findings
Differences in participation are explained by Lave and Wenger's (1991) idea of a community of practice as well
as Gee's (2005) idea of 'affinity spaces'. Both refer to participation in an activity of shared interest, with Gee's
focus on space rather than membership. To some degree, both these characterizations seem to fit the community
and space we are studying- a blogging community of amateur athletes (triathletes, marathoners and adventure
racers). This community has existed for close to six years, has 12 member-contributors and 16 acknowledged
followers. The blog is public. It was started by one founding member who wished to run a race as a fundraiser
for a cause of his choice. Initial invitees included his lifelong friends and new members were added by invitation
or recommendation. Understanding changes in participation in online communities is commonly done through
Lave and Wenger's (1991) Legitimate Peripheral Participation model where the community is in a state of flux
as far as degrees of participation are concerned and the movement is from a state of low to high participation
until the member leaves the community (Bryant, Forte and Bruckman, 2005). However, we propose that this
model overstates the likelihood of such movement in a community like the one in question. Similarly, the
affinity space model (Gee, 2005), which often refers to massive online groups for illustration, is largely silent
about the nature of participatory change other than acknowledging individual variation. So, neither Lave and
Wenger's work nor Gee's view satisfy our need to model how participation brings about longitudinal changes to
this blog.
        In order to understand and model it, we chose to analyze the number as well as the content of every
contributor's posts.  To that end,  Figure 1   depicts the  former  in  terms  of every  member's  contribution  as  a
percentage of the yearly posts. According to the Lave and Wenger (1991) model, the lines depicting low initial
participation (the community became operational in 2007) should rise higher as they move toward the right and
closer to present day, and converge toward the middle. However, the activity of all but one of the members ('A')
rejects this model. In all other cases, activity is either robust at the beginning of the 6 year period but gradually
and consistently dips lower or stays steadily low throughout. In fact, although the graph includes data from 12
contributors, only 6 were plotted since contributions of the rest were consistently miniscule. These members
may be termed 'lurkers' (Bishop, 2007) or 'listeners' (Wise et al, 2011) and the above model would suggest that
their contribution would move them higher up in the graph as the years progressed. Clear evidence of their
lurking is expressed by their replies to other members' posts mentioning them despite rarely making original
posts of their own.
        We are currently in the process of analyzing content over the 6 years, looking for trends in relationships
between specific content and contributor, if any. In addition, we aim to better understand lurking/listening in the
community by analyzing comments and page views per post. By connecting these dots, we hope to understand
leadership in the community and specific forms of activity that propel leaders. The final part of this study is
interviewing contributors in order to better understand the changes we find in their participation over the years ­

© ISLS                                                                                                           319
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                     Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

specifically the reasons for both increases and decreases in it, their attitude toward the changes and, of particular
interest, the relationship of this community and its content with their real life physical activity. The goal is thus
to generate several kinds of data and understand the activity of this community more completely. Although such
research has    a rich history  (e.g.  Fields and Kafai, 2009, Harris et al, 2009), using  both backend   data and
interviews as data sources is unusual.

           100
               90
               80                                                                                A
               70
                                                                                                 B
               60
               50                                                                                C
               40                                                                                D
               30
                                                                                                 E
               20
               10                                                                                F
                0
                       2007       2008         2009       2010      2011        2012

         Figure 1: Member participation expressed as a percentage of posts per year between 2007 and 2012

Implications and recommendations for future research:
Given the limited degree of work done so far, we have few implications to offer. However, to the best of our
knowledge, research of this scope or focus is currently not under way. There are several good reasons for
initiating it:
         If the goal is to encourage participation in online communities of practice or affinity groups, then
         understanding patterns of activity, reasons for changes, leadership and forms of participation over long
         periods of time is important (Bishop, 2007).
         This   is a   `naturalistic' environment  that does not  force/coerce or otherwise   require participation,
         providing important insights into the life of an online community. Such insights may even be used to
         understand patterns of participation in MOOCs, given the freedom and self-initiated participation are
         their cornerstones.
         Depending upon the topic at hand, who dominates and what they say may have important implications
         for members' well-being. Researching participatory changes may help us monitor it better.
         Since    participation makes    a community,    studying historical changes in   the degree  and kind  of
         participation in the community will give us a more coherent picture of its life.

References:
Bishop, J. (2007) Increasing participation in online communities: A framework for human­computer interaction.
         Computers in Human Behavior, 23 (4), 1881-1883.
Bryant, S.L., Forte, A. & Bruckman, A. (2005) Becoming Wikipedian: Transformation of Participation in a
         Collaborative Online Encyclopedia. Published in Group '05 Proceedings of the 2005 international
         ACM SIGGROUP Conference on Supporting Group Work, New York.
Fields, D. & Kafai, Y. B. (2009) A connective ethnography of peer knowledge sharing and diffusion in a tween
         virtual world. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning 4(1): 47-68.
Gee, J.P. (2005) Affinity Spaces: From Age of Mythology to Today's Schools. In Barton and Tusting (Eds.)
         Beyond Communities of Practice. Cambridge University Press.
Harris, H., Bailenson, J.N., Nielsen A. & Yee, N. (2009). The evolution of social behavior over time in Second
         Life. PRESENCE: Teleoperators & Virtual Environments, 18 (6), 294-303
Lave, J. & Wenger, E. (1991) Situated Learning: Legitimate Peripheral Participation. Cambridge: Cambridge
         University Press
Wise, A. F.,    Speer, J. Hsiao, Y.   &  Marbouti, F. (2011) Factors  Contributing  to Learners' Online   Listening
Behaviors in Online and Blended Courses. Published in the Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on
Computer Supported Collaborative Learning, Hong Kong, China.

© ISLS                                                                                                         320
