CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                            Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

MTClassroom and MTDashboard: Supporting Analysis of Teacher
           Attention in an Orchestrated Multi-tabletop Classroom
         Roberto Martinez-Maldonado, Judy Kay, Kalina Yacef, School of Information Technologies,
         Marie-Theresa Edbauer, Business School, The University of Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia.
                         Yannis Dimitriadis, School of Telecommunications Engineering,
                                  University of Valladolid, Paseo Belén 15, Spain.
             {roberto,judy,kalina}@it.usyd.edu.au, medb1925@uni.sydney.edu.au, yannis@tel.uva.es

        Abstract: In spite of the substantial progress in CSCL, there is still some distance between the
        promise of    educational  technology   for  classroom   learning   and   what is   readily achieved.
        Emerging tabletop devices can offer new means to enhance teachers' classroom control and
        awareness. These technologies can help them orchestrate activities, and capture, analyse and
        visualise    students'  collaborative   interactions.  This  paper   presents     MTClassroom     and
        MTDashboard, that were designed, deployed and tested to support the teacher in orchestrating
        collaborative learning activities at an authentic classroom. MTClassroom is an enriched multi-
        tabletop environment that captures aspects of students' activity as they work in small groups.
        MTDashboard       is an orchestration   tool displayed  at a handheld     device, giving the  teacher
        control over classroom activities and providing `real-time' indicators of participation and task
        progress of each group. We analysed teacher's attention by triangulating quantitative evidence
        captured     by our  environment   with qualitative   observations  and   teacher's perceptions.  We
        investigated the affordances of our environment and the impact of the information provided to
        the teacher through the MTDashboard. The contribution of this paper is the novel approach
        for providing teachers with key indicators of small-group collaboration in the classroom and
        analysing their impact on teachers' attention to help them manage their time more effectively.

Introduction and Related Work
Research on     Computer-Supported       Collaborative  Learning   (CSCL)    has    demonstrated    that small   group
collaboration can activate particular learning mechanisms and that educational technology resources can be used
to mediate   and facilitate  such collaborative activities (Roschelle  et   al., 1995; Stahl, 2006).  In  spite of   this
substantial progress in research and practice, there is still some distance between the promise of technology and
what has actually been delivered in most classrooms. This issue is particularly important for CSCL due to over-
generalisation from a small pilot study's findings and over-expectation of new technology (Dillenbourg et al.,
2011a). Cuban et al. (2001) argued that the role of teachers is critical to determine the success of deploying
technological innovations in the classroom. This points to the need to consider the potentially key role for
creating new mechanisms that can help teachers design and orchestrate learning activities (Dillenbourg et al.,
2010; Prieto et al., 2011), so that they can successfully  use emerging technologies   in the classroom.
        An obstacle in using personal computers in the classroom is that these tend to make it more difficult to
promote face-to-face collaboration due to their small display and single input (Morgan et al., 2009). By contrast,
emerging shared devices, such as multi-touch tabletops, offer a large enriched interface that learners can use
simultaneously   to  create  artefacts. They also offer access  to  digital content  while  students  collaborate    and
negotiate understanding face-to-face with equal opportunities of participation (Dillenbourg et al., 2011a). Our
work aims to tackle the issues described above by providing a suite of hardware and software tools for (i)
enabling students to work in small groups and build virtual artefacts in the form of concept maps that represent
their shared understanding (Figure 1, right), and (ii) enabling teachers to orchestrate the learning activities and
teach curriculum content. We present MTClassroom (Figure 1, centre) and MTDashboard (Figure 1, left), which
were both deployed and tested in authentic classroom sessions. MTClassroom is an enriched multi-tabletop
classroom that captures aspects of students' learning and interaction processes as they work in small groups.
MTDashboard on an orchestration tool displayed at a handheld device that allows a teacher to control classroom

   Figure 1. MTDashboard  (Left),  MTClassroom  (Centre)  and  the  Concept  Mapping  application  (Right).

© ISLS                                                                                                             320
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                               Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

activities and obtain live visual indicators of collaboration or progress of each group. The main contribution of
this paper  is the  presentation of   an  approach  that provides   indicators   of small-groups'     performance    on   the
teacher's dashboard, and our study of its impact on the teacher's decisions about the groups needing attention.
         To date, full class sets of interactive tabletops have been studied in research contexts, rather than
authentic learning environments. One important project that explored the use of tabletops in the classroom is
SynergyNet (Mercier et al., 2012). This was a multi-tabletop environment used to investigate the quality of
school   children's collaboration     and the   ways  teachers    can interact   with    their system.    Another   similar
environment was presented by Do-Lenh (2012), which could track command cards for the teacher to orchestrate
the  tables and  also   showed   task  progress   indicators at a  wall  display    that all   the class  could    see. Both
environments    explored  ways   that  a  teacher can use    these devices for   classroom     orchestration,   in terms  of
collaboration and usability, respectively. A third example was provided by a teacher's dashboard proposed by
Martinez-Maldonado et al. (2012b), who evaluated a system that offered visual indicators of group work at each
tabletop to help teachers decide which group needed more attention over the duration of a class. However, in all
this previous work, the studies were not linked to authentic curricula; nor were they prepared by the teacher.
         The work we present in this paper builds on principles of classroom orchestration (Dillenbourg et al.,
2011b), specifically on the dimensions of regulation and awareness (Prieto et al., 2011). MTClassroom provides
an   environment    that captures  live   information    about  each  learner    collaborating     at the  classroom     and
MTDashboard is the interface that provides control functions and indicators enabling the teacher to be aware of
each group's progress and activity. Our work goes beyond previous research by showing how the captured data
can be used by the teacher in two ways: in class for light-weight indicators of students' progress; and after class,
to analyse the ways they allocated their attention between the student groups.

Design of our Educational Technology
The main motivation for designing MTClassroom and MTDashboard is that, as the use of technology in and out
the classroom is spreading, large amounts of learner data can be captured and summarised. These summaries of
data can be exploited to show information that might otherwise not be easily available. This can be provided to
teachers so that they can better decide which students may need timely interventions (Bull et al., 2012) or for
later reflection on how their classroom attention was divided. Interactive tabletops are devices that have the
potential to support knowledge co-construction in small teams (Dillenbourg et al., 2011a) and also to capture
aspects  of  learners   collaborative  interactions (Martinez-Maldonado       et al., 2012c).      Next,  we   describe   the
principles  of classroom   orchestration   and  awareness    that  drove  the  design    of  the   educational  technology
presented in this paper and then, our learning environments. These principles are as follows:
         a) To support the role of the teacher as the main actor in classroom orchestration. The design of the
system should primarily focus on providing services to assist teachers' actions and awareness in the classroom
(Dillenbourg et al., 2010).
         b) To support coordination of planned learning activities. The tools should support the enactment of
the activities designed by the teacher, so that the learning objectives can be achieved (Prieto et al., 2011).
         c) To support classroom regulation and management. The system should provide the teacher with
functions to manage and adapt, to some extent, the macro script of the classroom activity (Dillenbourg et al.,
2011b). We also highlight the importance of after-class analysis of the data that can be captured during the
learning activities for reflection and evaluation.
         d)  To  provide   "light-weight"   indicators   about  learners'  progress.     The   system    should be  able  to
automatically capture small-groups' interactions data and present this information to the teacher to enhance their
awareness and direct their attention (Bull et al., 2012; Martinez-Maldonado et al., 2012a).

MTClassroom: Multi-Interactive Tabletop Classroom
The MTClassroom is composed of a number of interconnected multi-touch interactive tabletops (4 were used in
our study). Each tabletop consists of a 26 inch PQlabs multi-touch layer placed over a high-definition display of
the same size. Each tabletop is enriched with an over-head depth sensor that detects the student who is touching
the interactive surface at any time (Figure 2, left). In this way, the host applications running at the tabletops
recognise   and  log    differentiated  actions   performed   by   each  student.   From     the   teacher's    perspective,
MTClassroom offers functionalities for orchestrating the tabletops through a controller dashboard that allows
teachers to send commands to the host applications to trigger actions such as blocking the touch input or moving
to  the next   learning  phase. A  full  description  of the  design  of  this tool   is provided     in the  next  section.
Additionally, the system incorporates a connected wall projector that the teacher can use to display the artefact
being created at a determined tabletop to lead reflection at classroom level (Figure 2, right).
         MTClassroom can run different learning applications. In this study, the classroom activity consisted of
the elaboration of concept maps. Concept mapping is an activity that encourages meaningful learning and, when
maps are constructed in small groups, can foster externalisation and negotiation of diverse perspectives (Novak,
1995;   Stahl, 2006).   This tabletop   concept   mapping    application (Martinez-Maldonado          et al., 2010)permits

© ISLS                                                                                                                   321
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                                  Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

  Figure 2.  MTClassroom  in  action  (Left).  Reflection  driven  by  the  teacher  using  the  wall  display  (Right)  

students to have access to a list of suggested concepts and linking words, or type their own words, in order to
build a concept map that answers a question asked by the teacher. Prior to the classroom activity, the teacher
uses a desktop concept mapping editor to create the list of suggested concepts and linking words, and generate a
Master Concept Map with the crucial or relevant concepts and links that learners must include in their maps, as
well as other relevant ones that might be expected.
          From a  data capture       perspective,   the      system  automatically   differentiates                              students' actions  at the
tabletop according to their seating position. The logging system of each tabletop records all actions to a central
repository that can be accessed in real time to generate indicators of group activity to be presented to the
teacher. Additionally, observation consoles can be directly connected to the repository to capture synchronised
qualitative data. In  our study,     two different         observers submitted  standardised                              annotations   of  the teacher's
attention and interventions. More details about these are described in the next sections.

MTDashboard

 Figure 3.  MTDashboard:  condition  1  (Left),  being  used  in  the  classroom  (Centre)  and  condition  2  (Right)
The MTDashboard is a multi-platform teacher's tool that contains both controlling and awareness components
(Figure 3, right). In this study, the dashboard was displayed at a handheld tablet device that the teacher carried
while walking around the classroom to monitor student progress (Figure 3, centre). The design of this dashboard
was driven by the requirements specified by the teacher. The design was also based on principles of classroom
orchestration of regulation and awareness (Dillenbourg et al., 2010; Prieto et al., 2011) and inspired by similar
technologies  applied in  related    work   (Do-Lenh,        2012;   Mercier et al., 2012). Figure                                4 shows   details of the
MTDashboard    interface  that     includes the    following    components.     A) General  functions,                               commands    that  the
teacher can use with any tabletop. These are, "Start" (Figure 4, A1) and "Finish" (A4) commands, to explicitly
mark the boundaries of the activity; a "Send message" (A6) command, so the teacher can send text reminders to
all the tables about, for example, the time left for the activity; "Block" (A2) to freeze the table when the teacher
wants students' attention and "Unblock" (A3) commands for the teacher to get students' attention when needed:
and a "Reset" (A5) command to clean up the tabletop interfaces and making them ready for students in next
                 Control functions            A6

       A1
                                                                                     Condition 1  :
       B1                                                                                            Size a  nd  distance  
                                                                                                    to t  he  teacher's  map
       A2                                                                                                                      D1
                                            C-Awareness
       A3                                   visualisations

       A4                                                                             Condition 2  :
                                                                                                   Amount  and  symmetry
       A5                                                                                               of p  hysical  
                          B2                                                                            participation          D2

Figure 4.  User  interface  of  the  MTDashboard  (annotated  to  show  Control  functions  A1--6,  B1--2,  C,  D1--2).

© ISLS                                                                                                                                                 322
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                                  Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

tutorial. B) Configurable functions, may be applicable in various activities but their meaning depends on the
macro-script     definition. These    include     the "Jump    to  the next  phase"  (B1)     and "Send     to   the wall"  (B2)
commands. Figure 3 (left) shows that in our case, this latter shows a concept map of one tabletop in the wall
display. And finally, C) Awareness visualisations, which can show key information about each group progress,
participation or other indicators that may be coupled to the domain (D1-2 are explained in detail below).

Study Description
Authentic classroom sessions. Two sets of tutorial sessions were taught in Semester 1 and 2, 2012, by the
School of Business of the University of Sydney. In the first set of 14 classroom sessions, we investigated how a
teacher can design and orchestrate small-group activities using an enriched classroom, and subsequently analyse
the data to assess that design (Martinez-Maldonado et al., 2012a). The technology used in this preliminary study
did not have any awareness or control functions available to the teacher. The study informed design of the tools
needed to orchestrate a classroom, for the second iteration. This paper focuses on that second set of classroom
sessions.  It had   8  tutorials, run   in the 6th   week   of Semester   2, 2012,   for a course    titled "Management      and
Organisational Ethics". In total, 140 students attended these tutorials. Each had 15 to 20 students. The teacher
arbitrarily formed four groups, with 4 or 5 students at each table. All students knew each other. The teacher
designed a case-resolution activity to cover the set topic as defined in the curriculum for that week.
          Activity design. A macro-script was defined by the teacher for the tutorials as follows: 1) Introduction
(10  minutes):    the   teacher   forms groups,      explains  the tutorial  objective,  teaches  students     how   to  use the
minimalistic concept mapping application and explains the objectives of the first activity. 2) Activity 1 (10
min.): the teacher uses the MTDashboard to ensure that all groups start at the same time. The four tabletops
respond by clearing the interface and loading a small scaffolding concept map (5 concepts and 2 links set by the
teacher). Students have to complete this map showing how the main actors of the case are linked. 3) Reflection 1
(5 min.): the teacher blocks the tabletops and introduces Activity 2, explaining it and leading class discussion
about possible solutions to the case. 4) Activity 2 (15 min.): for the teacher, this is "the most important activity
of the tutorial from the learning perspective". The teacher unblocks the tabletops; and students discuss the task
and  complete     their concept    map.    5) Group    sharing    and  final reflection  (10  min.):  the   teacher   blocks the
tabletops again and then asks each group to share their solution with the class. The teacher uses the function
send to   the    wall for each    table in    turns.  After each   group  has  explained   their  concept    map,    the teacher
summarises the outcomes of the activity and finishes the session. The class time was fixed at 50 minutes.
          Visualisations    presented   to    the teacher.  Two    different conditions   of  the MTDashboard         were  used
across 8 sessions. For Condition 1, the dashboard (Figure 3, left, and Figure 4, lower right) included the Group
Map Visualisation that represented the size and distance of each map to the teacher's map. This information was
explicitly requested by the teacher because she wanted this concept map quality measure that is not normally
available during the limited classroom time (Figure 4, D1). The second version of the dashboard (Figure 3,
right) presented the visualisation Radar of Physical Participation that shows the number of touches on the
tabletop  per    student  and   the equality   among     group    member     touches (Figure   4,  D2).   The    design  of  this
visualisation was suggested by the teacher in previous tutorials (Semester 1) who expressed that "quantitative
information   about     students'  actions    would   be  useful   for identifying participation".   This    visualisation   was
inspired by previous work on group chat communication and physical activity (Martinez-Maldonado et al.,
2011).  A  larger     range  of   visualisations     (some  more   elaborated)  were     offered  to the    teacher   (Martinez-
Maldonado et al., 2012b), but not selected for this study.
          Research      questions.  When      teachers   orchestrate   multiple groups     in the  classroom,     one    of their
challenges    is to identify  the   group  that   most  needs   immediate    attention  (Dillenbourg   et   al., 2011b)  whilst,
concurrently, spending a relatively balanced amount of time with each group, to be fair to all students. This is
where MTDashboard can provide awareness support for the teacher, enabling an informed decision about which
group to attend next. For this, we sought to address the next questions: What is the impact of the information
provided   to the   teacher  by   the MTDashboard        during    the classroom   sessions?   Is the teacher     attending  the
"lower achieving" groups according to the information provided?
          Data collection. We collected information from a number of sources to triangulate evidence. These
sources included: automated capture of the MTClassroom, notes from an external observer focused on teacher's
actions, notes from a second external observer focused on assessing each small-group work and notes from
interviewing the teacher. The automatically captured data consisted of synchronised log of the host application
at each tabletop (differentiated students' actions and partial states of the concept maps), logs of teacher's actions
using the MTDashboard, and partial distances of group artefacts from the teacher map. The manually captured
quantitative/qualitative data consisted of the observed time and duration of the moments when the teacher: i)
attended or intervened a group, ii) looked at the MTDashboard, iii) spoke to the whole group, iv) walked around
the  class or    did  not   look   at any     specific  group. These    observations    were   captured     through   a  console
synchronised with the application logs. The second set of observations consisted of quantitative assessments of
perceived qualitative collaboration per group based on an adapted rating scheme (Meier et al., 2007). Our

© ISLS                                                                                                                       323
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                        Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

scheme has 4 dimensions of collaboration, quantified from -2 to 2, for each of (a) mutual understanding and
dialogue management, (b) information pooling and consensus (c) task division, time management and technical
coordination, and (d) reciprocity. The teacher also assessed groups at the end of each tutorial, using one of three
possible values: low, medium or high achieving. Finally, we conducted semi-structured post-tutorial interviews
with the teacher to obtain feedback on the functions and visualisations provided for classroom orchestration.
         Data exploration. To analyse the teacher's attention distribution, we first define the terms attention and
intervention. We consider that teachers pay attention to a group when their gaze is focused on or they interact
with that group. Intervention is the subset of such attention that happens only when the teacher interacts with the
group, therefore interrupting their work. We made this distinction based on a previous study in which teachers
stated that for some outstanding groups they would "see what they are doing" but mostly leave them work by
themselves (Martinez-Maldonado et al., 2012b). During the post-tutorial interviews the teacher commented that
she "tried to provide equal attention to all groups", while "focusing on groups that needed more help". This
means that the teacher dynamically chose the order in which she attended to each group. Having made this
distinction, we   now  describe  an example  of  the teacher's actions  at the MTClassroom.     Figure  5  shows                        a
transition diagram where the nodes represent the elements that were at the focus of teacher's attention. The
nodes correspond to each group, the MTDashboard or the whole Class. The latter includes the times when the
teacher was not attending to any particular group or gave a message to the whole class. The directed arrows
between the nodes represent the transitions recorded by the external observer (45 transitions registered in this
example).    In this group,  the teacher devoted most  time to    the red  group  (32%   of attention  and 29%                         of
intervention time) compared with the others (20%, 26%, and 21%). In fact, the teacher assessed the red group as
the only low achieving group in the class, therefore confirming that the attention in this class was not equally
distributed. We also observed that the teacher never attended to the green group after looking at the dashboard.
Coincidentally, the green group also received the fewest interventions. This motivated the analysis of the rest of
the cases to find evidence that confirms the impact of the information delivered through the dashboard on
teacher's attention. In other sessions, the accumulated attention was more egalitarian. An analysis of dispersion
of attention and intervention among the sessions showed that the teacher paid attention to all groups largely
equally (mean index of dispersion -Gini factor- for attention= 0.12 and intervention = 0.124, where zero means
perfect equality).   The next section describes our  evaluation of  the impact    of the nature of the information
displayed through the dashboard on teacher attention and intervention. The actions that the teacher took after
looking at the MTDashboard are the focus of our evaluation (thicker transition lines in Figure 5).

Analysis and Discussion
This section is divided in three parts. The first two tackle our research questions and the last one explores the
impact of teacher's feedback on students to complete our analysis of the orchestration loop at our environment.
         Analysis, part 1. For the first question (What is the impact of the information we provided to the
teacher in real-time during the classroom sessions?), we started by analysing whether there was any relation
between the observed performance of each of the 32 groups during the tutorials with the accumulated amount of
time that the teacher dedicated to attend or intervene each of them. We divided the groups according to the two
conditions of the information that was provided to the teacher through the MTDashboard. The two conditions
were: (i) distance to teacher's map and (ii) physical participation. We performed correlation analyses between
attention/intervention   and group  performance  measured  in   different  levels and  from different  sources:                       the
external observer that measured collaboration, the artefact that students built and the teacher assessment. Table
1 shows the results of these analyses, where Attention time and Intervention time are the proportions of the time
the teacher dedicated to inspect and interact, or just interact, with specific groups respectively. Regarding the
columns of groups' performance, columns ob1, ob2, ob3 and ob4 correspond the 4 categories used by the
external observer to assess group's collaboration according to the schema adapted from Meier et al. (2007).
Column Obc corresponds to the correlations with the cumulative score of these 4.       Columns Size map and Dist
correspond to the correlations with, respectively, the size and the distance of groups' map to the teacher's map.
Finally, the column Tchr indicates the correlations with the quality of each group as assessed by the teacher.

  Figure 5.     An  illustrative  transition  diagram  of  the  process  of  teacher's  attention  in  one  classroom  
                                              session.  session.

© ISLS                                                                                                                               324
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                                                                                              Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

           Results              showed          a difference                     between      the        two         conditions                for     the   correlation              between                 observed
collaboration             and     attention/intervention                            time.    For        condition              (i)   distance             to teacher's                map,         we         found       a
significant positive correlation between levels of collaboration and the attention and intervention provided by
the teacher (columns ob2, ob3 and Obc, left). On the other hand, for condition (ii) physical participation, we
found a negative moderate correlation (columns ob1, ob3, ob4 and Obc, right). From a teaching perspective, a
negative correlation might appear desirable, since it would mean that the teacher provided more attention to the
low groups. However, a perfect correlation is unrealistic, since the teacher cannot totally neglect high achieving
students. To explain these findings, we triangulated this evidence with the teacher's statements during the post-
tutorial interviews. The teacher found that the information provided in condition (i) was useful during the class
and it was expressed as: "I looked at the number of relevant links because one group could have 21 links, but
how many of them actually matched my map? For a group with 9 linkages with most of them matching my map,
I would be satisfied". This means that information about the distance to teacher's map in condition (i) helped the
teacher    recognise             the  groups               that        might      have       needed       more              help.    The        analysis           supports           this        since       the       only
negative correlation of condition (i) was for column Dist (-0.3 and -0.16 for attention and intervention). The
level of collaboration of groups does not determine the qualitative aspects of their artefacts, therefore there were
no negative correlations for observed collaboration in condition (i).
Table 1: Correlation analyses between Attention/Intervention and Groups' performance.
                                                           i)  Distance  to  teacher's  map                                                           ii)  Physical  participation  
     Groups'  performance                     Observed  collaboration                     Size                                           Observed  collaboration                          Size    
                                     ob1       ob2        ob3          ob4      Obc      map      Dist        Tchr           ob1        ob2       ob3         ob4         Obc        map         Dist    Tchr  
Attention  time  (%)            --0.20      0.33       0.34       --0.10     0.44     0.29     --0.30     --0.10          --0.26    --0.10    --0.33      --0.32      --0.30      --0.10     0.48     0.00  
Intervention  time  (  %)      --0.10      0.37       0.34       0.02       0.45     0.34     --0.16     0.02            --0.20    0.05      --0.32      --0.38      --0.27      0.03       0.34     0.15  
Correlation                                   med/       med/  low  --  low  +  low  +  no  +  p<=0.1  med/  low  +  low  --  no  low--  no  med/  low  --  med/  low  --  med  --  no  +  p<=0.1  no  
           For condition (ii), the teacher expressed that the information provided by the Radars of participation
was good but was not used much because "a lot of the times groups decided that one only person was going to
do the links or I [the teacher] could tell by looking at the table that everyone was discussing but only two or
three people were actually moving things around. Then, by looking at the diagrams only, I couldn't interpret
[them] as the group was not working". Therefore, during these tutorials for the second condition, the teacher
mostly used what she could observe and listen from each group work. We argue that this is the reason why the
attention and intervention are more aligned to the observed level of collaboration (negative correlations for
columns ob1, ob3, ob4, Obs in condition Physical participation). As the information about the size of the map
and the distance to the teacher's map was not provided in this condition, we found no correlation or positive
correlation respectively (columns Size map and Dist). Finally, the teacher's assessment seemed independent
from her decisions to provide attention (values are close to zero in Tchr columns for both conditions). The
teacher described that groups' assessment was primarily based on the explanations that each presented to the
class towards the end of the tutorial, and also influenced by the students' conversations that she could overhear
and    the groups'              indicators        of       distance              to teacher's           map         provided          in       condition           (i).  Therefore,                the        teacher's
assessment was not connected to their evaluation of which groups needed the most help at some point. This
suggests that, while the cumulative analysis (part 1) is informative in both conditions, we also need to conduct
further analysis taking into account the moments when attention was provided to groups.
           Analysis, part 2. As groups' needs for teacher attention vary in time, the teacher needs to continuously
monitor groups' performance to try and keep the levels across groups as close as possible. Here is where our
second     research             question          arises:              is the       teacher         attending                 the   `less       achieving'              groups         according                     to the
information provided? To answer this, we analysed the decisions made by the teacher right after looking at the
dashboard. There were 38 teacher's actions that were captured by the external observer and synchronised with
the MTClassroom's logs (17 for distance to teacher's map and 21 for physical participation conditions).
           Condition (i). For each moment when the teacher looked at the dashboard and for each group in the
classroom, we calculated the quantitative indicators of size and distance of the map provided by the Group map
visualisation        at         that exact        moment.                 Then,      the     groups       were                ranked        from        the  smallest                and         furthest      map       to
teacher's map to the biggest and closest map at that point in time. There were 3 possible ranks: furthest behind
group(s), the strongest group(s), and the groups in between. The strongest group at a determined moment was
the one with more relevant links and less irrelevant links according to the teacher's map. Then, we identified the
group that the teacher chose to attend next.                                              After this, we assessed the category of the group chosen by the
teacher, for example, if the teacher chose a furthest behind group or a strong one. Table 2 shows the results of
this analysis. Column A corresponds to the 17 cases of teacher's attention after inspecting the dashboard of the
condition under analysis (i). Column B corresponds to the other cases where the second type of information was
provided (ii). We found that when the map size and distance to the teacher's map information was provided
(column A) the teacher only decided to attend the strongest group 18% of the times (3 out of 17 cases). On the
contrary, when this information was not provided, the teacher attended the strongest group 43% of the times (9

© ISLS                                                                                                                                                                                                                  325
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                                                                                         Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

out of 21). This confirms that showing information of each group's artefact in `real-time' had some impact on
the teacher's decision as to which group to attend next. It also validates what the teacher expressed, that looking
at the number of relevant links added by each group helped her have a better idea of groups' performance.
Table 2: Analysis the groups that the teacher attended for condition (i) distance to teacher's map.
     Condition:  distance  to  teacher's  map                 A)    Map  information  was  provided                              B) No  information  about  the  map  was  provided  
                  Total                                                 17                       Proportion  %                                21                       Proportion    %  
              Less  achieving                                          5                                29.41                                     4                       19.05  
            Not  the  best  groups                                   9                                52.94                                     8                       38.10  
              The  best  group                                        3                                17.65                                     9                       42.86  

         Condition          (ii).          We   calculated               the         information                   provided        by        the visualisation          radar                  of physical
participation for the 38 cases when the teacher looked at the dashboard. We had the same 3 possible ranks. In
this case, the strongest group was the more equilibrated in terms of participation. We measured the rank using
an index of dispersion, the Gini coefficient. This is a number between zero and 1, where zero means perfect
equality of students' participation. We followed the same process as the previous condition. Results are shown
in Table 3. These confirm that the participation radar, at least in the way in which we presented it, did not
provide information to the teacher to take decisions about which group to attend next. The teacher decided to
attend low or high achieving groups almost with no difference (33%, 38% and 28% of the times). The post-
tutorials interview confirmed that the teacher did not use the information about physical participation, justifying
this with the argument that "not everyone was touching the tabletop but they were speaking a lot and this is
good from a learning perspective". The teacher also argued that this information "would be very helpful in a
bigger class". The teacher described this as follows: "I cannot observe 80 people but I can observe 20 people, I
could tell who was talking. It would be fantastic to check the participation information for a bigger group".
Table 3: Analysis the groups that the teacher attended for condition (i) physical participation.
      Condition:  physical  participation      A)   No  information  about  participation  was  provided                                B)        Participation    condition  
                  Total                                           17                           Proportion  %                                21                       Proportion  %  
              Less  achieving                                     4                                    23.53                                 7                           33.33  
            Not  the  best  groups                              9                                    52.94                                 8                           38.09  
             The  best  group                                    4                                    23.53                                 6                           28.57  

         Analysis, part 3. Finally, we investigated whether the teacher's intervention actually had an impact on
students' performance immediately after. We considered as indicator of performance the number of relevant
links created by each group. The teacher intervened groups a total of 74 times in the 8 classroom sessions. For
each intervention, each group was ranked at the moment the teacher started the intervention from 1 to 4 (from
low to high group, according to the teacher's map distance of the four groups in the class). Then, we assessed if
there was an improvement (or decrease) of the map 2, 3, 4 and 5 minutes later (interventions lasted up to 2
minutes and each activity lasted from 8 to 10 minutes). For example, at minute 5:05 the teacher attends the
Green group. At that exact moment, this group had the furthest map to the teacher map in the class, so their rank
was 1. We divided the 74 interventions in two groups according to the 2 conditions of the information provided
to the teacher. Results                    on the      analyses               of  correlations             between       the              rank   of        each    attended   group                and  the
improvement of the teacher's map distance are shown in Table 4. For condition (i), Distance to teacher's map,
we found significant negative correlations. This means that the groups that were lagging significantly improved
their teacher's map distance after teacher's intervention. However no correlation was found in condition, (ii).
We can therefore argue that the teacher's intervention had a significant impact on the groups' artefact when the
information about          the            distance     to       the teacher's               map was                provided.       This       once         again    provides               evidence    that
supports the benefits of showing information about the quality of students' work to the teacher in real time.
Table 4: the Impact of teacher's interventions: correlation analysis between the rank of a group among the
others in the classroom and the improvement of their artefact's distance to the teacher's map.
          Condition                      #  interventions     after  2  min           after  3  min         after  4  min        after  5  min                              
    Distance  to  teacher's  map           40              --0.4,  p<=0.01        --0.27,  p<=0.05       --0.32,  p<0.025       --0.27,  p<=0.05       Significant  correlations  
       Physical  participation               34                      0.08                  --0.05                  --0.05                 --0.02                   No  correlation  

         Our analysis completed the circle of teacher's orchestration that includes: awareness, intervention and
students' action following this intervention. We found some trends by analysing the accumulated attention and
intervention by the end of the tutorials. Then, we obtained stronger evidence confirming the importance of
showing indicators of quality of student's work to drive teacher's decision. Finally, we found that informed
interventions of the teacher can lead students to improve their solutions according to teacher's perspective.

Conclusions and Future Work
We   presented our         enriched            multi-tabletop                    classroom      that               afforded        the       unobtrusive           data capture                 that makes
possible to present two sets of information to the teacher in real-time. The potential of MTClassroom can be
wide, from offering simple classroom orchestration controls to awareness and reflection tools. We confirmed
that the data  presented                   to the     teacher            in    the         classroom       can        drive        their      focus        of      attention especially               when

© ISLS                                                                                                                                                                                                 326
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                                Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

information about the quality of students work is delivered. The teacher described this as follows: "I think the
dashboard was really good, especially because it showed things about the quality of their work. If I haven't had
this information about the relevant links then I had to look at the whole diagram so it would take longer to look
at each map". Our study also confirms that the teacher would value indicators of group work and individual
participation for post-hoc analysis. The teacher expressed: "I don't want to see a lot of information in the
dashboard, this can be distracting. But more information can be provided after the tutorials for assessment
wise, like who did what, when, and the quality of the work". Our work in progress includes a detailed analysis of
the information     that should  be  delivered     to  the teacher  during  and   after the  classroom   sessions; and   the
integration of other sources of information (e.g. verbal participation) and other analysis tools (e.g. data mining)
to extract patterns of interaction that can provide more insightful indicators to the teachers in the classroom.

Acknowledgments
This research has been partially funded by Smart Services CRC, Australia. Roberto Martinez-Maldonado has
been funded     by  CONACYT      and   Fundación      Pablo   García. Yannis  Dimitriadis   has been   partially funded  by
Spanish projects (TIN2011-28308-C03-02 and PR2011-0137).

References
Bull, S., Wasson, B., Johnson, M. D., Petters, D., & Hansen, C. (2012). Helping Teachers Effectively Support
         Group Learning. Presented at the Workshop on Intelligent Support for Learning in Groups, ITS'12.
Cuban,  L.,  Kirkpatrick,   H.,  &  Peck,   C.     (2001). High    access and low   use  of  technologies  in   high school
         classrooms: Explaining an apparent paradox. American Educational Research Journal, 38(4), 813-834.
Dillenbourg, P., & Evans, M. (2011a). Interactive tabletops in education. International Journal of Computer-
         Supported Collaborative Learning, 6(4), 491-514. doi: 10.1007/s11412-011-9127-7
Dillenbourg, P., & Jermann, P. (2010). Technology for classroom orchestration. New science of learning, 525-
         552.
Dillenbourg,    P., Zufferey,   G., Alavi,   H.,   Jermann,    P.,  Do-Lenh,  S.,  &   Bonnard,    Q.  (2011b).  Classroom
         orchestration:     The  third  circle  of    usability. Paper   presented  at  the International  Conference    on
         Computer Supported Collaborative Learning 2011,              (pp. 510-517)
Do-Lenh,    S.  (2012).  Supporting    Reflection     and  Classroom    Orchestration   with  Tangible   Tabletops.   École
         Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne.
Martinez-Maldonado, R., Dimitriadis, Y., Kay, J., Yacef, K., & Edbauer, M.-T. (2012a). Orchestrating a multi-
         tabletop classroom: from activity design to enactment and reflection. Paper presented at the Conference
         on Interactive Tabletops and Surfaces (ITS 2012) (pp. 119-128).
Martinez-Maldonado, R., Kay, J., & Yacef, K. (2010). Collaborative concept mapping at the tabletop. Paper
         presented at the Conference on Interactive Tabletops and Surfaces (ITS 2010) (pp. 207-210)..
Martinez-Maldonado,       R., Kay,     J., &   Yacef,      K. (2011).    Visualisations  for  longitudinal  participation,
         contribution and progress of a collaborative task at the tabletop. Paper presented at the Computer
         supported collaborative learning,      (pp. 25-32)
Martinez-Maldonado, R., Yacef, K., Kay, J., & Schwendimann, B. (2012b). An interactive teacher's dashboard
         for   monitoring   multiple   groups      in a multi-tabletop   learning  environment.    Paper  presented  at  the
         Conference on Intelligent Tutoring Systems,          (pp. 482-492)
Martinez-Maldonado, R., Yacef, K., Kay, J., & Schwendimann, B. (2012c). Unpacking traces of collaboration
         from   multimodal    data   of    collaborative   concept    mapping  at   a   tabletop.  Paper presented   at  the
         International Conference of the Learning Sciences,           (pp. 241-245)
Meier, A., Spada, H., & Rummel, N. (2007). A rating scheme for assessing the quality of computer-supported
         collaboration processes. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 2(1),
         63-86. doi: 10.1007/s11412-006-9005-x
Mercier, E., Higgins, S., Burd, E., & Joyce-Gibbons, A. (2012). Multi-Touch Technology to Support Multiple
         Levels of Collaborative Learning in the Classroom. Paper presented at the International Conference of
         the Learning Sciences, (pp. 187-191).
Morgan,   M.,   &   Butler,  M.  (2009).    Considering     multi-touch   display  technology     for collaboration  in  the
         classroom. Paper presented at the EDMEDIA'09,              (pp. 674­683)
Novak,   J. (1995).   Concept   mapping     to facilitate  teaching   and  learning.  [10.1007/BF02334286].      Prospects,
         25(1), 79-86.
Prieto, L.  P., Dlab,    M. H.,  Gutiérrez,    I., Abdulwahed,      M., &  Balid,  W.   (2011).   Orchestrating  technology
         enhanced     learning:  a  literature     review   and   a conceptual    framework.    International    Journal of
         Technology Enhanced Learning, 3(6), 583-598. doi: 10.1504/ijtel.2011.045449
Roschelle,  J., &   Teasley,  S. D.  (1995).   The      Construction  of  Shared  Knowledge     in Collaborative   Problem
         Solving.
Stahl, G. (2006). Group Cognition: Computer Support for Building Collaborative Knowledge: MIT Press

© ISLS                                                                                                                  327
