CSCL 2013 Proceedings                  Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

 Multiple Scaffolds to Promote Collective Knowledge Construction
                                    in Science Classrooms

Hedieh Najafi, Jim Slotta, University of Toronto, 252 Bloor St. W., Toronto, ON, M5S 1V6
                            Email: hediehn@gmail.com, jslotta@gmail.com

         Abstract: In a designed-based study, we investigated the viability of knowledge communities
         in secondary school science classrooms using Knowledge Community and Inquiry model to
         guide curriculum   design. Based   on  findings   from  iteration 1, scaffolds were   added to  the
         designed curriculum unit in iteration 2 to help students plan and monitor their collaborative
         inquiry. Findings  from    iteration 2 showed     more  science   connections   in co-constructed
         knowledge  and  higher  amount    of  collaboration   among   students  while  constructing shared
         knowledge comparing to iteration 1.

Objective
Using the Knowledge Community and Inquiry (KCI) model, this study examined how a knowledge community
approach in science classrooms could become more accessible to teachers and students by integrating collective
knowledge construction in the context of relevant collaborative inquiry activities. In two design iterations, we
examined how a co-designed science curriculum unit fostered the development of characteristics of knowledge
communities, distributed cognitive responsibility and scientifically sound shared knowledgebase (Scardamalia,
2002), in multiple science classrooms. Curriculum topic for this study was Global Climate Change. A team of
researchers, teachers,  and technologist   collaborated    to design   a ten  week  unit on  this  topic along   with
technological environment where curricular activities were embedded.
         KCI curricula involve three interrelated phases: (A) establishing a community identity, (B) developing
shared  knowledge  through  collaborative  inquiry,   and  (C)  advancing    and interconnecting  shared knowledge
through further collaborative inquiry (Slotta & Peters, 2008). In the first iteration of this study, students in two
classes identified climate change issues of interest. Then, in cross-section groups, they conducted inquiry on the
impacts of climate change on seven Canadian regions. By the end of this phase, each student picked a specialist
role. In a subsequent   inquiry activity, specialists   from  regional   groups worked   together to understand  the
implications of climate change on their domain of specialty across Canada. Students used a wiki with page
templates to write their collaborative inquiry reports.
         Content  analysis  conducted  on  revisions    of wiki  pages   created in regional  and  specialist groups
revealed that the  co-designed  curriculum    had failed   to encourage   the development   of distributed cognitive
responsibility and the co-construction of scientifically sound knowledge. Our findings showed lack of highly
integrated science content in issues pages. Also, knowledge co-construction was dominated by individuals or
subgroups rather than distributed among all group members (Najafi & Slotta, 2010). Here we explain design
decisions regarding incorporating reflective and regulative scaffolds in collaborative inquiry activities and report
their implications in the second iteration of this study.

Study Design
In iteration 2, five Grade-9 classes participated in the study. We used a customized Drupal website to support
collaboration and to represent co-constructed knowledge. In the redesigned unit, first, students from 5 classes
engaged in an iterative brainstorming where first all class sections used post-it notes to add important climate
change issues to chart papers that were taken from one class section to the next. The last class section reviewed
existing issues, added new issues, and categorized all issues to represent important issues. Fourteen overarching
categories became the topic of the first small-group collaborative inquiry. Second, small cross-section groups
selected a climate change issue and collaboratively conducted a scaffolded inquiry that led to inquiry reports
shared in Drupal. Finally, from the list of identified remediation plans from Collaborative inquiry 1, single-
section small groups used issues pages to propose modifications to remediation plans.
         We used conceptual and empirical literature on knowledge community and inquiry based learning (e.g.
White  &   Frederiksen, 2000)   to specify the  desired    characteristics of knowledge   communities    and  design
scaffolds to support them (Table 1). Items addressed in reflection notes fell into two broad categories: Content
knowledge and metacognitive and regulative knowledge. Three reflection notes were specifically designed to
promote establishing a knowledge community across classrooms, and required students to reflect on the quality
of their contributions  to  the group, group    dynamics,     knowledge    co-construction, scientific depth  of co-
constructed knowledge; and opportunities for reusing and/or improving existing knowledge base.

© ISLS                                                                                                           321
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                    Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

      Data  sources  included     all revisions of  purposefully  selected Drupal   pages,  pre-unit   and post-unit
questionnaires,  and    curriculum    documents.   Data  analysis was    conducted  to:  (A)Investigate   distributed
participation in knowledge     co-construction  by: (1)  Contributing   knowledge  objects, and  (2)  Improving the
quality of shared knowledge objects.; and (B) Examine the Scientific soundness (Linn, Lee, Tinker, Husic, &
Chiu, 2006) and Epistemic complexity and growth of ideas (Hakkarainen, 2003) of shared knowledge.

Table 1: Scaffolds designed for Climate Change curriculum in iteration 2.

                   Scaffolds             Knowledge              Planning    Page         Reflection     Peer-review
                                         community              pages       templates    notes
Design Goals                             discussion
Distributed cognitive responsibility              X                X                          X              X
   Deep science connections                       X                X            X             X              X

Findings and Conclusion
Contents of Issues pages in iteration 2 showed more knowledge objects of partial and complex knowledge
integration type compared to iteration 1. We plotted the ratio of standard deviation to mean for the number edits
and the number of regulatory messages in each of the 14 Issues group. 11 groups had low to mid levels of
dispersion in those measures, suggesting that group members participated in knowledge co-construction more
equitably. An 80% increase in the amount of collaboratively edited knowledge-objects suggested that the co-
designed curriculum for iteration 2 was successful in addressing the issue of distributed cognitive responsibility.
         To further investigate the use of scaffolds, we selected two Issues groups: Deforestation group with less
equitable participation among group members and Ocean Warming group, with more equitable participation
among group members. Students in the Ocean Warming group used their planning page more effectively to plan
for and conduct their inquiry. All but one student in this group accomplished their assigned tasks, whether the
task was self-assigned or assigned by other group members. In the Deforestation group, students in each class
section created  a separate  planning    page and  never  merged  them   together. Regardless,   they co-constructed
content in their inquiry page spontaneously and did not use either of the planning pages.
         One reflection question asked the students to comment on the scientific quality of their contributions.
Using the number of words each member contributed towards factual or explanatory content, we identified
students with lower quality contributions. One such student from Deforestation group wrote this reflection note:
"My group-mates contributions to the issues page were better than mine because my contributions were mildly
non-existent." While this reflective note showed self-awareness of the low quality of the student's contribution,
none of the students who submitted similar answers to this question improved the quality of their contributions
over time. Communicating the need for improving contributions remained implicit.
         Our results suggest that with frequent epistemological treatment, such as reflective notes, it is possible
to raise students' awareness of the quality and quantity of their work even when roles and the amount of work
are not micro scripted. However, to increase their effect, these scaffolds could be complemented with group-
level follow ups and with in-time teacher feedback.

References
DBRC (2003). Design-based research: An emerging paradigm for educational inquiry. Educational Researcher,
         32(1), 5-8.
Hakkarainen, K. (2003). Progressive inquiry in a computer-supported biology class. Journal of Research in
         Science Teaching, 40(10), 1072-1088.
Linn, M.C.,   Lee,  H.  S., Tinker,    R., Husic,  F., &  Chiu, J.L.  (2006).  Teaching  and  assessing   knowledge
         integration in science. Science, 313, 1049-1050.
Scardamalia, M. (2002). Collective cognitive responsibility for the advancement of knowledge. In B. Smith
         (Ed.), Liberal Education in a Knowledge Society. (pp. 67-98). Chicago: Open Court.
Najafi, H., &   Slotta, J.  D. (2010).   Analyzing  equality of  participation in  collaborative inquiry:  Toward a
         knowledge community. In K. Gomez, L. Lyons, & J. Radinsky (Eds.), Learning in the disciplines:
         Proceedings of the 9th international conference of the learning sciences, 1 (pp. 960-967). International
         Society of the Learning Sciences: Chicago, IL.
Slotta, J., & Peters. V. L. (2008). A blended model for knowledge communities: embedding scaffolded inquiry.
         In Proceedings of the 8th international conference on International conference for the learning sciences,
         2 (pp. 343-350). International Society of the Learning Sciences.
White,  B., &   Frederiksen,   J. (2000).  Metacognitive  facilitation: An approach   to making   scientific inquiry
         accessible to all. In J. Minstrell & E. van Zee (Eds.), Inquiring into Inquiry Learning and Teaching in
         Science. (pp. 331-370). Washington, DC: American Association for the Advancement of Science.

© ISLS                                                                                                          322
