CSCL 2013 Proceedings                   Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

Multiple effects of collaborative mobile inquiry-based learning

    Jalal Nouri, Teresa Cerrato-Pargman, Karwan Zetali, Department of Computer and Systems Sciences,
                                          Stockholm University, Sweden
                                     Email: {jalal, tessy, karw-zet}@dsv.su.se

          Abstract:   This   paper presents  a  study  on mobile    learning  that  could   be  viewed     as  a
          manifestation of strong  voices calling for learning in natural contexts. The study was based on
          a sequence of inquiry-based mobile learning activities within the domain of natural sciences
          and mathematics education. We questioned the effects of collaborative scaffolding, and the
          effects scaffolding provided by technology have on learning and performance. Based on a
          quantitative interaction analysis, findings are presented illuminating, on the one hand, the
          interesting potentials of mobile learning, and on the other, some serious challenges that need
          to be met in order to realize those potentials meaningfully.   For instance, some of the findings
          presented  shows   that low-achievement   students benefits    from  this kind    of activities; that
          learning technologies have multiple effects on learning, both positive and negative, and that
          the roles of teachers is as important as before the introduction of learning technologies.

Introduction
Since the Industrial Age, and as a response to a need for mass-education, learning has, to a high extent, been
considered to take place in traditional classroom environments of lectures and books. As a consequence of the
mechanical   spirit  of  the industrial era, learning  traditions  were  developed    describing    knowledge     not  as
something that can be constructed by learners in appropriate contexts, but rather as information that should be
transferred from textbooks and teachers into the minds of learners (Figueiredo & Afonso, 2005).
          As time has elapsed, many strong voices have emphasized the importance of natural contexts (Dewey,
1916; Lave & Wenger, 1991). In the beginning of the 20th century, one of the first authors warning about the de-
contextualized nature of learning and challenging the assumption that the classroom is the optimal place for
learning  to occur  was  John  Dewey    (1916). He  proposed  the   idea that  "there is an    intimate and    necessary
relation between the processes of actual experience and education" (p.20), advocating that meaningful learning
should take place in the setting of real-world activities. Since then, several theories on learning and cognition
have been introduced, such as situated learning (Lave & Wenger, 1991) and situated cognition (Brown et al.,
1989), which emphasize authentic problems and natural contexts as powerful learning resources for learners'
generalization process. Also, since the emergence of the mobile learning field, more and more research projects
are investigating learning outside of the classroom, in the world and in authentic contexts ­facilitated by mobile
technology.
          The step   out of  the  classroom  into more  dynamical    environments,    combined    with     the increased
mobility of the students and the utilization of technology, changes the conditions for providing scaffolding
support. In such environments, teachers may not be as accessible due to the mobility of the students, and the
dynamical contexts can constrain the possibilities for social interactions (Winters and Price, 2005). From our
own experiences, we have also observed that the design of mobile learning activities and learning technologies
can dramatically restrict young students' opportunities to share knowledge and scaffold each other (Nouri, 2012;
Nouri et al. (2011).
          Thus, in the empirical study reported on in this paper, we attempted to further question the effects of
students scaffolding each other in field activities, what scaffolding needs these situations create, and the effect
collaborative scaffolding and scaffolding provided by technology have on learning and performance. In doing
that a sequence of inquiry-based learning activities were designed within the domain of natural sciences and
mathematics education. The designed learning activities were aimed at a group of primary school students using
mobile   technology     with  the  objective to   collaboratively  explore   a natural   phenomenon,       namely     the
characteristics of species of plants and trees and their biotopes.

Findings
For mobile learning to become an asset to the educational system, the gap between theories of learning in
contexts and practical and successful implementations must be reduced. Although some of the findings of this
study, to some extent, emphasize the potentials of mobile learning, other findings have illuminated that the gap
is still there with many challenges waiting to be addressed.

In regards to the potentials of mobile learning, the findings indicate that some learning certainly occurs. For
instance, a  44 %   mean  increase  in  performance is not inconsiderable,    although   it can  be gradated     with the

© ISLS                                                                                                              323
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                    Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

Hawthorne    effect   and discussions  regarding the need  for  control  group    studies and  comparison    to learning
occurring with more traditional pedagogical models in the frame of the classroom. Obviously, one could also
question what learning we assessed and how we did that in the first place, calling for richer assessments focus
beyond  performance     scores. In  terms of  performances  scores   however,     the most   noteworthy  finding  is the
impressive   performance    increase  of otherwise  low-achievement     students.   It   seems that  these  students are
particularly responsive to learning situations of this kind, characterized by structured activities that allowed and
guided both individual and collaborative work, also providing concrete experiences of the learning material
supported by the mobile technology that highlighted and captured critical features.
        On the other hand, the findings also demonstrated that we, as researcher, designers, and teachers,
should  not  rely on   collaboration  to unfold  satisfactorily in a   way   that provides   the   students the required
scaffolding. In fact, some of the findings indicate that collaborative scaffolding amongst young students can
have negative impact on learning, if the students are not capable and knowledgeable enough to provide the
required scaffolding. These findings emphasize two things; firstly, the still important role of teachers in these
kinds of activities, and secondly, the importance of a thoughtful technology- and primarily - activity design.
        After    all, our  analysis  suggests  that the  mobile    technology  used,     with  all its utilized positive
affordances, also gave rise to problems among students managing the technology, and to scaffolding interactions
that had significant negative influence on performance scores. Bearing in mind that the technology was designed
rather thoughtfully together with researchers, students and teachers, guided by usability considerations, there are
reasons to believe that this issue can become more pronounced if teachers are to design or choose learning
technologies on their own for educational purposes.
        Our   analysis    also suggests  that designers, whether   its researchers    or teachers,  should  thoughtfully
consider how learning activities across contexts are planned for, taking account of the scaffolding needs that
different tasks, learning processes, and learning contexts can give rise to. One should, for instance, not put to
much focus on conceptual learning in outdoor contexts, where teachers are not as readily available, and the
concerned students are believed to be incapable of providing required conceptual scaffolding to their fellow
group members.
        Along this line, and in terms of mobile inquiry-based learning, the goals of tasks in outdoor field
activities could be limited to concretely experience the contextualized learning material, and to collect multi-
modal   data for  further  analysis in indoor  environments.    Essentially, designers    of mobile  learning   activities
across contexts should thoughtfully ask which learning tasks are suitable for different contexts and how learning
tasks can be distributed across contexts in order to provide students with the required scaffolding for meaningful
learning to occur ­ for as many as possible. More on this study and its findings is documented in Nouri et al.
(2013).

References

Brown, A. L., Collins, A., & Duguid. (1989). Situated cognition and the culture of learning. Educational
        Researcher.18 (1989), 32-42.
Dewey, J. (1916). Democracy and Education. New York: The Free Press.
Figueiredo, A. D. & Afonso, A. P. (2005). Context and Learning: A Philosophical Framework. In Figueiredo, A.
        D. & Afonso, A. P. (eds.). Managing Learning in Virtual Settings: The Role of Context. Information
        Science Publishing, Hershey, USA, pp. 1-22.
Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. New York: Cambridge
        University Press.
Nouri, J. (2012). Eliciting the potentials of mobile learning trough scaffolding learning processes across
        contexts. International Journal of Mobile Learning and Organisation.
Nouri, J., Cerratto Pargman, T., Eliasson, J., & Ramberg, R. (2011). Exploring the Challenges of Supporting
        Collaborative Mobile Learning. International Journal of Mobile and Blended Learning, 3(4), 54-69.
Nouri, J, Cerratto Pargman, T, Zetali, K. (2013). Mobile inquiry-based Learning, A study of Collarborative
        Scaffoldng and Performance. HCI International, Las Vegas, 2013.
Winters, N. and Price, S. (2005). Mobile HCI and the learning context: an exploration. In: International
        Workshop on Context in Mobile HCI. MobileHCI05. Salzburg

© ISLS                                                                                                               324
