CSCL 2013 Proceedings                   Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

       Towards Collaborative Argumentation in "Losing the Lake"
              E. Michael Nussbaum, Marissa C. Owens, Abeera P. Rehmat, Jacqueline R. Cordova
                                        University of Nevada, Las Vegas,
                               4505 S. Maryland Parkway, Las Vegas, NV 89154
         Email: nussbaum@unlv.nevada.edu, owensm17@unlv.nevada.edu, rehmata@unlv.nevada.edu,
                                            cordova1@unlv.nevada.edu

         Abstract: Losing the Lake is an educational simulation game exploring the impact of climate
         change on declining water levels in Lake Mead.      This paper briefly describes the game and
         explores  options  for incorporating   collaborative     argumentation  into the  next    iteration,
         including several technological options.  We explain how Walton's argumentation framework
         is useful in  generating critical  questions for collaborative   argumentation   on   many   topics
         related to climate change and water resource management.

This paper reports on a design project, Losing the Lake, and efforts to incorporate collaborative argumentation
into the learning environment.    Losing  the Lake is a computer-based     educational resource    designed   to teach
students about climate change and its effects on the local environment.      Research suggests that many students
harbor a number of misconceptions about human-induced climate change (Nussbaum, Sinatra, & Owens, 2011)
due to the complexity of the phenomenon across multiple time and spatial scales, but teaching about the issue in
the context of a concrete, local phenomenon aids student understanding and engagement with this issue (Moser
& Diller, 2007).  The phenomenon focused on in this project is the rapidly declining water levels in Lake Mead,
which have been caused by an extended drought in the Rocky Mountain snowpack.           This drought will be made
worse by climate change.

Description of Losing the Lake
The educational computer system that was initially developed in this project consists of five activities designed
first to explore household and community water conservation options and then the nature of climate change (and
the relationship to snowpack and lake levels).  The penultimate activity is for users to run a visual simulation of
declining water levels (based on an actual climate model, HADCM2-A1B) and to compare their predictions of
how many years each regional conservation option will delay lake levels from falling below a level where no
more drinking water can be pumped from the lake.
         A major design decision was not to explore climate change first because that could create fear among
users, which  can  cause  disengagement   and denial  (Moser  &   Diller, 2007).  Instead, users first grapple with
conservation actions  they can take to build a sense of efficacy. Users start with topics that are more familiar and
meaningful to them (i.e., household conservation) and then progress to exploring more complex systems.
         In a study of the effectiveness of playing Losing the Lake as a stand-alone game among 113 seventh-
grade earth science students, compared with a control group which viewed an unrelated earth science website,
the game led to significantly increased knowledge gains on some topics (e.g., water conservation, the difference
between weather and climate), but not others (e.g., relation of snowpack to lake levels). (Results of the study are
reported in Nussbaum   et al., 2012.) There was also a small increase in student interest as measured   by a 10-item
Likert scale instrument (F(1, 110) = 3.98, p < .05, d = .23), particularly in home water conservation options.
         While the results are encouraging, focus group sessions with science teachers revealed that--in the
next iteration of the game--it might be better to use the game over a five-day period (or longer), where each
activity is played, reviewed, and analyzed by small groups of students and/or a whole class.     In addition, we are
in the process of incorporating argumentation activities into the game.

Integrating Collaborative Argumentation into Losing the Lake
Our original   intent for  developing   Losing the   Lake  was    that it could  be a  resource    to foster  student
argumentation and in turn conceptual change about climate change. (Financial limitations, however, prevented
the development of computer-supported argumentation features in the first iteration of the game.)      Collaborative
argumentation (Andriessen, 2006) involves individuals working together to construct and critique arguments,
and there is evidence that, under the right conditions, it can foster conceptual change and better critical thinking
(Asterhan & Schwarz, 2007; Mercer, Dawes, Wegerif, & Sams, 2004).           There are a number of CSCL systems
that support argumentation (see Scheuer, Loll, Pinkwart, & McLaren, 2010, for a review).
         In  developing  Losing the   Lake, a  number  of topics   suitable for  collaborative argumentation     were
identified. Some relate to natural science (e.g., Would greater and earlier melting of the snowpack increase or
decrease lake levels?); some are socioscientific in nature (e.g., What are the costs and benefits of building a

© ISLS                                                                                                            325
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                    Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

water desalination plant?).    Some have aspects of both but primarily involve estimation and modeling (Which
would save more water, covering a swimming pool or washing cars only at a car wash?).
         In designing the next iteration of the game, an open question is how best to incorporate collaborative
argumentation.    Some options include: (1) Using only face-to-face collaborative argumentation as described
above; (2) using existing chat systems that support "dialogue games," such as InterLoc (Ravenscroft, McAlister,
& Sagar, 2007); or (3) using an argumentation mapping system, such as Araucaria (Reed & Rowe, 2004) that
provides  a list of  "critical questions"   for different  types of  arguments,   known     as argument    schemes  (see
Nussbaum, 2011; Walton, 1996).          For example,   for an  argument from     sign  scheme,  one  critical question is
"How strong is the correlation of the sign with the event signified?" (e.g., "Is a ten-year drought strong evidence
of climate change?"). For an argument from verbal classification scheme, "Is a really an example of category A
or is there room for doubt?" (e.g., "Is a ten-year warming trend really an increase in climate?").         Such critical
questions are used to evaluate arguments tied to specific argumentation schemes.
         We have found Walton's argumentation framework useful because it encompasses both scientific and
socioscientific/policy arguments, all of which are relevant to climate change (Nussbaum et al., 2011).             Many
extant computer-supported argumentation systems are either too specific, in that only one type of argumentation
is scaffolded (e.g., scientific), or overly general:    Scaffolds are included to promote counterargumentation or
argumentation mapping without much reference to logical or epistemic criteria for evaluating arguments.
         Critical questions    provide  such criteria.  One  issue, though,   is how   best to seed  the discourse with
critical questions. The next iteration of   Losing the Lake will likely involve face-to-face argumentation and role
playing activities to make the game more fun and exciting; critical questions could         then be introduced into the
discourse by teachers during class discussions, or by students if they are taught to ask critical questions (as in
Nussbaum & Edwards, 2011).        Computer-supported argumentation could be used to supplement these activities
(to promote greater reflection and participation).      We have found some systems such as InterLoc (involving
locution openers)   to be   distracting to  students and   not specifically  focused   on critical questions.   An open
question is whether a structured graphing system, specifically Araucaria, would be useful or whether generic
asynchronous discussion, with question prompts reflecting specific critical questions, would suffice.

References
Asterhan, C. S.  C., & Schwarz, B. B. (2007).    The effects of monological and dialogical argumentation on
     concept learning in evolutionary theory.     Journal of Educational Psychology, 99, 626-639.
Andriessen, J. (2006).  Arguing to learn.    In K. Sawyer (Ed.), The Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences
         (pp. 443-460).   New York:     Cambridge University Press.
Mercer,  N., Dawes, L., Wegerif, R., & Sams, C. (2004).      Reasoning as a scientist:    Ways of helping children to
         use language to learn science.     British Educational Research Journal, 30, 359-377.
Moser, S. C., & Diller, L. (Eds.). (2007). Creating a climate for change:     Communicating climate change and
         facilitating social change.   New York:   Cambridge University Press.
Nussbaum, E. M.     (2011). Argumentation, dialogue     theory, and probability modeling:      Alternative frameworks
         for argumentation research in education.      Educational Psychologist, 46, 84-106.
Nussbaum, E. M.     & Edwards, O.   V. (2011).  Argumentation, critical     questions, and integrative stratagems:
         Enhancing young adolescents' reasoning about current events.         Journal of the Learning Sciences, 20,
         433-488.
Nussbaum, E. M., Sinatra, G. M.,    & Owens, M. C. (2011).      The two faces of scientific argumentation:
         Applications to global climate change.      Manuscript prepared for D. Zeidler (Series Ed.), Contemporary
         Trends and Issues in Science Education, M. Khine (Ed.), Perspectives in scientific argumentation:
         Theory, practice and research (pp. 17-37).      The Netherlands:    Springer.
Nussbaum, E. M., Sinatra, G. M.,    Harris, F. C., Ahmad, S., Dascalu, S. M.,    et al. (2012). Losing the Lake:
         Promoting sustainability awareness through educational computer-simulations of Lake Mead water
         levels and water supply to the Las Vegas Valley.      Technical report.   University of Nevada, Las Vegas.
Ravenscroft, A., McAlister, S., & Sagar, M. (2010), Digital dialogue games and InterLoc:           A deep learning
         designing for collaborative argumentation     on the Web.   In N. Pinkwart and B. M. McLaren (Eds.),
         Educational technologies for teaching argumentation        skills. Bentham Science    E-Books.
Reed, C., & Rowe, G. (2004).      Araucaria:  Software for argument analysis, diagramming, and representation.
         International Journal on Artificial Intelligence Tools, 13, 961-979.
Scheuer, O., Loll, F., Pinkwart,  N.,  & McLaren, B. M. (2010).     Computer-supported      argumentation:    A review
         of the state of the art. International Journal   of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 5, 43-
         102.
Walton, D. N. (1996).   Argumentation schemes for presumptive reasoning.          Mahwah, NJ:      Erlbaum.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by NSF EPSCoR grant EPS-0814372 and NSF grant CMMI-0846952.

© ISLS                                                                                                             326
