CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                           Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

          Juxtaposing Practice: Uptake as Modal Transposition
Richard Medina, Daniel Suthers, Dept. of Information and Computer Sciences, University of Hawaii at Mnoa,
                           1680 East West Road, POST 309 Honolulu, HI 96822 USA
                                 Email: rmedina@hawaii.edu, suthers@hawaii.edu

         Abstract:   The analysis     discussed in this   paper draws  attention  to  the interactional  and
         inscriptional practices observed in a science laboratory setting that utilizes Group Scribbles.
         The critical finding is the identification of a pivotal sequence of interaction occurring in the
         later half of the  activity  in which  one  member     of the group   proposes   an innovation  for
         illuminating two light bulbs in a single circuit. The proposal and its subsequent endorsement
         by the other members are contingent on an immediately prior interaction in which the group
         appropriates  another   group's  circuit  diagram. Together,     this pair of  adjacent   sequential
         structures exposes multiple instances of uptake between participants. These uptake relations
         are realized through an ensemble of contingencies consisting of persistent diagrams, tabletop
         materials,  and  a   locally situated  interactional   practice. Our    analysis shows    how   the
         participants' actions transform the setting and how these transformations are consequential for
         how the group proceeds in the learning activity.

Introduction
Laboratory science classrooms provide rich sources of data for understanding collaborative learning in small
group settings. Laboratory activities place learners in a position to experience scientific phenomena and engage
in practices of inquiry. In many cases these activities are organized in participant configurations ranging from
pairs to groups  of three  or four   learners situated at the "lab  bench".    Such activities typically consist  of a
teacher's instructions on procedure and access to instruments and materials needed for the experiment. In the
present work we analyzed the recorded interaction of four fifth graders in a Singapore primary school as they
collaborated during a thirty-minute lab activity about battery powered electrical circuits. The group is one of ten
other groups situated around tables in the classroom. Each table has four tablet personal computers, one for each
student, as well as a collection of batteries, small light bulbs, and wires for building circuits. The students also
use the Group Scribbles (GS) software installed on each tablet computer to draw diagrams of the circuits they
are experimenting with (Roschelle et al., 2007). Using the GS tools, students can share their individual diagrams
with their group by dragging them to a public area of the screen. Likewise, drawings in the public area of a
group's screen can be shared with others in the classroom allowing the distribution of artifacts between groups.
The inclusion of the Group Scribbles technology provides us an opportunity to assess important connections
between meaning making and the appropriation of technology resources.
         This paper reports on our investigation of the interaction practices of the learners as they coordinate
their actions in a multimodal setting as part of an authentic laboratory science activity. Within this relatively
short time frame we are able to piece together a detailed example of how the group deploys practices for
handling their work at the "lab bench" as well as the ways in which persistent inscriptional artifacts permeate
the group's setting. Our analysis focuses on a three-minute portion of the video record of the group's work in
which they appropriate another group's circuit diagram and subsequently develop an alternative solution. By
way of this analysis we also demonstrate an application of the use of uptake as an analytic approach for doing
CSCL research in multimodal settings (Suthers, Dwyer, Medina, & Vatrapu, 2010). In the following section we
ground our analytic approach and argue that it is a valuable approach for evaluating interactive phenomena of
the type we are investigating in this paper. We then move on to our analysis and findings.

Background
Investigating practices within a particular setting is a matter of careful consideration of the connection between
the sequential organization of participants' actions and the semiotic, material, and embodied aspects of that
setting. Situated interaction has a mutual elaborating relationship with the environment (Suchman, 1987). The
environment offers an array of external resources for action-relevant appropriation. Simultaneously, situated
action modulates, redefines, or otherwise reconfigures the resources within the environment, thereby enabling
and constraining subsequent acts. This dynamic ebb and flow of appropriation and modulation is sequentially
organized (Garfinkel, 1994; Goodwin & Heritage, 1990). With respect to multimodal and embodied interaction
Charles Goodwin writes,
         The issues posed for the analysis of action in such a setting involve not simply the resources
         provided   by different  semiotic  systems  as   self-contained  wholes,   but also the   interactive
         practices  required  to juxtapose them   so that  they mutually   elaborate  each   other in a  way

© ISLS                                                                                                            328
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                         Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

          relevant to the accomplishment of the actions that make up the setting. (Goodwin, 2003, p.
          237)
The study of multimodal interaction requires an understanding of both the properties of these semiotic systems
and how those systems are coordinated and appropriated in joint activity. This suggests two overlapping planes
of study: recognizing the external properties of the setting in one and meaning making practices in the other.
          Investigating interaction that takes place in a multimodal setting entails careful consideration of how
participants' actions in the environment are made relevant for emergent, sequentially organized, and shared
structures  of joint activity (Sacks, Schegloff, &   Jefferson, 1974).  Sequential  analysis  techniques   based  on
ethnomethodology and conversation analysis (EMCA) demonstrate, in a detailed manner, the contingent nature
of human interaction (Çakir, Zemel, & Stahl, 2009). These techniques expose how the resources available in the
setting of interaction are integrated in the very structure of communication that emerges in the activity. Taking
the turn-by-turn pattern of interaction in any social activity as an analytic starting point has yielded valuable
insights  into the   in-situ emergence  of   meaning  making    practices   (Koschmann    et al., 2005).   Although
conversation analysis was originally proposed to handle speech exchanges, numerous scholars have taken an
EMCA approach, in principle, as an inroad to understanding interaction mediated by more semiotic rich settings
such as online environments, scientific field work, and classrooms (Medina & Suthers, 2013; Goodwin, 1995;
Roth, 2001).
          The distribution of interaction across a setting has led many researchers to see the visual spatial field as
a categorical entity in sequential analysis. Streeck and Kallmeyer's (2001) analysis of a rather mundane two-
party business negotiation offers an example that suggests that graphic inscriptions can be taken as a form of
interaction that offers a different set of opportunities for meaning making beyond conversation. The act of
inscribing during interaction carries with it not only that which is being represented, its instrumental purpose,
but perhaps less obviously its discursive function. Inscriptions, once recorded in a medium (paper, whiteboard,
computer screen, etc.), offer structures for making arguments, substantiating claims, and indexing a range of
situation  relevant  and   epistemologically consistent communicative     action. The   sequential organization   of
inscriptional activity carries structural (e.g. rhetorical, canonical, or discursive) information that embodies taken
as shared conceptions, concerns, and meanings that are relevant to the situation at hand. Inscriptional action
draws upon an extended vocabulary from the visual field. They can embody forms of action such as a line
intimating gesture (e.g. a line drawn around a figure may be a deictic reference to an aspect of the figure of
concern in the interaction). Gesture is highly coupled with talk; however, inscriptions and instrumental acts
occur independently of talk yet articulate it. This has not been studied at length especially in regard to how
inscriptional action is sequentially organized. Streeck and Kallmeyer (2001) write,
          Actions that can occur independently of talk, however - instrumental acts, inscriptions, and so
          on - have so far only rarely been studied for their possible participation in the construction of
          `projectable' turns-at-talk. (Streeck and Kallmeyer, 2001, p. 469)
Inscriptions that once served as a field of calculation and measurement can be reinstated in rhetorical contexts to
persuade, compare, and express ideas. Further, persistent inscriptions enable variable, situation relevant courses
of action over time and setting (Latour, 1990).
          Still, while arguing for analytic accountability of inscriptions and non-verbal modalities in the setting,
Streeck and Kallmeyer warn against oversimplifying or fragmenting components of interaction across modal
and material properties. Rather, they suggest that ongoing interaction draws upon multiple vocabularies in the
making of meaning. Thibault (2011) goes further in advising against the rush to discover and extrapolate upon
regularities of symbolic systems. The prudent starting place is the distributional character of communication
across the senses, materiality, and symbols.
          The analytic approach considered in this paper takes interaction as fundamentally multimodal and
sequentially organized. Underlying theoretical assumptions are based on the notion that participants build their
interaction through the moment-by-moment or otherwise sequential exchange of actions. These actions are
potentially distributed across all available aspects of the setting. As Goodwin's quote makes clear, the study of
interaction practices exposes the relationship between the setting and the joint activity of the participants.
          Through analysis of practice we gain a rich understanding of the distributional character of action and
its implications for computer supported collaborative learning and teaching in classrooms, online settings, and
instances of both. Sequential multimodal interaction analysis can be used to uncover the relationship between
the properties  of   the environment  and  the  interactional practices that make   those  properties  relevant  and
consequential   for  joint meaning  making.  More specifically,  analysis of  interactional  practices is useful  for
understanding   how   inscriptional devices  (verbal and  nonverbal)    are  integrated in  joint meaning      making
structures.

Uptake: A Relational Unit of Interaction
Making sense of the sequential structure of multimodal interaction presents a degree of complexity for analysis
where participants' actions may be distributed across a diverse range of media. A useful strategy to begin with

© ISLS                                                                                                           329
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                               Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

might be the recognition of how any participant actions are evidenced to be relevant and consequential for the
activity. How and where are actions positioned in the sequential unfolding of the activity and how and through
what means do those actions relate to prior actions? The notion of uptake has been proposed as a useful concept
for investigating precisely these questions.
       Suthers, Dwyer, Medina, & Vatrapu, (2010) describe uptake as a relational construct that identifies a
participant action as appropriating aspects of a prior or ongoing setting as relevant for ongoing interaction. This
definition is deliberately abstract, enabling it to be purposed in a wide range of interactional settings. It is also
intended to support a diverse range of theoretic and methodological approaches. Uptake provides an interpretive
heuristic rather than a specific method of analysis (the authors describe it as a proto-analytic). The potential gain
by interpreting interaction as uptake is that uptake does not privilege one particular communicative modality or
granularity  over   another.  A     warranted interpretation of    uptake    only specifies   that one   human    action  is
appropriating aspects of a prior or ongoing element of the setting while also transforming that setting. The value
of uptake   for  the analysis    of multimodal   interaction is    its provision  for  a more   flexible  consideration   of
sociological and environmental contingencies.

Group Scribbles Analysis
In the present work we analyzed the recorded interaction of four fifth graders in a Singapore primary school as
they collaborated during a thirty-minute lab activity about battery powered electrical circuits (Chen, Looi, &
Tan, 2010). The group is one of ten other groups in the classroom. Each group of four is gathered around a table.
Each table has four tablet personal computers, one for each student, as well as a collection of batteries, small
light bulbs, and wires for building circuits. In addition to these tabletop materials students also use the Group
Scribbles  (GS)    software   installed   on  each  tablet computer      to  draw   diagrams    of the   circuits they   are
experimenting with (Roschelle et al., 2007). Using the GS tools, students can share their individual diagrams
with their group by dragging them to a public area of their respective screens. Likewise, drawings in the public
area of a group's screen can be shared with others in the classroom allowing the distribution of GS artifacts (or
drawings) between groups.
       The students are instructed to begin the activity by drawing circuit diagrams using the Group Scribbles
software. After these initial diagrams are complete they are instructed to evaluate their diagrams using the
tabletop materials consisting of batteries, wires, and bulbs. Subsequently, over the course of the activity the
students are reminded to record their exploration of circuits by diagramming different arrangements of the
circuits they tested along the way.
       The      analysis presented     in the   following  sections    takes as   a topic   the multimodal    interactional
mechanisms demonstrated by the participants in the laboratory activity described above. The data consists of
five synchronized video records of the entire thirty-minute activity. Four of the records were taken from screen
capture videos of each of the four participants' tablet computer screens. The fifth video source was drawn from
a camera situated adjacent to the participants' table. It captured a wide-angle view of the group's work including
what they constructed on the table. The videos were imported and synchronized using the Tatiana software tool
(Dyke, Lund, & Girardot, 2009). Tatiana allows simultaneous playback of all video sources. As the videos are
viewed, transcriptions and analytic annotations are entered and stored in sync with the video timeline. Tatiana
was useful   for   monitoring    simultaneous   events in  detail. For   example,   at times  we   were  able observe    the
drawing actions of a student by focusing on that student's screen video during the event sequence of interest.
We could alternatively shift to the group video record to track how those actions related to the interaction of the
group. In general, we conducted our video analysis using sequential microanalysis techniques similar in purpose
to Jordan and Henderson (1995) although uptake is appropriated here because it offers a general heuristic at a
suitable granularity for describing the empirical evidence. This is not to suggest that uptake is only a macro level
construct.  It can   be utilized  at any  descriptive  level appropriate     for  the  analytic evidence  on  which    it is
grounded. In the present analysis, uptake is used to explicate the critical relations between participant actions
that are distributed across time, media, participants, and material (classroom) artifacts.
       The Group Scribbles classroom is organized like many similar learning environments that are computer
supported, networked, and embodied in classroom situations. In these contexts interaction is distributed across
modalities (verbal, nonverbal, textual, and visual-spatial). Three aspects of the activity were identified at the
onset of the analysis. First, the students constructed a series of persistent inscriptions in the Group Scribbles
environment. The production of these inscriptions, and their availability throughout the activity, suggested that
inscriptions   might have   a role  to play  in ongoing   group    interactions.  Second,   the centrally located  tabletop
materials provided a visual spatial modality with respect to the spatial arrangement and placement of the various
circuit parts such as batteries, wires, and bulbs. Third, the activity of the group is patterned. That is, the students'
work occurs     in a series   of sequences    each oriented  to a   unique   problem     or concern  in  the activity. The
interrelation of these phenomena formed the basis for the following analytic questions.
       1.      How are Group Scribbles inscriptions appropriated and/or coordinated in joint action?

© ISLS                                                                                                                 330
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                         Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

        2.   How are the elements of the (classroom) environment modulated by the situated actions
             of the  participants and  what are the consequences      of this for their meaning      making
             practice?

Observations
During  the thirty-minute activity the students work  through    five different electricity circuit  configurations,
which we refer to as episodes (of interaction). For this paper we focus on the last two episodes (4 and 5) in
which  the  group  members  develop   an innovation for lighting  two    bulbs  with one    circuit. In the ensuing
descriptions each student is referred to by his or her pseudonym, (Bruno, Serena, Agnes, and Joel). We begin
with episode four.

Episode 4: Two-Battery-One-Bulb in Vertical Series
Using Group Scribbles Serena accesses another groups' diagram. She locates a diagram that has two batteries
stacked upright one above the other with the light bulb contact directly on the positive end of the top battery.
Two wires are arranged from the bottom of the lower battery up to the bulb shielding (see Figure 1a). Serena
shares this diagram with the others by swiveling her screen around so that it faces Bruno and Joel. All four
students orient to the diagram being referenced by Serena and agree to test its arrangement. The subsequent
experimentation moves through two phases. In the first, Bruno and Joel have made an interpretation of the
stacked diagram   by proceeding   to use a wire to complete the   circuit  connection   between the    bulb and the
positive post of the battery. Serena publicly notes this inconsistency with respect to the diagram posted by group
"SF_2". A subtle departure in the stacked diagram from the other diagrams the group has been working with is
that the bulb appears to make direct contact with the positive battery post, bypassing the need for a wire (see
Figure 1b). Serena points this out and grasps the bulb and places it directly on the positive battery post. The
group then proceeds to successfully construct a working circuit using the stacked arrangement (diagrammed in
Figure 2). The subtle yet critical diagrammatic placement of the bulb and its successful implementation appears
to set up the group's immediate next experiment with two bulbs.

                                                Figure 1b. Bulb
    Figure 1a. Group SF_2's diagrams.               contact(highlighted byFigure 2. Agnes draws configuration.
                                                   the authors).

Episode 5: Two-Battery-Two-Bulb in Vertical Series
The last experiment has the group attempting to light two bulbs. They are building on the "stacked" arrangement
of the circuit they successfully tested in the immediately prior experiment (episode four). Joel initiates this
experiment by spontaneously picking up two bulbs and placing them both directly on the positive post of the top
battery. Joel performs this act while Bruno remains holding the batteries in the position they were in during the
prior experiment. At this moment there is no direct evidence from the video record that the bulbs are actually lit.
At the very least Joel's act is presenting an idea to the group. He appears to position the bulbs, then looks up to
the group as if requesting their noticing (this moment is captured in the frame presented in Figure 3 inset 3
below). The group takes notice and excitedly proceeds to successfully construct the circuit with two bulbs.

© ISLS                                                                                                          331
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                        Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

                                        Figure 3. Proposing an innovation.

        As noted above the group's approach does not require a wire for the positive contact (i.e. the bulb is
placed directly on the positive post of the top battery). This innovation opens up the possibility of adding a
second bulb to the positive post of the top battery. It is this opportunity that Joel seizes and demonstrates and
that the others recognize. Subsequently, their competence at constructing a working circuit is evidenced in the
efficiency at which they move from Joel's initial idea to a working two-bulb circuit.

Discussion
The  sequence   of  interaction in episodes  4 and  5  described  above  demonstrate  the  learners' opportunistic
appropriation of various elements of the setting to conduct their laboratory activity. Our analysis below reveals
how the learners juxtapose their practices against the material and semiotic elements of the setting in order to
coordinate their actions with the tabletop objects and the inscription displayed in the Group Scribbles screen. In
the following we identify learners' uptakes to highlight critical aspects of the learners' coordination with the
setting and to expose what we view as important implications for CSCL research and the design of media-rich
technologies.

How Inscriptions Permeate Interactional Context: Representational Competence
In episode four, the group members have integrated another group's diagram into their interaction. The diagram
is displayed on Agnes' screen and is directed towards the center of the table. It depicts a vertical arrangement of
a circuit in which the bulb makes direct contact with the battery post (no wire is needed for that portion of the
circuit), which the group had not previously considered. As Bruno and Joel work at reconstructing the diagram
using the  tabletop components,    Serena   notes that they have  misinterpreted the  diagram. She   observes and
demonstrates to the others a novel detail in the placement of the bulb with respect to the top battery (see Figure
1b). The group subsequently modifies their circuit to maintain consistency with the diagram.
        Here we can observe a series of uptake relations. Bruno and Joel's reconstruction (using the tabletop
materials) of the diagram is the first in the series. This uptake affirms the proposed relevance of the diagram to
the group's   ongoing physical   experiment.  Next, Serena  takes up  the result of this reconstruction  when she
observes how their arrangement is inconsistent with the diagram. Subsequently, Bruno and Joel rearrange the
tabletop materials accordingly as they take up Serena's point. By definition, there are multiple uptake relations
in which a participant action takes up aspects of the setting as relevant for the situation at hand and by so doing
transforms  the setting (Suthers   et al., 2010). Bruno   and Joel's uptake of   both the diagram    and the prior
availability of the circuit materials result in a transformation of the experimental apparatus. In turn, Serena takes
up this transformation and invokes the diagram that remains directed at the group (Figure 3, inset 1). Bruno and
Joel take up Serena's indexical act by adjusting the experimental apparatus, once again relying on the previous
setup. Figure 4 (uptake relations u1 through u6) summarizes the pattern of uptake discussed here. From an
interactional exchange   perspective,   experiment   four might   appear  rather  straightforward and    mundane.
Interpreted as uptake, however, the brief exchange sheds a different light on the significance of interactions with

© ISLS                                                                                                        332
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                       Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

respect to how the participants are cooperatively and opportunistically appropriating a range of resources in the
setting well beyond verbalization. Uptake relations show how a sequence of actions produces relationships
between inscriptions and established practices for handling tabletop materials. Further, the very notion that
Bruno  and  Joel can be referred  to as  jointly performing   an action is  a notable    example  of how tightly
coordinated the  participants' actions are  with  their laboratory practice  for  maintaining the    experimental
apparatus.

                                     Figure 4. Uptake relations in episodes 4 and 5.

        Episode four demonstrates a level of representational competence with respect to the group's ability to
correlate the phenomena (electrical circuits), with its associated diagrammatic inscription (Kozma, 2003). In this
group's work, there is a clear, non-abstract, relation between diagram and phenomena (bulbs look like bulbs in
the diagram). The critical point, however, is that it is the group's orientation to Serena's indexical act that
reveals that the others clearly understand the misinterpretation and immediately rectify the relations between
diagram and  phenomena.  The    diagram  is appropriated  for representation  and as   a resource for negotiated
meanings.

Making a Proposal: Coordinating Actions
A second critical moment comes immediately after the group has completed episode four. At this moment
(Figure 3) Joel makes his proposal for lighting two bulbs by building on the circuit configuration constructed in
episode four. There are a number of points to note here. (1) The prior arrangement of circuit materials, originally
taken up via a diagram displayed in the Group Scribbles software, remains intact on the table. Further, Bruno's
hand remains on the batteries to keep them in the stacked position. These are physical contingencies for the
formulation of ideas. The arrangement of batteries, wires, and bulbs require bodily coordination to be distributed
across individuals and this is taken up by Joel to establish his proposal. (2) Joel places the two bulbs on the post
and looks up towards Agnes as if to request a response. Agnes and Bruno take up Joel's act as demonstrating a
new arrangement (two bulbs). After some excitement Serena, who has directed her attention at Bruno's and
Joel's attempt to implement the proposal, reaches over the table to position the necessary wire to complete the
circuit. In this instance, Serena is taking up the now established practice that requires coordinated arrangement
and manipulation of the tabletop components to maintain the experimental apparatus. This practice became
necessary over the course of the entire activity and is demonstrated once again here.
        The proposed innovation offered by Joel and the subsequent uptake and implementation performed by
the group demonstrates the coordination of multiple aspects of the setting. The proposal is initiated when the
group reconstructs a circuit diagram depicted on Agnes' computer screen, which she has faced towards the
group (Figure 3, inset 1; and described above). Joel's proposal and its recognition by the group members is
achieved by a configuration of an indexical field consisting of the batteries held in place by Bruno along with
Joel's placement of two bulbs (Figure 3, inset 2). Here, Joel is taking up a prior tabletop configuration and
transforming it into another (Figure 4, u7). This is followed by his upward gaze towards the shared space above
the table (Figure 3, inset 3), and Agnes' uptake of the gaze and position of the two batteries as communicating
an idea (Figure 3, inset 4). Bruno's endorsement may be implicit as he maintains the physical apparatus to
sustain Joel's communicative action. The group members are configuring the environment through multiple
surfaces to mediate their meaning making. In this case the members of the group build on their prior locally
available interactional practices for constructing experiments with electrical circuit materials. Evidence for this
association is the placement of Bruno's right hand, (Figure 3), as Joel enacts his proposal for two bulbs. The
configuration of body parts and orientation of the learners with respect to the table is entwined with the group's
interactional context. The learners effectively take up the idea represented in the diagram by leveraging prior
arrangements of bodies and hands. This arrangement is established over the course of the entire thirty-minute
activity and constitutes important part of the group's interactional practice in an ongoing and changing semiotic
context (Goodwin, 2007). This practice includes constructing and managing the experimental apparatus and
attending to the relevant parameters of the problem. In this case, the learners have demonstrated evidence of

© ISLS                                                                                                     333
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                               Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

competence at both while also invoking the practice to make a discovery (Amerine & Bilmes, 1988; Koschmann
& Zemel, 2009; Roth, McRobbie, Lucas, & Boutonné, 1997).

Confluence of Uptake
The final observation we wish to make rests on the notion of mutability. At the onset of experiment four, the
group has been shown a diagram constructed by another group in the classroom. This diagram (Figure 1a) is an
immutable mobile (Latour, 1990). Bruno and Joel's uptake of the diagram is to reconstruct its features using the
tabletop materials. As detailed above, the next series of actions project through episodes four and five. Here we
see demonstrated the transposition between modes such that the immutable object displayed on the screen is
made mutable through its reconstitution in the tabletop materials. Realization of the affordance of mutability
establishes the necessary relationship between the actors and the setting making it procedurally consequential
(Schegloff, 1991). In other words, the uptake of the diagram transforms the setting by projecting the next set of
relevant actions. These actions are to build a complete circuit, which requires the group to coordinate what they
know  about   circuits and  how    to actually achieve   the  necessary   arrangement   of materials.  This observation
suggests  that uptake  relations   that take   the  form of   modal  transposition   (Peeters, 2010)  may   dramatically
contribute to interactional practice because it invokes coordination with and the instantiation of the relevant
aspects of the problem (Koschmann, LeBaron, Goodwin, & Feltovich, 2006). Competencies for reformulating
ideas and concepts across modes has been used to assess levels of conceptual coherency in laboratory science
activity settings  similar to  the one    discussed in  this  paper (  und  &       cu-Robinault, 2010,   2012).  This is
especially relevant for analysis of interaction at the lab bench where multiple resources are assembled and
invoked by learners as they move through their inquiry. This view parallels Kozma's (2003) assessment of
representational competence. In the case of our participants the placement of the bulb in episode 4 becomes a
problem raised by Serena but only made salient after Bruno and Joel transposed the circuit from diagram to the
tabletop.

Conclusions
The directive given to the participants was to use diagrams to reason about and explore the concept of electricity
flow. This   analysis  showed  how    diagrams   shared   as  classroom   artifacts provided   a resource  on which  the
participants juxtaposed    and configured     their local interactional   practices  and  developed   competencies   for
experimentation    and meaning     making   in  a   laboratory science    activity. Uptake  was   used  to describe  the
interaction contingencies that were observed and to demonstrate how contingencies scale across the embodied,
physical, semiotic, and temporal facets of the setting. We observe that practices are made accountable and
support the development of group-level competencies. In our data we conclude (a) that persistent inscriptions
provide   a durable   semiotic resource    for making    instantiations of  relevant  and  emergent   components    of a
problem   (Alac &   Hutchins,  2004;    Koschmann     et al., 2006).   That is, salient aspects   can be  located or are
"locatable in the setting" and are consequential to how a group proceeds and (b) that uptake across modes
(modal transposition) requires mutable surfaces for any action to perform a transformation in the setting. Thus,
uptake is dramatically facilitated by opportunities for distributed interaction across mutable media.

References
Alac, M.,   &  Hutchins,   E. (2004).   I see  what  you  are  saying:  Action  as  cognition  in fMRI   brain mapping
          practice. Journal of Cognition and Culture, 4, 3(4), 629­661.
Çakir, M. P., Zemel, A., & Stahl, G. (2009). The joint organization of interaction within a multimodal CSCL
          medium. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 4, 115­149.
Garfinkel, H. (1994). Studies in ethnomethodology. Polity Press.
Goodwin, C. (1995). Seeing in depth. Social Studies of Science, 25, 237­274.
Goodwin, C. (2003). Pointing as situated practice. In S. Kita (Ed.), Pointing: Where Language, Culture and
          Cognition Meet (pp. 217­241). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Goodwin, C., & Heritage, J. (1990). Conversation analysis. Annual Review of Anthropology, 19(1), 283­307.
Jordan, B., & Henderson, A. (1995). Interaction analysis: Foundations and practice. Journal of the Learning
          Sciences, 4(1), 39­103.
Koschmann,     T., LeBaron,   C.,  Goodwin,    C.,  &  Feltovich,   P. (2006).  The  mystery   of the  missing referent:
          Objects, procedures,  and   the  problem   of  the  instruction follower.  In P. Hinds   &  D.  Martin  (Eds.),
          CSCW     '06: Computer   Supported Cooperative Work (pp.      373­382).    New York, NY, USA: ACM.
Koschmann, T., Zemel, A., Conlee-Stevens, M., Young, N. P., Robbs, J. E., & Barnhart, A. (2005). How do
          people learn? In R. Bromme, F. W. Hesse, & H. Spada (Eds.), Barriers and Biases in Computer-
          mediated Knowledge Communication: And How They May Be Overcome (pp. 265­294). Amsterdam:
          Kluwer Academic.
Kozma, R. (2003). The material features of multiple representations and their cognitive and social affordances
          for science understanding. Learning and Instruction, 13(2), 205­226.

© ISLS                                                                                                               334
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                      Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

Latour, B. (1990). Drawing things together. In M. Lynch & S. Woolgar (Eds.), Representation in Scientific
       Practice (pp. 19­68). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
 und,  ., &    cu-Robinault, K. (2010). Learning physics as coherently packaging multiple sets of signs. In
       Proceedings of the 9th International Conference of the Learning Sciences - Volume 1 (pp. 404­411).
       International Society of the Learning Sciences.
 und,  ., &     cu-Robinault, K.    (2012). Conceptual change   and sustainable coherency  of concepts   across
       modes of interaction. In D. D. Suthers, K. Lund, C. P. Rose, C. Teplovs, & N. Law (Eds.), Productive
       Multivocality in the Analysis of Group Interactions. New York: Springer.
Medina, R., & Suthers, D. (2013). Inscriptions Becoming Representations in Representational Practices. Journal
       of the Learning Sciences, 22(1), 33­69.
Peeters, H. (2010). Multimodality and its modes in novelizations. Image & Narrative, 11(1), 118­129.
Roschelle, J., Tatar, D., Chaudbury, S. R., Dimitriadis, Y., Patton, C., & DiGiano, C. (2007). Ink, improvisation,
       and interactive engagement: Learning with tablets. IEEE Computer, 40(9), 38­44.
Roth, W.-M. (2001). Situating cognition. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 10(1-2), 27­61.
Sacks, H., Schegloff, E. A., & Jefferson, G. (1974). A simplest systematics for the organization of turn-taking
       for conversation. Language, 696­735.
Schegloff, E. A. (1991).  Reflections  on   talk and social structure. Talk  and social structure: Studies   in
       ethnomethodology and conversation analysis, 44­70.
Streeck, J., & Kallmeyer, W. (2001). Interaction by inscription. Journal of Pragmatics, 33(4), 465­490.
Suchman, L. A. (1987). Plans and situated actions. Cambridge University Press.
Suthers, D. D., Dwyer, N., Medina, R., & Vatrapu, R. (2010). A framework for conceptualizing, representing,
       and    analyzing distributed interaction. International Journal  of Computer-Supported   Collaborative
       Learning, 5, 5­42.
Thibault, P. J. (2011). First-order languaging dynamics and second-order language: The distributed language
       view. Ecological Psychology, 23(3), 210­245.

© ISLS                                                                                                     335
