CSCL 2013 Proceedings                   Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

Conceptual ontology framework for socio-cultural aware Computer
                 Supported Collaborative Learning environments
 Fadoua Ouamani, Narjès Bellamine       Ben Saoud, Riadh Hadj   M'tir, Henda Hajjami Ben Ghézala,    Laboratoire
       RIADI, Ecole Nationale des Sciences de l'Informatique, Université de Manouba, Manouba, Tunisia
                                         Email: wamanifadoua@yahoo.fr

          Abstract:   Considering  the  socio-cultural contexts of  learners  and teachers  involved in  a
          collaborative learning activity, we provide a conceptual ontology framework for socio-cultural
          aware CSCL environments. This framework is composed of two ontologies communicating
          together  and  sharing  the  socio-cultural  knowledge   about the  user  in  order to perform
          appropriate adaptation tasks.

Background
The purpose of this paper is to describe a new approach to adapt the CSCL environment to the learner's socio-
cultural  profile. In  fact, adapting  CSCL  environments    to  socio-cultural characteristics  of its users  is a
challenging task (Blanchard et al., 2010). First, it is a multidisciplinary task that needs to carry studies within
humanities and social sciences (anthropology, ethnology, sociology and psychology), educational sciences and
computer sciences (Human Computer Interaction (HCI), user modeling, adaptation/personalization, mediated
collaboration) in order to determine and define two types of knowledge: (1) knowledge about the user which
consists in socio-cultural characteristics influencing his/her behavior, personality and different states (emotional,
cognitive and motivational) and (2) knowledge about the CSCL domain represented by socio-culturally sensible
variables. Second, in such environment, the knowledge handled by the adaptation is very specific, semantically
rich and holds various relationships among them. So to consider all these issues, we propose an ontology based
models of the user characteristics (1) and the domain characteristics (2).

The proposed conceptual ontology framework
The framework is composed of two ontologies: the ontology based socio-cultural profile (SOCUDO) and the
Socio-Cultural Aware CSCL Ontology (SCACO) described below.

The ontology based socio-cultural profile
The goal of this ontology is to represent socio-cultural characteristics of a user, independently of the area in
which it can be used. To collect and define the concepts of this ontology as well as relations between them, we
conducted a multidisciplinary study (Ouamani et al., 2012) in several disciplines cited above. These works
studied the impacts of socio-cultural variables on humans and the necessity to take them into account in several
areas. So, this ontology was built from the scratch. Once the concepts and their relationships were defined, we
realized the first conceptualization of this ontology called SOCUDO
          The SOCUDO      concepts  are  describing   as following: the  user has a set  of dimensions:   he/she  is
characterized by two sub profiles (individual and cultural profile), lives in a social context, and has different
states (emotional, cognitive and motivational state). He/she also belongs to an age class which is an important
concept here because the dimensions mentioned above vary across age. Each dimension is composed of a set of
characteristics.

The socio-cultural aware CSCL ontology
This ontology is designed to represent computer supported learning collaborative variables, influenced by the
socio-cultural characteristics of the user represented by the first ontology. To build this ontology SCACO we
have applied the same construction process of SOCUDO. Subsequently, we tried to compare our ontology with
existing ontologies representing the same domain subject, trying to find similarities or a possibility of extension.
We have found that the more appropriate one is the CSCL ontology (Barros et al, 2001).

The communication and the sharing of socio-cultural knowledge between the two ontologies:
The two ontologies are closely related. They communicate to share socio-cultural knowledge about the user in
order to trigger the appropriate adaptation tasks. The SOCUDO ontology is instantiated for one user after his/her
information inputs via the forms; this instance of SOCUDO triggers an instance of SCACO (see Figure 1) for
this user based    on adaptation rules  (example: If  PowerDistane=   hierachical and   belonging=  collective then
assistanceDegree= high show wizard). Then, the adaptation process will use this instance to trigger the right
adaptations tasks for this user.
          The figure 1 shows an example of an instantiation part of the two ontologies based on some adaptation
rules. The  user   "Sarah Ben    Foulen" is from  Tunisia   and  live in Tunisia   then he  has  a  cultural profile

© ISLS                                                                                                         329
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                   Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

characterized  by   a "collectivism"   belonging,   "Hierarchic"   power   distance, "monochromic"       time attitude,
"dominance"    relationship   with  environment    and  "Uncomfortable"    risk  and  uncertainty   avoidance.  These
concepts values   trigger  specific   concept values   in the second   ontology:  For    example "Hierarchic"   power
distance triggers a "pushy" assistance manner, "teacher" help initiator, "formal/structured" activity structure,
"hierarchical" control type, etc.

Discussion and conclusion
This poster presentation outlines an ontology based modeling approach that aims to give a common vocabulary
used to model user socio-cultural characteristics and to show how these characteristics impact the collaborative
learning settings and outcomes. The knowledge modeled using ontologies as well as the adaptation rules were
extracted and defined from a considerable multidisciplinary literature study effort.
         This  research   has several  practical and   theoretical implications  (1) concerning   its  significance for
theory development, the study contribute to previous attempt to understand the socio-cultural impacts on user
(behavior, communication, cognition) by trying to gather, unravel and model all the socio-cultural influences on
human   beings  and   its impacts   on  collaborative  learning.   (2) Concerning    its significance  for educational
practices, the adaptation of CSCL systems to the socio-cultural characteristics of the learners may enhance the
learners' satisfaction with the collaborative learning tools and in an intercultural collaboration, the system will
be able to resolve cultural conflicts and make the intercultural collaborative experience more effective. (3)
Concerning  its significance   for  design and   development    practices, the  use  of  ontologies may    enhance  the
sharing, the usability, the structuring of the knowledge handled by the system, the interoperability of ontology
based model and the reasoning about knowledge.

 Figure 1. Excerpt of an example of instantiation of SOCUDO and SCACO ontologies and their relationships

References
Barros, B., Mizoguchi,     R. &   Verdejo, M.    F. (2001).   A platform   for collaboration  analysis  in CSCL.    An
         ontological approach. Proceeding of Artificial Intelligence in Education AIED, San Antonio, USA,
         530-532, IOS Press.
Blanchard,  E.  G., Mizoguchi,     R. and  Lajoie,  S. P.  (2010).  Tructuring  the  cultural domain   with  an Upper
         Ontology of Culture. In E.G. Blanchard and D. Allard (Eds), Handbook of research on Culturally
         Aware    Information   Technology:    Perspectives     and  Models,   Hershey,    PA:   Information  Science
         Publishing.
Ouamani,   F.,  Hadj   M'tir, R.,   Bellamine,   N.  and   Ben  Guézala,   H.  (2012).   Proposal   of a   generic  and
         multidimensional socio-cultural user profile for collaborative environments. the proceeding of the 5th
         International Conference on    Information Systems and Economic Intelligence       SIIE, 75-83.

© ISLS                                                                                                             330
