CSCL 2013 Proceedings                   Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

     Understanding the enactment of principle-based designs: Conceptualizing
          principle-based approaches as carriers of principles for learning

                 John Ow, Learning Sciences Lab, NIE Singapore, ow.eu.gene.john@gmail.com
                  Sunhee Paik, Learning Sciences Lab, NIE Singapore, sunhee.paik@nie.edu.sg
          Katerine Bielaczyc, Department of Education, Clark University, USA, kateb369@gmail.com

          Abstract: Using a metaphor of pharmacological carriers, we will present how teachers in a
          Singaporean    primary school  enacted    the Knowledge    Building    Communities    model   (KBC
          model)  as   a new   principle-based    approach.   Ideas First   project  was   implemented    in   a
          Singaporean    primary school  and   it has visible outward   features  such   as the practices and
          structures  that are external  embodiments      of  the  design   principles.  This study  aims    at
          advancing an understanding of the enacting of new educational models.

Introduction
The    Knowledge   Building  Communities      model   (KBC   model)  and    its associated  technology-based     learning
environment, Knowledge Forum, have been drawn attention in the field of CSCL for over 20 years (Bereiter,
2002; Scardamalia, 2002; Scardamalia & Bereiter, 1993, 2006). Although exemplars of the KBC model exist in
various parts of the world, a better understanding is needed of how to bring the model to life in classrooms
(Bielaczyc, Kapur, & Collins, 2011; Chan, 2011). Ideas First is a two-year science program co-designed with
primary school teachers that has been operating in P3 and P4 classrooms in a Singaporean primary school since
2006 (Bielaczyc & Ow, 2007, 2010). The program is based on the vision of a KBC model where students work
to advance the science understanding of the classroom community through engaging in collectively building
knowledge in response to problems of understanding (Scardamalia & Bereiter, 2006). Students are supported in
their work by Knowledge Forum, that allows learners to construct a communal multimedia knowledge base that
visually traces the community inquiry (Scardamalia, 2004). One concern in the enactment of the KBC model is
that of "lethal mutations" that undermines its principles and goals (Brown & Campione, 1996). What are the
design features of Ideas First that set P3 and P4 classrooms on implementation paths (Bielaczyc & Collins,
2006) with fidelity to principles of the KBC model? We utilize the metaphor of pharmaceutical carriers to better
understand the enactment of a KBC model in classrooms. Our goal in the poster presentation is to provide
insights into design features gleaned using the metaphor of pharmacological carriers that support the enactment
of principle-based designs with fidelity to the underpinning principles and goals.

Understanding Teachers' Enactment of Ideas First
A metaphor of pharmacological carriers can be used to understand the enactment of principle-based approaches.
Carriers are used in pharmaceutical science for the delivery of genetic material or medicine to the therapeutic
sites of action. Pharmacological carriers take on a form that results in the encapsulation of material for delivery
to the sites of action. Pharmaceutical carriers have characteristics that determine their efficacy. Some of these
include, the body's recognition of carriers as foreign entities, the ability of the carrier to exist in prolonged
circulation and the stability of the carrier.
Ideas   First project  has  visible outward    features  such   as  the practices   and  structures that  are    external
embodiments of the design principles. The external features of principle-based approaches are analogous to the
external  capsule   of pharmacological   carriers,  while   the principles   of  the principle-based    approaches     are
analogous to the genetic material and therapeutic drug within the carriers. Similar to pharmaceutical carriers,
these outward features facilitate the delivery or take up of the principles in the classroom. When the classroom
community     takes  up  the principles, the    classroom   culture  shifts reflecting   the  different principles     and
educational goals of the approach. This is analogous to the effect when genetic material and therapeutic drugs
achieve   their therapeutic  effects. We  draw     on our research   on   Ideas   First project to  illustrate teachers'
implementation of KBC model the characteristics of pharmacological carriers to understand teachers' enactment
of principle-based approaches:

·    The foreign nature of principle-based approaches: Carriers are foreign entities introduced into the body.
     Likewise principle-based approaches are designed with different visions of learning compared to existing
     approaches in classrooms. The introduction of these approaches and their novel practices and structures are
     thus akin to the introduction of a foreign entity into the human body. As the class community will mount a
     defense against the foreign approach, the introduction of Ideas First may result in reactions to the new
     approach that includes the adoption of strategies without understanding of the deeper principles as well as
     the appropriation of strategies and structures into existing practices. Initially, the reactions can appear as
     mutations of the enactment of designs. However to avoid ongoing mutations to the extent that they become

                                                                                                                     
  
© ISLS                                                                                                              331
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                     Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

     lethal mutations, we have developed a realization of importance of designing practices and structures that
     lend themselves to long term use by the classroom community.
·    The  ability of principle-based    approaches    to have   a  "prolonged   circulation"    in the community:    An
     important characteristic of carriers that increase their efficacy is their ability to prolong their circulation in
     the organism. In Ideas First, the tri-phasic design of the approach based on KBC principles enabled the
     repeated enactment of practices and structures. The constant enactment of the principle-based practices and
     structures provided multiple opportunities that reflected an emerging understanding of the principles.
·    The  stability  of  the  practices  and  structures    of the   principle-based  approach:     Another  important
     characteristic of  carriers affecting their efficacy is   the stability of the external capsule.  This  allows  the
     carriers to  achieve prolong   circulation  and reach   their target areas. Likewise,   it is important to design
     structures and supporting artifacts for principle-based approaches to establish stable learning environment
     for teachers and students in classroom. In Ideas First, artifacts such as the Think Cards (Ow & Bielaczyc,
     2007) and hypothetical game configurations (Bielaczyc & Kapur, 2010) lend stability to the practices by
     making visible knowledge building practices and support the reflection, learning and enactment of practices
     consistent with the design principles.

Significance
This poster presentation contributes to advancing an understanding of the enacting of new educational models,
especially    how   the participating teachers   perceive and   implement     KBC   model   as  a  new  principle-based
approach and how their perceptions and implementations have changed over time.

References
Bereiter, C. (2002). Education and mind in the knowledge age. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Bielaczyc,    K.  &  Collins,  A.  (2006)  Implementation    paths:  Supporting   the trajectory   teachers traverse  in
          implementing technology-based learning environments in classroom practice. Educational Technology,
          46(3), 8-14.
Bielaczyc,    K., &  Kapur,   M.   (2010). Playing   Epistemic     Games  in  Science and    Mathematics    Classrooms.
          Educational Technology, 50(5), 19-25.
Bielaczyc, K., Kapur, M., & Collins, A. (2011). Cultivating a Community of Learners in K- 12 Classrooms. In
          C. E. Hmelo-Silver, A. M. O'Donnell, C. Chan, & C. A. Chinn (Eds.), International Handbook of
          Collaborative Learning. New York, NY: Routledge. Taylor & Francis.
Bielaczyc,    K., &  Ow,   J. (2007).   Shifting the social  infrastructure: Investigating  transition mechanisms    for
          creating knowledge building communities in classrooms. Paper presented at the ICCE 2007 Workshop
          Knowledge Building Research in Asia Pacific, Hiroshima, Japan.
Bielaczyc, K., & Ow, J. (2010). Making knowledge building moves: toward cultivating knowledge building
          communities in classrooms. Paper presented at the Proceedings of the 9th International Conference of
          the Learning Sciences - Volume 1, Chicago, Illinois.
Brown, A. L., & Campione, J. C. (1996). Psychological learning theory and design of innovative environments:
          On   procedure,    principles and  systems.    In: L.    Schauble   &  R.  Glaser  (Eds.),   Contributions of
          instructional innovation to understanding learning (pp. 86­102). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Chan, C. K. K. (2011). Bridging research and practice: Implementing and sustaining knowledge building in
          Hong Kong classrooms. International Journal of Computer- Supported Collaborative Learning, 6, 147-
          186.
Ow, J., & Bielaczyc, K. (2007). Epistemological perturbations: using material artifacts to cultivate a knowledge
          building   culture  in  classrooms.    Proceedings   of  the 8th   International  Conference   on  Computer
          Supported Collaborative Learning, New Brunswick, New Jersey, USA. 583­585.
Scardamalia, M. (2002). Collective cognitive responsibility for the advancement of knowledge. In B. Smith
          (Ed.), Liberal education in a knowledge society (pp. 67-98). Chicago: Open Court.
Scardamalia, M. (2004). CSILE/Knowledge Forum®. In Education and technology: An encyclopedia (pp. 183-
          192). Santa Barbara: ABC-CLIO
Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (1993). Computer support for knowledge-building communities. Journal of the
          Learning Sciences, 3(3), 265-283.
Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (2006). Knowledge building: Theory, pedagogy, and technology. In K. Sawyer
          (Ed.), Cambridge Handbook of the Learning Sciences. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Acknowledgements
We would like to thank the Ideas First Team --- both the researchers and teachers who made this work possible.
This work was funded by two Singapore MOE grants to the third author through the National Institute of
Education's Learning Sciences Laboratory (R8019.735.PM07 and OER 18/10 KB).

                                                                                                                   
  
© ISLS                                                                                                              332
