CSCL 2013 Proceedings                 Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

       Using Mobile Technology to Support Innovation Education
                   Pete Phelan, Daniel Rees Lewis, Dr. Matt Easterday, Dr. Elizabeth Gerber
                        Northwestern University, 2133 Sheridan Rd., Evanston, IL 60208
    Email: pete.phelan@u.northwestern.edu, daniel-rees@northwestern.edu, easterday@northwestern.edu,
                                         egerber@northwestern.edu

          Abstract: Innovation is critical to our prosperity. A vital task in innovation is to understand
          the context within which problems occur. This poster investigates the potential of mobile
          technology and location-based learning to help novice innovators identify unmet needs using
          human-centered  design   research  techniques.  Drawing   on  an authentic  situated   learning
          perspective, we describe a place-based investigation activity supported by mobile technology.

Introduction
Serial innovators aiming   to make  meaningful   improvements   to  our daily  lives are driven   to identify  and
understand complex problems. Without understanding the context of problems through research techniques such
as field  observations, addressing authentic needs is limited to   the innovators' speculation   and     assumption.
Unfortunately, opportunities to practice researching real-world problems are limited for undergraduate students.
To prepare students for careers in innovation, we need to explicitly teach them how to identify and understand
problems from the perspective of those who are most affected. Developments in place-based learning initiatives
(e.g. Squire, 2009) suggest an opportunity to create meaningful learning experiences outside the classroom and
spread   the learning experience throughout  the community.    We   describe   an activity   facilitated by mobile
technology to help novice innovators develop the specific skills necessary to understand the users' experience.

Background
Innovation is the intentional implementation of novel and useful processes, products, or services designed to
benefit society applied to a new domain (West & Farr, 1990). A critical aspect of successful innovation is a
project's response to a genuine human need. Professionals conduct detailed and systematic observations of a
target situation and user to gain the understanding necessary to discover opportunities to innovate (e.g. Beyer &
Holtzblatt, 1997). Traditional undergraduate design research curriculum is often offered as a course module,
informed by textbook readings and direct instruction in a classroom setting, sending students out into the field to
practice the skill alone (Fixon, 2009). These activities lack specific guidance regarding process, reflection and
feedback at the actual point of observing user behavior.

Research Method
The goal of this work is to distill design principles for teaching research methods to undergraduates undertaking
innovation education. Here we describe the initial design cycle of a design-based research study (Design-Based
Research Collaborative, 2003) which utilizes multiple iterative rounds of design and testing to improve an
intervention's impact while developing a deeper theoretical understanding of the learning occurring. Our central
research questions are to understand how novices conceptualize the process of understanding users and how
location-based activities situate the learning of design research decision-making. We applied human centered
design research methods (Easterday, et al., in press) including ethnographic observation, interview and cognitive
task analysis to investigate common struggles when conducting field observations, compare expert and novice
needs finding strategies, and reveal possible opportunities for an educational intervention.

Initial Findings
In an ethnographic study of 22 undergraduates learning to be innovators, we found that existing instruction in
understanding users was not sufficiently preparing them for the task of needs finding. The novices represented a
variety of academic majors and worked on project teams of 4-6 people. An artifact analysis indicated that many
learners' field observation data sets lacked  objectivity, clarity and  depth. Furthermore    we  discovered   that
novices often observed alone, comparing their findings with their group members only later after leaving the
field, forgetting key information and missing opportunities to learn from other investigators while still on site.
Without clear, immediate feedback, many novices judged their efforts adequate and expressed desire to move
`forward' into a new phase of design, reflecting their conception of a linear design process (Lande & Leifer,
2010), unlike professionals who perform reflective, collaborative, on-site analysis to drive further investigation.

Design Rationale
We aim to give students authentic opportunities to practice observing behavior in situ, foster reflective dialogue
about the observation process, separate their subjective interpretation from observable data and make decisions

© ISLS                                                                                                        333
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                  Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

when following promising leads. We support location-based learning with the ARIS augmented reality system
(http://arisgames.org), which allows us to cultivate a customized digital map with messages that are triggered by
proximity according to the learners' GPS coordinates (Fig. 1). Following an orientation session facilitated by an
experienced local innovator, we invite small groups of 3 to 5 students to investigate phenomena at various
locations throughout the community. Students use handheld mobile devices to track their position within the
map space and discover challenges requiring them to observe specific behavior or conduct a group reflection on
an aspect of the process (Fig. 2). The system facilitates note and photo taking, tagged with GPS data, which
students refer to when they return for a data synthesis and large group debrief phase.
        The situated  activity structure is developed  from  an understanding  that    knowledge  is constructed
through exposure to and interpretation of new phenomena, and that this process is directly influenced by the
context in which the learning occurs (Lave & Wenger, 1991). According to expert innovators we interviewed,
the knowledge gained from investigating complex situational behavior should not be limited to the subjective
interpretation of a single individual, but instead compared with others working on the same task. This aligns
with Roschelle and Teasley (1995) who describe collaboration as a negotiation between individuals resulting in
the construction of shared  meaning    and  conception of a problem.   Therefore when     teams  debrief  after an
observation session they are not only clarifying what they saw as individuals but the group builds knowledge
that forms the basis for the team's future reference and decision making (Stahl, 2006).

                            Figs 1 & 2. ARIS map and sample challenge interface

Future Work
Using mobile technology and computer supported collaborative learning principles we are extending traditional
innovation education into the field where learners have struggled. Early tests suggest this activity is engaging
and interesting for novices, and helps guide meaningful conversation. The next steps on our research agenda
include further evaluation of the learner's experience, testing additional elements of gameplay, and developing a
structure for user contribution of observation challenges. This project will be an asset to the Learning Sciences
because it will help inform the design of mobile place-based learning activities and identify principles for
helping novice innovators as they develop skills to understand the context of user experience.

References
Beyer, H., & Holtzblatt, K. (1997). Contextual design: defining customer-centered systems. Morgan Kaufmann.
Design-Based Research Collaborative (2003). Design-based research: An emerging paradigm for educational
        inquiry, Educational Researcher, 32 (1), 5-8.
Easterday, M., Gerber, E., Rees Lewis, D. (In Press). Applying human-centered design methods to learner
        centered design: A case study. In A. Person (Chair), Symposium on Human-Centered Approaches to
        Developing   Usable   Educational   Technologies. Symposium    conducted at    European  Association    for
        Research on Learning and Instruction 2013, Munich, Germany.
Fixson, S. K. (2009). Teaching innovation through interdisiplinary courses and programmes in product design
        and development: An analysis of 16 US schools. Creativity and Innovation Management, 18(3).
Gagnon, D. (2010). ARIS [computer software]. Available from http://arisgames.org
Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge University
        Press.
Lande, M. & Leifer, L. Difficulties student engineers face designing the future. International Journal of
        Engineering Education, 26,2 (2010), 271­277.
Roschelle, J. & Teasley S.D. (1995) The construction of shared knowledge in collaborative problem solving. In
        C.E. O'Malley (Ed.), Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning. (pp. 69-197). Berlin: Springer.
Squire, K. (2009). Mobile media learning: Multiplicities of place. On the Horizon, 17(1), 70-80.
Stahl, G. (2006). Group cognition: Computer support for building collaborative knowledge. Cambridge, MA:
        MIT Press.
West, M. A.,   &  Farr, J. L.  (1990). Innovation and   creativity at work: Psychological    and  organizational
        strategies. John Wiley & Sons.

© ISLS                                                                                                       334
