CSCL 2013 Proceedings                   Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

Can we increase students' motivation to learn science by means of
                             Web-based Collaborative Inquiry?
                                        Annelies Raes, Tammy Schellens
            Department of Educational Studies, Ghent University, Henri Dunantlaan 2, 9000 Ghent,
                          Email: annelies.raes@ugent.be, tammy.schellens@ugent.be

         Abstract: This study hypothesized that web-based collaborative inquiry in science classrooms
         can be considered as a need-supportive environment which in turn can foster good quality
         motivation as conceptualized by the Self-Determination Theory (SDT). The results did not
         confirm   the hypothesis  of  an increased autonomous     motivation, however    an increase  of
         controlled motivation was found. We discuss how we can improve the teaching and learning
         environment to satisfy students' basic needs and improve good quality motivation.

Theoretical background
Many countries are facing a decline in motivation for science resulting in reduced numbers of young people
choosing to pursue the study of science and a career in science. This finding has been one of the driving forces
for developing and implementing computer-supported collaborative learning environments. CSCL environments
are often perceived as motivating learning environments since students are connected to their peers and to
technology they regularly employ for informal learning. However, to date the focus is more on theories of
learning in CSCL settings whereas motivational analyses are still rare (Dillenbourg, Järvelä, & Fisher, 2009).
Though, we need this kind of research to specify the exact motivational challenges of CSCL. To meet this gap,
this paper focuses on the implementation of a web-based collaborative inquiry project in secondary science
education and unravels if it can contribute to the aim of fostering students' motivation to learn science.

Motivation from a Self-Determination perspective
According to Deci and Ryan's SDT (1985) , motivation can be distributed along a continuum from low to high
levels of self-determination. The most self-determined style of motivation is intrinsic motivation. In addition,
several types of extrinsic motivation have been proposed each with a different degree of self-determination.
From   a high   to a low degree   of  self-determination, there is identified  regulation where  the  individual's
behaviour reflects conscious values and is internalized as personally important; introjected regulation which
represents a partial internalization without completely accepting it as one's own; and external regulation which
takes place when a behaviour is performed for external rewards or constraints (Deci, Vallerand, Pelletier, &
Ryan, 1991). The subcomponents intrinsic motivation and internalized extrinsic motivation on the one hand
refer to autonomous    motivation;   external and introjected regulation on   the other hand  refer to controlled
motivation (Vansteenkiste    et al., 2009).   Previous research within   the  SDT  tradition has  shown     that an
autonomous, relative to a controlled, regulation of study activities is associated with various positive learning
outcomes (see Reeve, Deci, & Ryan, 2004, for an overview). Moreover, regarding science education more
particularly, it has been found that the more self-determined students' science motivation, the more likely they
should consider an education and a career within a scientific field (Lavigne, Vallerand, & Miquelon, 2007). In
this respect, autonomous motivation need to be fostered.

Basic Need Satisfaction and Web-based Collaborative Inquiry
Within the framework of SDT it is maintained that teachers foster autonomous motivation when they create an
environment that facilitates the satisfaction of three basic needs: 1) students' need for autonomy, 2) competence,
and 3) relatedness (Vansteenkiste et al., 2009). First, teacher autonomy support involves the offering of choice,
the minimization of controlling language, and the provision of a meaningful rationale. Second, the need of
feeling competent can be supported by the provision of structure, including optimal challenging tasks, praise,
encouragement after failure, and adequate help. Finally, to meet the third basic need of relatedness the provision
of involvement is important which refers to the experience of a sense of closeness and friendship with one's
student  peers. This   study put  forth Web-based    Collaborative  Inquiry   by  means   of the  online    learning
environment   WISE   (Web-based    Inquiry  Science Environment,   (Slotta &   Linn, 2009)   and hypothesize     that
implementing web-based collaborative inquiry in science classrooms can be considered as a need-supportive
environment which in turn will foster autonomous motivation for science learning.

Methodology
The participants in this study were 220 students from 13 secondary school classes (grade 9 and 10). The average
age of these students was 16 years. The ratio of males to females among the participants was 63% boys to 37%
girls. The science teachers of these classes were asked to dedicate four class periods of 50 minutes to complete

© ISLS                                                                                                         335
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                    Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

the intervention, i.e. the implementation of a web-based collaborative inquiry curriculum project. Students'
motivation for science learning was measured by means of an adapted version of the Academic Self-Regulation
Questionnaire originally developed by Ryan and Connell (1989), yet redesigned by Vansteenkiste, et al. (2009).
This 16-item scale containing four items per regulation type has been successfully used and validated in the
context of previous motivation research. In this study, the questionnaire has been conducted during a pretest and
posttest to assess potential shifts in the quality of motivation. Internal consistencies for the eight-item subscales,
as indexed by Cronbach's alpha, were satisfactory for both autonomous motivation (pretest  = .93 , posttest 
=.94) and controlled motivation (pretest  = .72 , posttest  =.85 ).

Results & Discussion
Based on the results of this study, the hypothesis of an overall increased good quality motivation for science as a
result of being exposed to web-based inquiry during secondary science education need to be rejected since no
significant pre to posttest difference is found for autonomous motivation (t = .04, df = 211, p = .97). On the other
hand an overall significant increase of controlled motivation is found (t = -2.21, df = 211, p = .03), but this does
not result in more qualitative motivation profiles.
         We   need  to conclude    that higher     learner  motivation,  which  in  this study  meant  more    qualitative
motivation, cannot taken for granted because of an innovative learning approach. This finding can be related
with what Dillenbourg et al. (2009) described as `the myth of media effectiveness'. This refers to the fact that
entering new media in the educational sphere often generates over-expectations with respect to its intrinsic
effects on learning. This finding force us to rethink the implementation of web-based collaborative inquiry in
science education in light of the satisfaction of the three basic needs. Regarding autonomy support, we need to
think about how we can provide students with more choice, for example with regard to the completion of
inquiry activities. Regarding competence support, although it is found that most students don't have operational
problems during computer-assisted learning, a lot of students struggle during information problem solving on
the web (cf. the myth of the digital natives). Next to scaffolding for domain-specific knowledge, also scaffolding
the metacognitive   skills  during   CSCL    need     to be  stressed. Regarding    relatedness   finally, as noticed  by
Blumenfeld   et al. (2006),   students  need    to  adjust  to a new   relationship with  the  teacher who    becomes   a
facilitator rather than the primary source of information, but also teachers need to adjust to a changing role
which in recent years has become central concern in CSCL (Dillenbourg et al., 2009). In addition, although
students are working together in small groups at the computer, this does not guarantee that they engage in
collaborative knowledge     construction     and   in shared   regulation. The   question   how   we   can   improve  the
probability that students communicate with each other, seek feedback from each other and jointly approach the
learning activity and negotiate solutions to complex problems is also one of the challenges in CSCL research.

References
Blumenfeld, P.C., Kempler, T.M., & Krajcik, J.S. . (2006). Motivation and Cognitive Engagement in Learning
         Environments. In R. K. Sawyer (Ed.), The Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences. New York:
         Cambridge.
Deci, E. L.,  &   Ryan,    R. M.   (1985).   The    General    Causality Orientations    Scale -  Self-Determination   in
         Personality. Journal of Research in Personality, 19(2), 109-134.
Deci, E. L.,  Vallerand, R.   J., Pelletier, L.  G.,  &  Ryan,   R. M.  (1991). Motivation   and   Education   - the Self-
         Determination Perspective. Educational Psychologist, 26(3-4), 325-346.
Dillenbourg,  P.,  Järvelä,   S., &    Fischer,  F.   (2009).  The  Evolution   of  Research   on  Computer -Supported
         Collaborative Learning. From Design to Orchestration. In N. Balacheff, S. Ludvigsen, T. de Jong, A.
         Lazonder & S. Barnes (Eds.), Technology-Enhanced Learning. Principles and Products.: Springer.
Lavigne, G.   L., Vallerand,  R.   J., & Miquelon,       P. (2007). A   motivational model     of persistence  in science
         education: A self-determination theory approach. European Journal of Psychology of Education, 22(3),
         351-369.
Reeve, J., Deci,    E. L.,  &  Ryan,    R.   M.  (2004).    Self-determination  theory:   A dialectical    framework  for
         understanding the sociocultural influences on motivation and learning: Big theories revisited (Vol. 4).
         Greenwich, CT: Information Age Press.
Ryan, R., & Connell, J. (1989). Perceived locus of causality and internalization: Examing reasons for acting in
         two domains. . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 57, 749-761.
Slotta, J. D., & Linn, M. C. (2009). WISE Science, Web-Based Inquiry in the Classroom. New York: Teachers
         College Press.
Vansteenkiste, M., Sierens, E., Soenens, B., Luyckx, K., & Lens, W. (2009). Motivational Profiles From a Self-
         Determination Perspective: The Quality of Motivation Matters. Journal of Educational Psychology,
         101(3), 671-688. doi: Doi 10.1037/A0015083

© ISLS                                                                                                               336
