CSCL 2013 Proceedings                    Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

                              Design in the world AND our work
                   Richard Reeve, Queen's University, Kingston, Ontario, reever@queensu.ca
           Vanessa Svihla, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, New Mexico, vsvihla@unm.edu

         Abstract:   Design    is a ubiquitous  term  in CSCL     and  the Learning   Sciences,  but  neither
         discusses design methods in parallel to how design is represented in classical design fields.
         We     examine   the use   of the  word   "design" in  publications.  On-going    analysis  explores
         published representations of design process at a finer grain size. We tentatively find a lack of
         problem finding, a scarcity of iterative design, and notions of customer needs in contexts are
         largely absent.

Issues Addressed and Potential Significance
Design as a term has been a significant part of the CSCL discourse since the first issue of ijCSCL (Volume 1 No
1 2006) with 308 references spread across 7 articles. This focus builds on the use of the term in issues of the
Journal of the Learning Sciences (e.g. an early CSCL focused JLS issue - Volume 3 No 3 with 77 references
across 4 articles). However, myriad forces conspire to distract us from taking design seriously; chief among
these  are notions   that generalizability  and scalability are the dominant    goals of   our work.  These   selective
pressures lead us to seek overt and covert means to teacher-proof our designs for learning and to decontextualize
our findings. Rather than presenting our design decisions in tandem with findings and descriptions of context,
we  tend   toward abstraction,    inferring design principles,  which  in  practice may    be applied haphazardly   or
incoherently. We note three ways to consider how we may or may not act as designers: design involves problem
finding; design problems emerge from customer needs and/or user experiences; and that problems and solutions
co-evolve as design work progresses.
         Notions of design and in particular design thinking have gotten a foothold in the adjacent community of
The Learning Sciences and beyond; for instance, in a recent Review of Educational Research, it is claimed that
design thinking    "can also have a positive influence on 21st century education across disciplines because it
involves creative thinking in generating solutions for problems" (Razzouk & Shute, 2012, p. 331). Design
thinking is valued by our communities as a means for solving "wicked problems" (Rittel & Webber, 1984).
However,   there  is concern   voiced   from  design fields regarding   this infiltration of  design thinking, in part
because "an identification of design with problem solving and with strategies for change paints but half the
picture" (Stewart, 2011, p. 516). One of the ways in which design problems differ from other types of problems,
is that they tend to be ill-defined (Cross, 1982). A way to illustrate this is to consider how the design problem as
given differs from the problem as solved, meaning that when the same design problem is assigned to fifty teams,
there will not be "`fifty solutions to the same problem' but, in important respects, `fifty different solutions to
fifty different problems'"    (Harfield, 2007,  p. 160). In  this way,  design  problems   and  solutions are  seen to
coevolve (Dorst & Cross, 2001). Embedded in concerns about design thinking is the notion that design is simply
problem solving; however, design from the design thinking perspective begins from problem finding activities
undertaken by designers, who value the "need for more informed insight into user experience, especially in the
context of rapidly developing digital technologies," (Stewart, 2011, p. 516). We wondered, to what extent are
our designs ­ be they designs for learning, software or research-- explicitly emergent from customer or user
needs? To what extent are the problems being viewed as ill-defined? And finally do the solutions and problems
co-evolve as the design work progresses.      "Scholars do not usually ask: Who does the design benefit and why?
This linear view is associated with notions of perfection, completeness, and finality" (Engeström, 2011, p. 600).
Research questions focus on how the use of the word "design" has changed in the adjacent communities of
CSCL and The Learning Sciences. In particular, we consider passive uses of the word design ("the activity was
designed to engage") and contrast these with more designerly (Cross, 1982) uses       in relation to the journal, year,
and topic. Further, we explore antecedents of design experiments and design-based research to better understand
the myriad ways design --as a process-- is viewed in these communities of scholars. Ultimately our goal is to
examine    our  layered uses  of  the  term design and   through  this analysis to  better understand  it in  terms of
meanings and processes that exist outside of the CSCL community. By providing a better understanding of our
various uses of the term design we anticipate the CSCL community may be able to consider where design and in
particular design thinking could lead us in terms of our work.

Connection to Conference Theme
Our poster addresses the conference theme: "To see the world AND a grain of sand" by examining how design,
as it has been used by the CSCL community, has become laden through the layered ways we have engaged in
talking about it. When we zoom out-- seeing the world--the work in CSCL and The Learning Sciences appears
to align   with design;   However,    when  we  zoom  in--seeing   the  grain  of sand--references    to  design work
diverge, with   some  researchers   enacting  strong design  processes,   and others  omitting  much   of what   being

© ISLS                                                                                                            337
         1991
              1992
                   1993
                        1995
                             1996
                                  1997
                                       1998
                                            1999
                                                 2000
                                                      2001
                                                           2002
                                                                2003
                                                                     2004
                                                                          2005
                                                                               2006
                                                                                    2007
                                                                                         2008
                                                                                              2009
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                             Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

designerly is about. Ultimately, we contend that design is not simply problem solving; it involves locating needs
in the world, understanding them within contexts, working between the problem and solution towards a suitable
solution. Our preliminary work in this area provides a beginning point for a renewed discussion about the nature
of design as it has been presented in iJCSCL and how these descriptions relate to the designerly ways that have
been part of the discourse in the allied design fields.

Methodological Approach
We began our review by searching three journals: Journal of the Learning Sciences (JLS, 1991-2011),
International Journal of Computer Supported Collaborative Learning (iJCSCL 2006-2011), and Design Studies
(DS 1991-2011) for the word "design." We created a database of all sentences containing the word design,
omitting only those that were contained within transcripts or in the references cited (e.g., a journal title). We
then began an on-going analysis of uses of the word design (e.g., "X was designed to..." see Figure 1).

 800
 700
 600
 500
 400                                                                                                   other uses of design
 300                                                                                                   dbr/ design experiments
 200                                                                                                   designed to
 100
   0

Figure 1. Uses of the word "design" in The Journal of the Learning Sciences

Major Findings, Conclusions and Implications
First, we infer that our current analysis continues to be incomplete, and has not been conducted at the right grain
size. We conclude with next steps for our on-going analysis. First we plan to examine articles at a finer grain
size, and with     a    particular     focus     on   the  relationship     between        iJCSCL    and JLS;   we posit that the 2006
introduction of iJCSCL may have impacted how design is presented in JLS. This issue is a current concern for
these adjacent communities; for instance at the 2012 International Conference of the Learning Sciences (ICLS),
an "open meeting of the CSCL community at ICLS" was held, and some attendees voiced concerns over their
continued presence       at  ICLS.     We    wonder        what  might     be   lost     ­ in  terms  of design capacity-- if these two
communities were to further diverge. Disappointed by not having those features- what opportunities are missed
by not having certain aspects of design in our process. In particular, we fear the lore of design as a fairly
straightforward, linear process of problem solving will continue to dominate. Our communities are not talking
about design in the ways reflected in journals such as Design Studies. There is a lack of visible iteration, and
sparse reference to users or customers (perhaps because we find these terms abhorrent), but our initial analysis
has yet to reveal a strong parallel for this role. We anticipate constructive discussions at CSCL 2013.

References
Cross, N. (1982). Designerly ways of knowing. Design Studies, 3(4), 221-227.
Dorst, K., & Cross, N. (2001). Creativity in the design process: co-evolution of problem­solution. Design
         Studies, 22(5), 425-437.
Engeström, Y. (2011). From design experiments to formative interventions. Theory & Psychology, 21(5), 598-
         628.
Harfield, S. (2007). On design `problematization': Theorising differences in designed outcomes. Design Studies,
         28(2), 159-173.
Razzouk, R., & Shute, V. (2012). What Is Design Thinking and Why Is It Important? Review of Educational
         Research, 82(3), 330-348.
Rittel, H., & Webber, M. M. (1984). Planning problems are wicked problems. Developments in Design
         Methodology, 135-144.
Stewart, S. C. (2011). Interpreting Design Thinking. Design Studies, 32(6), 515-520.

© ISLS                                                                                                                              338
