CSCL 2013 Proceedings                     Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

          Interview Findings on Middle Schoolers' Collaboration in
                              Self-Organizing Game Design Teams
Rebecca B. Reynolds (rbreynol@rutgers.edu), Cindy Hmelo-Silver, Lars Sorensen, Cheryl Van Ness
                     Rutgers University, 57 US Highway 1, New Brunswick, NJ 08901

          Abstract: Understanding how younger students can learn to collaborate, and affordances of the
          learning environment that can effectively support this, are critical questions for knowledge
          sharing, networking and innovation in education.      Exploratory  research results on emergent
          middle schooler collaborative activity in a guided discovery-based learning program are
          reported. Students in self-organizing game design teams experience certain challenges (e.g.,
          version control), and innovate solutions. Some indicate meta-knowledge development and
          socialization gains. We conclude with ongoing questions.

      "Guided discovery-based" learning experiences are those in which learners are given a particular task (e.g.,
a problem or a project) that must be supported by inquiry. That is, in order to successfully complete a task, the
learner must develop core disciplinary knowledge as well as practices (e.g., the technical means of creating a
multimedia project). Discovery denotes the need for student engagement in autonomous inquiry to support
development of the core knowledge and expertise in the practices, to complete the given problem or project task.
Often such complex activity is completed in teams. One example of this type of intervention is the Globaloria
program, which embodies the principles of Constructionism and distributed cognition (Harel & Papert, 1991;
Salomon, 1997), and is being implemented in middle and high schools in several U.S. states. Participating
students engage   in collaborative    game    design within  a formal,  in-school class. The   primary  goal  from  the
students' perspective is successful completion and online publishing of a functioning web game, which they
also enter into an annual competition. To complete a game, students participate in several integrated technology-
supported activities to  meet     a range of   instructional objectives (Reynolds  &   Harel,  2009).  The  instruction
involves two less-structured areas that are largely self-organized by students: (1) resource use of a wiki-based
information system containing the curriculum, online syllabus, sequence of assignments, and tutorials on game
design and Flash programming, and (2) student collaboration in teams. An exploratory study was conducted to
investigate students' collaborative engagement in co-located game design, as supported by the wiki environment
and a studio-based classroom setting in which knowledge-sharing as a value was made explicit by teachers
(Salomon, 1997). Here we discuss middle schoolers' collaborative activity that emerges when given the chance
to self-organize their game design teamwork.
Methods
Intervention.  In brief, Globaloria provided digital learning supports via a wiki-based social media platform,
twice- teacher training, and ongoing webinars with students and teachers. In-school classes followed a blended
learning curriculum daily, for up to 90 minutes per session, across either a semester or a full year. Within this
curriculum, students    first engaged  in   individual game    design across 3  modules.  Educators    were minimally
trained on supporting collaboration and teamwork processes. Students chose their own teams and largely self-
organized, delegating tasks and roles. The wiki featured an informational text page text outlining team roles.
         Data  collection and     analysis.   We  visited four schools  in two  states and  interviewed  18   teams  of
participating Globaloria students and their teachers at two timeframes (March and May of 2012), asking about
their experiences with   collaboration,   teamwork,    and   resource use.  We  recorded   all interviews,  adopting a
grounded theory analysis approach to the dataset, and engaged in several rounds of coding video.
Results
Role-taking and division of labor. Teams self-reported variation in strategies for self-organization, role-taking
and   division of  labor.     For   instance, some   students  (especially   6th-graders working    in pairs) worked
collaboratively on shared tasks on a single computer at times, involving negotiation and decision-making for
small incremental steps in the task, such as the color of a background, or figuring out the coding of buttons.
Other teams reported delegating tasks, with individuals working separately and in parallel, coordinating only
when deemed necessary. We found that in most teams, individuals took on varying roles they preferred (e.g.,
programmer,    graphic  designer,    researcher), occasionally  shifting roles. Some     reported self-monitoring  and
evaluation of teamwork processes, and distributed expertise held by individuals at varying levels of mastery
(Barron, 2003). Some teams strategically organized roles to leverage perceived strengths of individuals therein.
Most  teams    reported some    difficulties  self-organizing, negotiating  tasks and    cooperating. Many   discussed
particular instances when communication broke down; several also reported pride in coming to some agreement.
         Peer Help. A culture of informal peer teaching appeared to take hold in the game design classrooms.
Many students reported their teachers had established a prescribed set of problem-solving steps for students to

© ISLS                                                                                                             339
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                     Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

follow in seeking help: first they must visit the wiki to find answers, then ask a team member or peer in the class,
and finally, the last resort is to ask the teacher for help. Certain students became recognized for their acumen in
specialized areas such as programming, and were sought out by other peers in class for specific help. Teachers
informed us that some of these game design leaders were under-performers in traditional school, and upon
participating in this class, had made clear gains in knowledge, social standing, and self esteem. Student experts
we interviewed appeared to enjoy this new role, and the value proffered by the community upon their expertise.
Other students also reported gaining expertise and learning through their interactions with the expert peers.
          Version Control. One challenge students faced was keeping track of game file versions. Because of
variation in self-organizing teamwork processes, students required varying strategies for merging distributed
work and project files. Version control issues appeared to have challenged some groups' productivity. Adobe
Flash source files do not lend themselves easily to version control. Although some more advanced students
reported fluency in importing work of others into a central Flash project file, such as graphics or code from
other team members' files, several teams indicated confusion over this. Many reported an intention to tackle
integration at the end, saving and accruing distributed work individually in files on local computer hard drives.
Although the wiki was meant to help students project manage file version control, most teams noted that the
wiki served as an occasional backup archive, rather than the main channel of file transfer and coordination.
Teams reported using flash drives to transfer shared files, which occasionally became lost. Some teams emailed
each other    files. Attempting   to control  for the  complexity of managing    many   different tasks, a few teams
reported dedicating use of a particular computer for a particular function (e.g., "the computer on the left is
where we save graphics files, and the one on the right is for coding"). Such a strategy may reveal that some
students struggled to conceptualize parallel multi-tasking capabilities such as multiple file tabs in Flash project
files, SWF files, folders, and file management in general. Similarly, some students reported sharing their login
credentials for the wiki with each other, enabling a given individual to log into another's account and upload
his/her files into the other's file gallery as one mode of transfer (when they could simply login and upload as
themselves to make files accessible to all classmates on the wiki). As deadlines approached, teachers reported
stepping in to scaffold and help students integrate files.
Discussion
Findings   indicate   that applying  the instructional  design decision  to allow   middle-schoolers  to self-organize
teamwork in guided discovery-based learning appears to both afford and constrain student collaboration and
distributed cognition. By following an intensive collaborative design experience, some students develop insights
about collaborative work processes (Barron, 2003). Students' reporting of delegation of team roles based on
perceived expertise shows evidence of consciousness and meta-knowledge about roles. Comments made by
some students about being sensitive to team members' feelings while delegating based on perceived expertise
also reflects a certain socialization and cooperation. Although some students had difficulty with version control
and  file management,      others seemed   to develop   adaptive strategies such  as use of Flash  drives, ultimately
learning how to copy/paste features and code created by others into a central project file. It appears that version
control and task delegation could be structured more by teachers and/or the curriculum and e-learning system, to
facilitate greater productivity. Also, while benefits exist to allowing students to specialize in and master certain
tasks (e.g., graphic design; programming; online research), if the program aims to cultivate common skills
among all students in all areas, a more structured approach to role-taking must be considered to ensure students
have adequate experience with practices and time on task for learning. These results lead to questions about
ways  in  which   the  social tools  could  better support  distributed  expertise. Another question  relates to  how
teachers might capitalize on emergent roles (e.g., Hmelo-Silver et al., 2007; Miller et al; 2013) while at the same
time finding ways to assign roles that are important but don't emerge. Ultimately, we observe that tensions exist
among: (a) the constructionist framework used in the guided discovery-based program investigated, (b) its goal
to facilitate student-centered    learning,  (c)  the need for collaborative  teamwork   to be productive,    and, (d)
formative/summative assessment constraints imposed by schools that assume common outcomes for all, that
warrant   further consideration   and  investigation.  These   questions have key    implications for the  design  and
implementation of computer-supported collaborative inquiry-, discovery- and project-based learning in schools.
References
Barron, B. (2003). When smart groups fail. The Journal of The Learning Sciences, 12(3), 307-359.
Harel, I, & Papert, S. (1991) (Eds.). Constructionism. Norwood, NJ: Ablex Publishing.
Hmelo-Silver, C.E., Katic, E., Nagarajan, A., & Chernobilsky, E. (2007). Soft leaders, hard artifacts, and the
groups we rarely see: Using video to understand peer learning processes. In R. Goldman, R. Pea, B. Barron, & S.
Derry (Eds.), Video research in the learning sciences (pp. 255-270). Mahwah NJ: Erlbaum.
Miller, B., Sun, J., Wu, X., & Anderson, R. C. (2013). Child leaders in collaborative groups. In Hmelo-Silver,
Chinn, Chan & O'Donnell (Eds.), International Handbook of Collaborative Learning, NY: Routledge.
Reynolds, R., Harel Caperton, I. (2009). The emergence of 6 contemporary learning abilities in high school
students as they develop and design interactive games. Paper presented at AERA, April 2009.
Salomon, G. (1997). Distributed cognitions: Psychological and educational considerations. Cambridge U. Press.

© ISLS                                                                                                             340
