CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                            Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

  Measuring `Framing' Differences of Single-Mouse and Tangible
                     Inputs on Patterns of Collaborative Learning
                              Luis A. Andrade, Joshua Danish, Indiana University,
                              Email: laandrad@indiana.edu, jdanish@indiana.edu
                        Yanín Moreno, Lenin Pérez, Universidad de San Buenaventura,
                 Email: ymoreno@academia.usbbog.edu.co, lhperez@ academia.usbbog.edu.co

         Abstract:   Research  on   usability of  tangible  interfaces has predominantly     focused   on  the
         quantity of  interactions.  In  contrast, we   argue  that   research on   tangible  and   touchable
         interfaces must focus on the quality of interactions. We introduce the concept of framing and
         resource  activation in   studying   the  nature  of the  collaborative   activity  within   tangible
         interfaces. We  observed    40  five year-old  children engaging   in   a math-series   activity with
         either a tangible or single-mouse input, and uncovered four categories of behavioral clusters
         which accounted for 90% of student interactions. We found a positive correlation between
         exploratory talk and synchrony cluster (i.e., shared responsibility over the action) particularly
         on  the  single-mouse    condition,   and  a  negative   correlation  with  passiveness/individual
         behavior (no   negotiation   of the  actions), predominantly    on   the  tangible  condition.   This
         suggests a  tension  for designers   as  they  aim to   balance the   learning benefits   of focused
         individual engagement with those that stem from collaboration.

Objectives
Traditional computer interfaces were designed with a single user in mind at a time (Grudin, 1990). However,
most of us will agree that today collaboration is an important part for both working and learning. A great deal of
research has   shown   that collaborative  learning    outperforms    individual   learning (c.f., Dillenbourg,  1999;
O'Malley, 1995). Since the turn of the century, software and interface designers are moving toward facilitation
of collaborative interaction in co-located groups (Stahl, Koschmann, & Suthers, 2006). For instance, studies of
how people collaborate with multiple-mice inputs, touch surfaces, or tangible interfaces, have received a great
deal of attention (e.g., Antle, Bevans, Tanenbaum, Seaborn, & Wang, 2011; Falcão & Price, 2009; Ha, Inkpen,
Mandryk, & Whalen, 2006; Harris et al., 2009; Stanton, Neale, & Bayon, 2002). A recent idea of many software
and interface designers is to embed features that increase the awareness of participants over each other activities
(Dourish & Bellotti, 1992). For instance, Hornecker, Marshall, Dalton, and Rogers (2008) argue that tangible
materials increase awareness by facilitating the visualization of activities of other participants.
         Research on Human Computer Interaction (HCI) has shown that touchable (or tangible) interfaces can
promote  equal   access (Hornecker    et al.,  2008),  foment    on-task talk  (Harris  et  al., 2009),   and  facilitate
simultaneous interaction with the digital information (Harris et al., 2009). In contrast, comparative studies of
single-mouse   versus   multiple-mice    inputs  have   shown    that  six-year-old  children    tend  to  work   more
collaboratively by having to share a single mouse; conversely, they tend to work in an individual, parallel way
with multiple-mice inputs (Stanton et al., 2002; Stanton & Neale, 2003). Thus, there seems to be two competing
hypotheses  about how   single-   or multiple-input   interfaces support  collaborative  learning   (c.f. Harris et al.,
2009). On the one hand, single-mouse allows more discussion at the interior of the group, and allows more
awareness of each other's actions by forcing allocation of responsibility (Stanton & Neale, 2003); but it is prone
to dominance of one individual over the others, and it has been shown that the talk content is mostly about turn-
taking (Harris et al., 2009). On the other hand, touchable or tangible interfaces allow more equity to take place
in the physical activity (Rick et al., 2009; Stanton et al., 2002), allow more awareness by visualizing each
other's actions (Antle et al., 2011; Ha et al., 2006), and also the talk content is more task-focused (Harris et al.,
2009); though, more interferences might occur (Hornecker et al., 2008).
         However, the epistemological assumptions of how tangible designs might enhance collaboration must
be explicitly addressed (Dillenbourg, 1999). This mixed evidence from previous research creates a paradox: Are
people inherently individualistic so that we ought to design interfaces in such a way that users are forced to
collaborate, or do people have a natural inclination to collaborate but traditional interfaces prevent them from
doing so? Additionally, does traditional technology, designed with only a single user in mind facilitate more
collaboration?
         The apparent paradox is created by mistakenly identifying where the locus of the collaborative activity
is situated. We believe that although previous literature on HCI design shows the trend has moved to support
group behavior, there is no consensus on the level of the unit of analysis (Dillenbourg, 1999) . This issue causes
mixed and contradicted results in the literature on tangibles, tabletops, hybrid surfaces, and other shared-ware
technology. In this paper we would like to address this problem by elucidating a possible answer to the question
of how to study collaboration on this type of interfaces, i.e., by taking into account a dynamic unit of analysis.

© ISLS                                                                                                              34
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                                Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

Theoretical and Design Framework
We argue that theory and research on tangible and touchable interfaces has to pay attention to the level of unit of
analysis. We are introducing the concept of framing and resource activation (Conlin, Gupta, & Hammer, 2010;
Scherr   & Hammer,      2009)  to   study the nature  and  quality   of the   collaborative activity   within   tangible and
touchable interfaces. Framing has been defined in the anthropological literature as the structure of expectations
of how people understand, moment by moment, the character of an activity; stated more simply, a sense of
`what is going on' (Tannen, 1993). Also, Conlin et al. (2010) introduce the idea of ontological frames as a
coherent activation pattern of resources. These authors state that framing has a dynamic nature, in which the
pattern of activation involves manifold resources, whether in the individual mind, across minds, or across minds
and materials. Some studies of these ontological framings have pointed out that various behaviors tend to cluster
together both within and across participants of an activity. Also, there seems to be only so many behavioral
clusters that  can  account  for   most of the time   participants   interact with   each  other. Moreover,     Conlin et  al.
(2010) found that one of these clusters tends to be specially correlated to a particular type of reasoning, e.g.,
scientific reasoning.
         We intend to use this framework of framing and resource activation to first categorize the clusters of
behavior in a particular activity with either tangibles or single-mouse input, and second, to correlate one of these
clusters with a type of productive talk, called `exploratory talk' (Mercer, 2008). Exploratory talk has been
defined as "the active joint engagement of the children with one another's ideas." (Littleton et al., 2005, p. 5).
That is, we wanted to study whether children would frame the activity to collaborate and negotiate meaning, or
as an independent, parallel work.
         In order to understand how this dynamic unit of analysis informs collaborative learning in tangible
environments, we examined how children collaboratively worked to solve a problem of mathematical series by
using  either  a single-mouse    or  tangible objects.   However,    we   were more     interested in  the process  of   how
children learned within this collaborative activity than in the product of such an activity, a method that other
authors have proposed (c.f., Dillenbourg, Baker, Blaye, & O'Malley, 1996). This is one way we might better
inform the design of such tangible interfaces.

Methods
Participants were 40 five-year-old kindergarten students from a public school in a capital city in South America.
A between-subjects condition was employed in which we randomly assigned half of the students to a single-
mouse condition and the other half to a tangible condition. We considered the mouse interface condition as a
type  of single-input    activity,  whereas   the tangible condition    as a  type   of multiple-input.    For  the tangible
condition, children were given plastic objects (e.g. geometric figures, animal figurines, colored beads). For the
mouse condition, children used virtual manipulatives available on-line at the National Library of Manipulatives
(Dorward & Heal, 1999). We let students use the touchpad at the center of the laptop instead of the physical
device, for it was equidistant to each participant. Many teachers use this kind of settings in which they have
students work in pairs with tangible material or virtual manipulatives on a laptop that is shared by a couple of
students (Rosen & Hoffman, 2009). In future studies newer technology, such as iPad's, can be used rather than
laptops. In the present study, iPad's were not used due to limited funds.
         Four tasks on mathematical series were presented to the dyads to solve together. A series task is a
common     mathematical    activity that   children solve  with manipulative      objects,  such  as  geometric    figures or
colored objects of different sizes. In a word, a series task is an activity of finding a pattern (by shape, color, size
or more than one feature) that repeats throughout a long sequence of objects. This task has also been popular
with the use of virtual manipulatives, which makes it a suitable task for a comparison between a tangible-
environment    against   a single-mouse    interface. Also, such     an activity  is both   engaging   and  demanding      for
children  of  this  age.   Further, we  expected    this activity would    help   children  engage    in a discussion    that
challenges their knowledge about mathematical relationships. The first task was to create a necklace with color
beads; the second task was to create a sequence of animals; the third task was to create a sequence of colored
beads  with   two  levels  ABAB     or  ABCABC      (see figure 1);   the  fourth task  was  to   complete    a sequence   of
geometric blocks.
         Students were paired up by the teacher in a way that she believed created dyads that would interact
well. The pairs were balanced to include a similar number of same and mixed gender compositions. The task
was conducted in a separate classroom with one dyad at a time in order to have a better setting to capture good
quality video-recordings. No explicit roles were assigned or explicit instructions given on how children were to
deal with turn-taking. Instructions were simple and given by the researcher (e.g., "You are to discover a pattern
shown by the first elements in the sequence and then follow it"). Before the four tasks started, children were
given some time to familiarize with the materials. We used this initial game as an activity to informally test
children's  ability  to  manipulate    the concrete   materials   or  the  touchpad.    Although   all the  activities were
considered   for the initial steps  at the qualitative analysis   and interpretation,   for the purpose    of this paper   we
analyzed   the third  task  in a   fine-grain detail, in which    the type  of  material   was  the  most  similar  in   both

© ISLS                                                                                                                     35
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                             Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

conditions. This activity lasted about 2-3 minutes for each pair, and the four activities went on for about 15
minutes in total.

                         a)                                                            b)

         Figure 1. Two conditions of a math series task; a) tangible objects, and b) virtual manipulatives

Measures of Behavior
We developed a coding scheme to capture clusters of behavior. This coding scheme was partially based on
Conlin et  al. (2010)  and   was aligned     with Collazos et   al. (2007)   idea of synchrony  of collaboration.  A
synchronous activity can be understood as a `meta-cognitive' contract in which both participants expect their
messages be processed fluidly and misunderstandings resolved (Collazos & Mendoza, 2006). We delimited a
span of 10 seconds as a time long enough as to include sufficient information to determine how children's
behavior converge   on a    certain cluster; and  also short enough   as to  have  enough  number   of  total clusters
throughout  the   activity.  Six    major  categories   were  conceived:     synchrony,   interference,  passiveness,
individuality, distraction, and  indeterminate    (see Table 1). However,    because  of  the particularities in each
condition (there is no individual-parallel work on single-mouse condition) the categories of passiveness and
individuality were collapsed into one single code (passive is "like" doing things on your own, without paying
much attention to the group-mate). Scores on these categories represent proportion of behavior occurrence (each
one 10 seconds long). Two researchers independently coded all the videos for activity three and then met to
resolve differences until a 100% agreement was reached.

Measures of Talk
We also transcribed children's talk and non-verbal language. We developed a coding scheme to categorize their
talk to sort out level of engagement when negotiating a shared understanding throughout the problem-solving
activity. This coding scheme was partially based on the concept of exploratory talk developed by Littleton et al.
(2005). The rest of the scheme was based on a converging process of refining interpretations from several
iterations of watching the videos and discussing them within the research group. Four major categories were
conceived: exploratory,     narrative, disputative, and   other  (off-task). Scores   on  these categories represent
proportion of utterances. Each category was subdivided in various sub-codes (see Table 2). Two researchers
coded half of the transcripts and a third researcher coded an overlapping 50%. Overall inter-rater agreement was
87%.

Table 1: Categories of Behavioral Clusters

   Category                          Description                                       Example
                       Participants share the focus of
                       attention and their gaze is directed
                       towards the same point.
  Synchronous          Their actions contribute to the result
                       of the activity.
                       They implicitly share responsibility
                       for the action.

© ISLS                                                                                                            36
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                       Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

                     Participants may or may not share
                      the focus of attention.
    Passive          However, the authorship of theaction is not shared, because the
                      activity is not the result of the joint
                      action of the participants.

                     Participants, despite having
  Individuality       active roles, act independently,without actually articulating or
                      negotiating their actions.

                     Participants may or may not share
  Interference        the focus of attention. However, the action of a member
                      hinders the action of the other.

                     The focus of the participants does
                      not coincide with that of the
   Distraction        proposed activity.
                     Participants are distracted and look
                      to a different place.

                     There is ambiguity about the actions
                      of the participants.
                     Unable to determine with certainty
                      the intent or purpose of the action.
                     Includes technical, incidental, and
 Indeterminate        accidental circumstances thatprevent determining with certainty
                      the purpose of the action.
                     The category also serves to code
                      actions that are not relevant to this
                      investigation (jumping for joy,
                      singing, dancing, etc.).

Table 2: Categories for utterance codes

         Category                     Sub-code                                Example

                                  Propose orExploratoryIn these types of statementssuggestion"All we need is a pink." "We have to remove this.""Put it below the other." "You are to do this." "Put ithere."
 the intention is to constructmeaning. In a way,Inquiry"What?" "How?" "Where to?" "What is this?" "Blue?""Here?"
 participants intend to make a`shared reasoning' about theRespondBoy: "Do I do it?"Girl: "Yes, do it."
 problem and its solution.        Explain              "If there are two reds here, if you put two red ... hereare two yellow, two yellow, two red, two red."
 Descriptive                      Egocentric           "This goes here," "here we go again," "we're almost
 Such utterances are primarily    narrative            there."
 intended to narrate the facts,   Passive narrative    "Hey, you need to put three here!"

© ISLS                                                                                                          37
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                         Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

 events or intentions ofparticipating subjects. It isDescriptionnot the intention to anticipate"Here's one, two, three." "All the colors are gone.""White is there already."
 what needs to be done.
                                   Assertion              "That's it," "It is this one," "I do mine," "Here!"

 Disputative                       Negative               "No, not here!"
 These types of statements
 show a lack of agreement          Push backamong the participants,"Let me do it!" "I do it `cause I know how to!" "Helpme!" "You do it!"
 either because they do not
 agree, because they do not                               "Why did you do that?" "Now it broke!" "You don't
 know how to fix the activity,     Demand                 want to play with me." "Don't do it so hard." "Don't
 or because they do not like                              do that!"
 how the other is acting.

 Others:
 This category includes
 utterances that are not
 addressed explicitly orimplicitly to the solution ofOthers"I'm thinking I'm good at this," "I scraped myself".
 the problem or support the
 interaction of participants to
 solve the problem.

Results

Finding Patterns of Behavior and Talk
All dyads completed the task correctly, and took on average about two minutes to solve it (M=2:14, SD=1:27).
Participants in the virtual    condition (M=2:42,  SD=1:53)    took longer  than the tangible  condition (M=1:47,
SD=0:27). In general, in the tangible condition children did not talk as much (151 utterances total), and talked in
an egocentric way (narrative talk). It seems they were narrating and describing what they were doing, instead of
collaboratively planning future moves (see Table 3). In fact, they only included a low percentage of exploratory
utterances. On a positive note, though, they were not involved in as many moments of conflict (disputative talk)
as on the single-mouse condition. Nonetheless, the tangible condition seems to have elicited more independent
work in the form of two parallel, individual activities (see Table 4). For instance, it is apparent from the
following excerpt of the tangible condition that both children were motivated on solving the problem, but this
behavior seemed more like a parallel attempt without many purposeful exchanges of negotiation.

       Group1: tangibles (dyad 3)

                                            (Child A    begins to place chips on    the table while B
                                            notices it)
                                            Child B: I will put this one. (Child B puts one chip while
                                            Child A keeps placing other chips) Oh! I got this one.
                                            Child B: (Child B places the remaining chips and Child
                                            A looks elsewhere). Here, look.
                                            Child A: This one goes here.
                                            Child B: This one. Done!   (End of activity).

Table 3: Percentage of utterances by condition.
                     Exploratory         Narrative       Disputative      Others           Total
Tangible             23 (15.23%)         84 (55.63%)     14 (9.27%)       30 (19.87%)      151 (100%)
Single-mouse         130 (44.52%)        69 (23.63%)     64 (21.92%)      29 (9.93%)       292 (100%)

Table 4: Percentage of behavioral clusters by condition.

© ISLS                                                                                                            38
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                            Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

                                     Passive/
                  Synchronous        Individual            Interference     Distraction  Indeterminate    Total
                                                                                                          104
 Tangible         12 (11.54%)        70 (67.31%)           8 (7.69%)        5 (4.81%)    9 (8.65%)        (100%)
                                                                                                          151
 Single-mouse     103 (68.21%)       23 (15.23%)           5 (3.31%)        5 (3.31%)    15 (9.93%)       (100%)

         On the other hand, single-mouse interaction led to a greater number of utterances (292 total). Children
talked about future moves, planning, proposing, asking and explaining, which we labeled as `exploratory talk'.
Children also talked about turn-taking, but this talk was not as frequent as previous research suggests (Harris et
al., 2009); in  fact, only 18   over  a  total of  130 exploratory  utterances were   coded  as turn-taking   (7.22%).
Children in this condition also talked egocentrically, which was observed about half the time compared to the
tangible condition. However, children did tend to argue more and conflicts arose from time to time. Indeed,
children on the single-mouse condition tended to exchange a sustained, vivid dialog to keep the activity going
on. For instance, in the following excerpt, not only did these kids maintain a dialog prominent with inquiry,
explanations and suggestions, but also with a small level of strain:

         Group2: single-mouse (dyad 1)

                                         Boy: Your turn.
                                         (Girl manipulates the mouse)
                                         Boy: And there's a red... Two red ... you're doing it wrong
                                         (Girl continues to manipulate the mouse, while he seems focused on what
                                         she does)
                                         Boy: Girl, here I think two reds should follow (points on the screen with
                                         two fingers)
                                         (Girl silently manipulate the mouse and completes the two colors)
                                         Boy: No, not there ... here.
                                         Girl: I know!
                                         Boy: Then delete them ... those two (scratches his head)
                                         Girl: But they have to be pink and have to be here.
                                         (Boy cautiously takes off his hand from the mouse and then points at the
                                         screen)
                                         Boy: Here you are missing a red, two red, look (manipulates the mouse)
                                         here... I'll take this, this, this, this and this (deletes them, trying to correct
                                         some colors)
                                         Girl: your turn (ceding the control of the mouse)

Correlations between Behavior and Talk
In order to understand if there were systematic differences on behavioral clusters and talk between single-mouse
and tangible conditions, a one-way MANOVA with three categories of talk and four categories of behavior was
conducted.  With   the   use of    Wilk's lambda    criterion, the combination    of  these  observed   measures  was
significantly related to the condition (F(7,12)=4.91, p=.008), with a large magnitude of association (2 = .741).
A series of univariate ANOVA tests with alpha = (.05/7) was performed to find significant differences on the
dependent   measures.    We  found   that exploratory    talk  was significantly higher  for single-mouse     condition
(M=12.9, SD=8.0) than for tangible condition (M=2.30, SD=1.77), F(1,18)=16.71, p=.001, with a large effect of
association, 2 = .481. Passive/individual behavior was significantly higher in the tangible condition (M=7.0,
SD=3.29) than in the single-mouse condition, (M=2.0, SD=2.01), F(1,18)=16.30, p=.001, with a large effect of
association, 2= .475.    Disputative talk was marginally higher in the single-mouse condition (M=6.20, SD=6.75)
over tangible condition (M=1.40, SD=2.01), F(1,18)=4.65, p=.045, with a medium effect of association, 2=
.205. Also, synchronous behavior was marginally higher on single-mouse condition (M=10.20, SD=10.79) over
tangible condition (M=1.20, SD=1.23), F(1,18)=6.86, p=.017, with a medium effect of association, 2= .276.
We also found that exploratory talk was highly correlated with synchronous behavior (r=.852, p<.001), and
with disputative talk (r=.651, p=.001, R2=.423), and also negatively correlated with passive/individual behavior
(r= -.583, p=.007, R2=.339).
         Our    results provide    evidence  to  support Stanton   et al.'s (2002, 2003)    hypothesis. Single-mouse
interfaces  for these   particular tasks seem   to promote    more dialog,  discussions and  more arguments    among
participants. Furthermore, this kind of talk was highly correlated to a set of behaviors that imply synchrony in
which  both  participants  processed    each   other's messages  and  resolved   misunderstandings   fluidly. We  also

© ISLS                                                                                                             39
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                         Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

noticed, as Harris et al. (2009) did, that in the tangible condition children tend to talk more about the task, but it
took the form of a parallel activity instead of a collaborative effort. Finally, on the single-mouse condition
children did talk more about turn taking, again noticed by Harris et al. (2009), but these conversations only
account for less than 10% of the collaborative talk.

Discussion and Conclusion
This paper intends to make a contribution to the literature on evaluation of the usability of tangible interfaces
and collaborative learning. Previous research on the usability of tangible interfaces has predominantly focused
on the quantity of direct interaction (e.g., Fjeld, Schar, Signorello, & Krueger, 2002; Ha et al., 2006; Harris et
al., 2009). From our point of view, by introducing the concept of exploratory talk to the study of collaboration
within an object-manipulation task, we have been able to sharpen the study of the content of the talk this type of
interaction elicits. Also to acknowledge that collaboration can occur in performance as well as talking, we
measured behavioral clusters of physical actions from a framing perspective. Through this process, we have paid
much closer attention to the quality of the interactions than previous studies have.
       By using this framework of framing and resource activation, we found four categories of behavioral
clusters in the math-series activity, either with tangibles or single-mouse input. These four clusters (synchrony,
interference, passiveness/individuality, and distraction) accounted for more than 90% of students' interactions
during the problem-solving activity. We also found a large positive correlation of exploratory talk with the
synchrony cluster, particularly for the single-mouse condition. At the same time, we found that exploratory talk
was negatively    correlated with   passiveness/individual   behavior, which   was   predominant  in the   tangible
condition.
       What does it all mean for collaboration and learning? For collaboration this suggests that if the unit of
analysis is at the level of the dyad, participants are more engaged in talk and negotiation by having to share the
object of interaction. From a social-mind-unit-of-analysis perspective, it seems plausible to understand that the
nature of a collective activity is directed by a shared object (literally, in this case). This shared object then
shapes individual actions and other mediators within the shared activity (Engeström, 1987). On the other hand,
conclusions for learning might not be as straightforward, because the narrative talk that we observed with
tangible materials was a particular type of egocentric talk which is characteristic of this range of age. However,
Vygotsky (1986) was one of the first psychologists to notice that egocentric talk might in fact be beneficial to
the child's cognitive development. In this way, at the individual level of analysis it seems that tangible objects
engage students and challenge their mathematical knowledge. Although this kind of egocentric talk is important
for the child's reasoning, as Vygotsky noticed, it is not shared or negotiated synchronically with others at this
developmental point yet. This suggests a tension for designers of tangible interfaces as they aim to balance the
learning benefits of focused individual engagement with those that stem from collaboration. We believe that
recognizing    how participants  tend toward a set    of behavioral  clusters during  their interactions, and then
understanding how this set of clusters correlate with a particular, desired reasoning process is an important step
for evaluating the shareability of every interface.

References
Antle, A.N., Bevans, A., Tanenbaum, J., Seaborn, K., & Wang, S. (2011). Futura: design for collaborative
       learning and game play on a multi-touch digital tabletop. Paper presented at the TEI '11 Proceedings of
       the fifth international conference on Tangible, embedded, and embodied interaction, New York, NY,
       USA.
Collazos, C.A., Guerrero, L.A., Pino, J.A., Renzi, S., Klobas, J., Ortega, M., . . . Bravo, C. (2007). Evaluating
       collaborative learning processes using system-based measurement. Journal of Educational Technology
       and Society, 10(3), 257.
Collazos, C.A., & Mendoza, J. (2006). Cómo aprovechar el "aprendizaje colaborativo" en el aula (How to take
       advantage of "cooperative learning" in the classroom). Educación y Educadores, 9(2), 61-76.
Conlin, L.D., Gupta, A., & Hammer, D. (2010). Framing and Resource Activation: Bridging the Cognitive-
       Situative Divide Using a Dynamic Unit of Cognitive Analysis. Paper presented at the CogSci, Portland,
       USA.
Dillenbourg,   P.  (1999). Collaborative Learning:     Cognitive  and  Computational   Approaches.   Advances   in
       Learning and Instruction Series. New York: Elsevier Science.
Dillenbourg, P., Baker, M.J., Blaye, A., & O'Malley, C. (1996). The evolution of research on collaborative
       learning.    In  E.   R. Spada,  P. (Eds)     (Ed.), Learning   in Humans     and Machine:    Towards   an
       interdisciplinary learning science. (pp. 189-211). Oxford: Elsevier.
Dorward,   J., &  Heal, R.  (1999). National library  of  virtual manipulatives for  elementary and  middle   level
       mathematics. Proceedings of Webnet99, 1510-1512.

© ISLS                                                                                                         40
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                         Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

Dourish, P., & Bellotti, V. (1992). Awareness and coordination in shared workspaces. Paper presented at the
         CSCW     '92 Proceedings  of the  1992  ACM    conference   on Computer-supported    cooperative   work,
         Toronto, ON, Canada.
Engeström, Yrjo. (1987). Learning by expanding. An activity-theoretical approach to developmental research.
         Helsinki: Orienta-Konsulti Oy.
Falcão, T.P., & Price, S. (2009). What have you done! the role of'interference'in tangible environments for
         supporting collaborative learning. Paper presented at the CSCL'09 Proceedings of the 9th international
         conference on Computer supported collaborative learning, London.
Fjeld, M., Schar,  S.G., Signorello,  D., &  Krueger,  H. (2002).  Alternative tools for tangible  interaction: A
         usability evaluation. Paper presented at the Proceedings of the International Symposium on Mixed and
         Augmented Reality, ISMAR 2002, Darmstadt, Germany.
Grudin, J. (1990). The computer reaches out: the historical continuity of interface design. Paper presented at the
         Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems: Empowering people.
Ha, V., Inkpen, K.M., Mandryk, R.L., & Whalen, T. (2006). Direct intentions: the effects of input devices on
         collaboration around a tabletop display. Paper presented at the TABLETOP '06 Proceedings of the
         First IEEE International Workshop on Horizontal Interactive Human-Computer Systems, Washington,
         DC, USA.
Harris, A., Rick, J., Bonnett, V., Yuill, N., Fleck, R., Marshall, P., & Rogers, Y. (2009). Around the table: Are
         multiple-touch  surfaces  better  than single-touch   for children's collaborative interactions?   Paper
         presented at the CSCL'09 Proceedings of the 9th international conference on Computer supported
         collaborative learning, Rhodes, Greece.
Hornecker, E., Marshall, P., Dalton, N.S., & Rogers, Y. (2008). Collaboration and interference: awareness with
         mice or touch input. Paper presented at the CSCW '08 Proceedings of the 2008 ACM conference on
         Computer supported cooperative work, New York, NY, USA.
Littleton, K., Mercer, N., Dawes, L., Wegerif, R., Rowe, D., & Sams, C. (2005). Talking and thinking together
         at Key Stage 1. Early Years: Journal of International Research and Development, 25(2), 167-182.
Mercer, Neil. (2008). Talk and the Development of Reasoning and Understanding. Human Development, 51, 10.
         doi: 10.1159/000113158
O'Malley, C. (Ed.). (1995). Computer supported collaborative learning (Vol. 128). Berlin: Springer.
Rick, J., Harris, A., Marshall, P., Fleck, R., Yuill, N., & Rogers, Y. (2009). Children designing together on a
         multi-touch tabletop: An analysis of spatial orientation and user interactions. Paper presented at the
         IDC '09 Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children, Como,
         Italy.
Rosen,  Dina,   & Hoffman,   Jo. (2009).  Integrating Concrete  and  Virtual  Manipulatives In Early Childhood
         Mathematics. YC Young Children, 64(3), 26-33.
Scherr, R.E.,   &  Hammer,    D.  (2009).   Student   behavior and   epistemological  framing:  Examples    from
         collaborative active-learning activities in physics. Cognition and Instruction, 27(2), 147-174.
Stahl, G., Koschmann,    T., &   Suthers, D. (2006).  Computer-supported  collaborative  learning: An    historical
         perspective. Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences, 2006.
Stanton, D., Neale, H., & Bayon, V. (2002). Interfaces to support children's co-present collaboration: multiple
         mice and tangible technologies. Paper presented at the Proceedings of the Conference on Computer
         Support for Collaborative Learning: Foundations for a CSCL Community.
Stanton, D., & Neale, H.R. (2003). The effects of multiple mice on children's talk and interaction. Journal of
         Computer Assisted Learning, 19(2), 229-238.
Tannen, D. (1993). What's in a frame? Surface evidence for underlying expectations. Framing in discourse, 14,
         56.
Vygotsky, L.S. (1986). Thought and language (A. Kozulin, trans.). Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press.

Acknowledgments
We are grateful to Diana Claros for her generous help.

© ISLS                                                                                                        41
