CSCL 2013 Proceedings                 Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

        Digital Evidence and Scaffolds in a Model-Based Inquiry
                       Curriculum for Middle School Science

         Ronald W. Rinehart, Ravit Golan Duncan, Clark A. Chinn, Michael Dianovsky, Rutgers, The
            State University of New Jersey, Graduate School of Education, 10 Seminary Place, New
                                          Brunswick, NJ, 08901-1183
                      Email: ron.rinehart@gse.rutgers.edu, ravit.duncan@gse.rutgers.edu,
                       clark.chinn@gse.rutgers.edu, michael.dianovsky@gse.rutgers.edu

        Abstract: The Framework for Science Education (National Research Council, 2011) and the
        subsequent Next Generation Science Standards feature modeling as an integral component of
        inquiry driven classrooms. Evaluating such models entails careful consideration of fit with
        evidence. In this poster we discuss student use of computer animations, simulations, blogs and
        emails as sources of evidence in a collaborative model-based inquiry middle school science
        curriculum.

In this poster we present a method of using computer animations and other digitally generated and presented
material in the context of a model-based inquiry curriculum used in a middle school science classroom.    Model-
based inquiry entails a shift away from narrower conceptions of science as hypothesis generation and testing to a
view of science as a set of practices for generating scientific explanations and theories in a setting of critical
discourse (Windschitl, Thompson, & Braaten, 2008). Recent developments in national science standards reflect
this view; "The focus here is on important practices, such as modeling, developing explanations, and engaging
in critique and evaluation (argumentation), that have too often been underemphasized in the context of science
education." (NRC, 2012, p. 3-2). Our conception of inquiry-based modeling includes the use of a rich set of
evidence that students collaboratively assess in small groups and use to support or rule out competing models.
        Our study was conducted with over five hundred students in more than twenty science classrooms. A
typical lesson included two or more scientific models that students evaluated in light of three to six pieces of
evidence. Students reflected on the quality of each piece of evidence and how it related to each model, by
supporting the model, contradicting the model, or being irrelevant to the model.
        We used computer-based activities to enhance four aspects of our model-based inquiry curriculum
including: the generation of data with simulations, enhancing authenticity of information by placing it in a
context that   is familiar  to  students,  visualizing dynamic   cellular  processes,  and   multiple  formative
comprehension checks. Each figure below corresponds to one of these four aspects.
        In a unit on cell organelles students considered the function of mitochondria.  Students collaboratively
used evidence to either support or refute two competing models about the function of this organelle.   One model
claimed that mitochondria   are  responsible for movement    and the other  posited  that mitochondria    generate
energy for the cell. Figure 1 shows a simulation of ATP measurements of human runners measured at different
time points in a training regime spread out over a number of weeks. Without the use of digital simulations this
type of evidence could not be generated by students in the classroom. Figure 2 depicts an online advertisement
for a quack medicinal cure for wrinkles through mitochondrial enhancement.        Students read and discussed a
series of email exchanges debating the merits of this treatment and the credentials of its purveyors. The email
format enhanced the authenticity of this evidence by placing it in a context that is familiar to students. Other
evidence was presented through blog entries for similar purposes of augmenting authenticity.
        In  another lesson  students assessed two  complex   competing    models  of genetic resistance   to HIV.
Figure 3 is a still frame from an animation that was used to scaffold student understanding of the complex role
of protein receptors in cell membranes and their relation to genetically based HIV resistance in humans. Prior
research on students' learning in molecular genetics has shown that animations are effective for helping students
learn about  dynamic   processes (Marbach-Ad,    Rotbain,  & Stavy,  2008). In   the context of    models of HIV
resistance the use  of an  animation  allowed    students to visualize the  underlying    cellular and molecular
mechanisms proposed by the competing models. Expert guidance, aimed at facilitating sense making during
inquiry (Quintana et al., 2004), was also embedded in the animations in the form of prompts that draw students'
attention to the salient comparable features of the two models of HIV resistance. Finally, we also embedded
multiple formative comprehension checks of the models and evidence. These embedded assessments allowed
both students and teachers to evaluate their understanding of core ideas presented in models and evidence and
return to specific parts of the evidence when concepts, processes or mechanisms were unclear.
        The  use   of digital animations  of evidence   and  models  allowed us   to present more    complicated
mechanisms and experimental procedures that would have otherwise been too difficult for students to follow.
Other forms of evidence, such as emails, online ads and blog posts, created a more authentic and familiar

© ISLS                                                                                                        341
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

context, similar to the types of evidence students may encounter outside of the classroom. Lastly, these digital
artifacts afforded a wider variety of model and evidence formats that students found to be engaging.

References
Marbach-Ad, G., Rotbain, Y. & Stavy, R. (2008). Using Computer Animation and Illustration Activities to
         Improve High School Students' Achievement in Molecular Genetics. Journal of Research in Science
         Teaching, 45, 273-292.
National Research Council. (2011).   A  Framework for  K-12  Science Education:    Practices,        Crosscutting
         Concepts, and Core Ideas. Committee on a Conceptual Framework for New K-12 Science Education
         Standards. Board on Science Education, Division of Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education.
         Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.
Quintana, C., Reiser, B. J., Davis, E. A., Krajcik, J., Fretz, E., Duncan, R. G.,...Soloway, E. (2004). A
         Scaffolding Design Framework for Software to Support Science Inquiry. The Journal of Learning
         Sciences, 13, 337-386.
Windschitl, M., Thompson, J., & Braaten, M. (2008). Beyond the scientific method: Model-based inquiry as a
         new paradigm of preference for school science investigations. Science Education, 92, 941-967.

© ISLS                                                                                                        342
