CSCL 2013 Proceedings                  Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

   That's Me and That's You: Museum visitors' perspective-taking
               around an embodied interaction data map display
        Jessica Roberts, Francesco Cafaro, Raymond Kang, Kristen Vogt, Leilah Lyons, Josh Radinsky,
              University of Illinois at Chicago, 1240 W. Harrison St., Ste. 1570, Chicago, IL 60607
jrober31@uic.edu, fcafar2@uic.edu, ray.kang@gmail.com, kvogt4@uic.edu, llyons@uic.edu, joshuar@uic.edu

          Abstract:    CoCensus,  a museum   exhibit leveraging embodied     interaction, allows  users to
          collaboratively  explore  US   census data   on a  large GIS     display. We    utilize tracking
          technologies to support personalized interactions, and we examine users' perspective-taking
          when discussing and interpreting the data display. Here pronoun use is analyzed to examine
          how the affordances of this technology facilitate connections between visitors and the social
          worlds represented by the data.

Introduction and Background
History museums strive to connect visitors' culturally situated "little narratives" to social and historical "big
narratives" (Rowe, Wertsch, & Kosyaeva 2002).     With CoCensus (Roberts, Radinsky, Lyons, & Cafaro, 2012),
users pick an ancestry category, then approach an exhibit carrying a passive RFID tag which reveals their
ancestry dataset on a large, interactive, shared display (Cafaro, Panella, Lyons, Roberts, & Radinsky, 2013).
This paper explores one facet of narrative creation ­ positioning ­ during the collaborative exploration of the
interactive map. We hypothesized that this design would encourage users' actor positioning (Brunyé, Ditman,
Mahoney, Augustyn, & Taylor, 2009), demonstrated by visitors' use of first-person pronouns when referring to
the mapped data. We use Brunyé and colleagues' (2009) framework for examining the perspectives taken by
readers   in their mental  simulations of a  narrative: readers take an    actor perspective  when   they  position
themselves as participants in the scene, associated with the use of first-person pronouns (e.g. "I," "we"). An
onlooker perspective is marked by third-person pronouns (e.g. "he," "they"). We assert that visitors' usage of
personal pronouns can similarly elucidate the immersive depth and degree of embodiment in the narratives
visitors construct with an interactive museum exhibit.

Methods and Analysis
While interacting, participants were asked questions about their interpretations, including "What do you see in
this display?" and "Does anything you see in the display surprise you?"     Responses were transcribed and coded
to characterize    the referents of speech. Transcripts   were coded as    evidencing  an  "actor"  or  "onlooker"
perspective based on pronoun usage, in order to track the perspectives adopted by each visitor in their shared
narratives constructed during the interview. A third code, "self," was used to document instances of visitors
referring to themselves outside the context of the map, e.g. "I'm German." By contrast, a "data" code was used
when visitors referred to the data on the map absent any personal connection (Figure 1).
          We also tracked the ways each group utilized the space in the exhibit. Moving forward and backward
affected the layering and transparency of the data shown on the shared screen. The further a user stood from the
display, the more transparent her/his data were, and whoever was closest to the display saw her/his data "on
top." A log file recorded the movements of each user in the space. Traces of visitors' locations during these
three interviews are shown  in Figure 1.  Darker traces correspond to the locations were the user spent more time.

Figure 1. Frequency of perspectives (left) and traces of interaction patterns (right). The first listed participant in
                                          each pair is represented by red.
Findings
The three groups talked about the display in different ways, revealing different modes of interaction afforded by
the exhibit. Belle and Peg assumed "actor" perspectives, e.g. "It looks like I'm along the Lake" (Belle), "And
I'm not" (Peg). Sixteen of the 35 codes applied to their transcript were actor codes. This actor positioning was
coincident with their movements in the space (Figure 2), suggesting that interaction may promote connections to
the data.

© ISLS                                                                                                        343
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

        Figure 2. Timeline of Belle and Peg's movements in the exhibit space alongside pronoun usage.

        By contrast, Greg and Ann did not assume the actor perspective. They talked about themselves and
each other, including references to ancestry, but did not reference the mapped data as connected to themselves.
Of all the visitors,  Ann moved  the most in the interaction space,  seeming  to       be very engaged with  the
interactivity of the system. While she realized that she was able to control the data transparency, she frequently
walked from left to right, despite the fact that side-to-side movement produces no effect on the display. Greg, in
contrast, stood virtually still during the entire discussion. Their lack of understanding of the interaction design
may have ultimately prevented them from engaging more personally with the data.
        In between these two cases is the father-son pair Ben and Ian. The majority of the 28 codes applied to
their interview were references to the data on the display, without reference to the people those data represent.
They sometimes assumed the actor perspective, such as when Ian interpreted for his father, saying, "That's you,
okay, see? The dark spots are where you and me are in the same place," but they minimally discussed personal
stories, only adopting "self" and "onlooker" perspectives three times each. Instead, the majority of the interview
was spent trying to make sense of the display. Ben and Ian were able to utilize the interactivity to "see" each
other's data; that is, they were able to "instrumentally operate" the system (Williams, Kabisch, and Dourish,
2005). Ian moved forward and backwards, illustrating to his father which data were "him."      Ben took longer to
figure out how to interact with the system, looking for what he called "the optimal distance" from the screen, but
eventually asked Ian to move in order to both see his "own" data on top and to explore their overlapping areas.
It was only at that point that Ben switched to the "actor perspective" and embodied "his" data, but he still only
did so for one turn.

Discussion
These three cases show different examples of how embodied interaction appeared to foster adoption of an actor
perspective. When these museum visitors recognized their ability to instrumentally operate the system, they
established a more direct and personal connection with the data they were controlling. The interaction design
allowed visitors to explore the represented world "as embodied actors" (Dourish, 2001).      This may afford the
construction and sharing of personal narratives that incorporate data representations.

References
Brunyé, T. T., Ditman, T., Mahoney, C. R., Augustyn, J. S., & Taylor, H. A. (2009). When you and I share
        perspectives   pronouns modulate perspective taking  during narrative comprehension.      Psychological
        Science, 20(1), 27-32.
Cafaro, F., Panella, A., Lyons, L., Roberts, J., & Radinsky, J. (2013) I See You There! Developing Identity-
        Preserving Embodied Interaction for Museum Exhibits. Accepted for publication in the Proceedings of
        the 2013 ACM int'l conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM, New York, NY,
        USA.
Dourish, P. (2001). Where the action is: the foundations of embodied interaction. Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT
        Press.
Roberts, J., Radinsky, J., Lyons, L., Cafaro, F. (2012, April) Co-Census: Designing an Interactive Museum
        Space to Prompt Negotiated Narratives of Ethnicity, Community, and Identity. Paper presented at the
        meeting of the American Educational Research Association, Vancouver, B.C., Canada
Rowe, S. M., Wertsch, J. V., & Kosyaeva, T. Y. (2002). Linking little narratives to big ones: Narrative and
        public memory in history museums. Culture & Psychology, 8(1), 96.
Williams, A., Kabisch, E., & Dourish, P. (2005). From interaction to participation: Configuring space through
        embodied interaction. Proceedings of the Ubicomp 2005, LNCS 3660 (pp. 287-304).

Acknowledgements
This work is funded by the National Science Foundation and the National Endowment for the Humanities.
Census data courtesy of Minnesota Population Center. National Historical Geographic Information System,
www.nhgis.org.

© ISLS                                                                                                       344
