CSCL 2013 Proceedings                   Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

           Designing Community Knowledge in Fabrication Labs:
                        Design Directives and Initial Prototypes

           Maryanna Rogers, Paulo Blikstein, Stanford University, 450 Serra Mall, Stanford, CA 94305
                                  maryanna@stanford.edu, paulob@stanford.edu

         Abstract:   In this  poster, we     present our process   of  designing  physical and   digital
         supports for learning and community development in fabrication labs. Recognizing mere
         access   to technology   is  not sufficient  to  bridge  the  digital divide  associated with
         technological fluency, we conducted design research and developed initial prototypes to
         support equitable experiences across lab members. We share three design directives for
         community learning supports in fabrication labs as well as our initial prototypes.

Introduction
Every few decades, a new set of skills and intellectual activities become crucial for work, conviviality, and
citizenship. In the early seventies, computer programming was one of them (Papert, 1991). The educational
establishment derided the idea of programming as a fundamental pedagogical goal, but in recent years this
idea has been challenged by easier to learn programming tools and the expansion of accepted disciplinary
topics  in K12  to   engineering, design, and  computer    coding  (Astrachan,   Hambrusch,    Peckham,   &  Settle,
2009). In 1999, the National Research Council suggested that fluency with technology should no longer be
considered merely a vocational skill or a way to train future STEM workers, but we should regard it as
knowledge valuable for every citizen, a claim that resonated with the concerns of Papert (1991) and diSessa
(2000) around fluency with new media.
         With the invention and increased affordability of such digital fabrication tools as 3D printers and
laser cutters, fabrication labs are becoming ubiquitous across settings-- in schools, in community centers, and
even in  museums.    The analogy   of digital  fabrication with  computer   programming     is clear as  these new
technologies are becomingly increasingly accessible and their associated skills are more highly valued. As a
result, many  schools   are adopting  such   programs   across the country.    However,  the spaces  where   digital
fabrication takes place (fabrication labs or maker spaces) require innovation in terms of how students build
knowledge together. Most of these spaces are the collection of improvised sets of tools and environments,
which work well for experts but could not work for novices. As Pinkett (2000) articulates, "Access does not
imply use, and use does not imply meaningful use, we must also consider the nature of engagement we seek
to promote." Equity issues arise when adequate support is not available. As Blikstein (2013) demonstrated,
such environments disproportionately benefit male students, learners from high-income schools, and students
with parents with an engineering background. In order for a fabrication lab to thrive and support all types of
students, we must build and nurture the social and cultural experience in addition to providing the equipment
and physical space. In this paper, we will address the design of spaces for collaborative and project based-
learning, with a particular focus on issues of equity and inclusiveness. We borrow from the sociocultural
constructionism framework developed by Pinkett (2000), which emphasizes the role of community members
as active change agents and knowledge producers within a learning context.

Design-based Research and Initial Prototypes
The first author conducted design research in the fabrication lab prior to having participated in the lab in any
capacity. This novice's perspective, by design, allowed for insights to surface that more immersed others may
not have perceived. Through observations and interviews with various lab users, including lab assistants, current
graduate   student lab members,    high school  workshop   students,   newcomers   to  the lab, and  lab  alumni, we
developed initial directions for space design prototypes. Below, we describe the ideas that emerged from this
design research and how we fashioned these insights into design directives for the lab space.
         In fabrication labs, students tinker and build to discover the myriad constraints and affordances of lab
materials and equipment. In the process, they adopt and adapt techniques for realizing their project visions.
Observations in our fabrication lab indicated that such discoveries were primarily individual experiences and
were opaque to other lab members. During open lab time, when students who did not know each other occupied
the space,  there  were few   moments     of sharing  and  discussion. Despite   this lack of  interaction, when  the
opportunity arose, lab members were eager to share discoveries with each other. For instance, we observed a
former student excitedly relaying an insight he discovered through trial and error to a student he noticed etching
text into clear acrylic, which was an element of his own class project the prior year. In this case, knowledge
sharing occurred due to happenstance. We viewed this as an opportunity to design ways for students to "stumble
across" more knowledge sharing moments.
         One might assume that lab assistants, who have the most pervasive presence in the fabrication lab

© ISLS                                                                                                           345
CSCL 2013 Proceedings              Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

space, would act as mediators of the knowledge that individual students derive from their experiences in the lab.
However, we noticed that students  of all experience levels    approached      lab assistants primarily  to ask  one
question: Where is "x"? The second most common question type was related to general machine usage. Not
only were the answers to such common questions highlighted in the equipment training materials, but these
questions could be answered by any number of lab members. Again, we viewed this as an opportunity to design
easy entry points for lab members to interact with each other and collaboratively find solutions. This insight,
again, pointed to the need for more scaffolds to support lab member sharing and co-discovery. With these
findings in mind, we generated three design directives: 1) How might we make student work more visible? 2)
How might we facilitate lab member introductions? 3) How might we provide scaffolds for just in time sharing
of small discoveries? As a way to test our design directives, we created digital and tangible prototypes, of
various levels of resolution, with materials such as paper, cardboard, and existing tablet applications.
       Hargadon  and  Sutton   (2000) refer to the term knowledge          brokering as a strategy   that   the most
innovative groups adopt wherein people are able to borrow from previous ideas and repurpose them for future
use ­ using "old ideas as the raw materials" for new ones (Hargadon & Sutton, 2000; p. 158). In the context of
the fabrication lab, we view prior project work across lab members as "raw materials" to spark new ideas. In
addition to providing display space for actual projects, we aimed to create a persistent digital memory of all of
the projects created in the lab via tablets mounted in the space. With Twitter hashtags and visual Twitter feed
applications, students are able to share photographs of their projects on Twitter, which would simultaneously be
broadcast to tablets placed strategically in the space (Fig.1, left).

Figure 1. (left) A dynamic, visual Twitter feed creates persistent memory of what was created in the fabrication
lab; (mid) a paper prototype supports just-in-time sharing of discoveries in the lab, (right) a visualization of lab
members currently in the fabrication lab makes individual expertise transparent.

       As noted above, we observed that lab members had been reticent to approach unknown lab members
unless they were in the midst of an activity that related directly to their own experience. This lack of interaction
concealed the diverse areas of expertise distributed across lab members. In response, we prototyped a dynamic
visualization of individuals using the lab space (Fig. 1, right). Via an online schedule and RFID tags, which lab
members use to "check in" to various stations, members entering the lab could see with a quick glance how
many people were in the space, their background, and their lab expertise. Finally, in order to support just-in-
time sharing of individual insights, we posted signage above the laser cutter station with heuristics for using the
equipment and for sharing new discoveries about the equipment (Fig. 1, middle).

Conclusion
Through design research conducted in a collaborative fabrication lab, we derived three design directives, and
created three prototypes in the collaborative space to address knowledge visibility, expertise identification, and
knowledge sharing. We are continuing this work by testing the effectiveness of each component, and devising
new artifacts based on our evolving research in these spaces.

References
Astrachan, O., Hambrusch, S., Peckham, J., and Settle, A. (2009). The Present and Future of Computational
       Thinking. In SIGCSE    2009: The 40th ACM Technical Symposium on Computer           Science Education,
       Chattanooga, TN.
Blikstein, P. (2013). Digital Fabrication and 'Making' in Education: The Democratization of Invention. In J.
       Walter-Herrmann & C. Büching (Eds.), FabLabs: Of Machines, Makers and Inventors. Bielefeld:
       Transcript Publishers.
Hargadon, A. and Sutton, R. (2000). Innovation factory. Harvard Business Review, 157- 248.
DiSessa, A. A. (2000). Changing minds: Computers, learning, and literacy. The MIT Press.
Papert, S., and Harel, I. (1991). Situating constructionism. Constructionism, 1-11.
Pinkett, R. D. (2000) Bridging the Digital Divide: Sociocultural Constructionism and an Asset-Based Approach
       to Community Technology and Community Building.          In the 81st Annual Meeting     of the American
       Educational Research Association, New Orleans, LA.

© ISLS                                                                                                           346
