CSCL 2013 Proceedings                Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

                     DynaLabs for Teachers to Collaborate
                                   on Pedagogical Strategies
           Jeremy Roschelle, Charles Patton, John Brecht, SRI International, Menlo Park, California
                                   Janet Bowers, San Diego State University
                                   Sue Courey, San Francisco State Unversity
                             Elizabeth Murray, CAST, Wakefield, Massachusetts
                                     Contact: jeremy.roschelle@sri.com

         Abstract: Developing students' argumentation skill is now important in many countries. We
         report on new tools for teachers to construct, share, and iteratively refine idealized dialogues
         with imagined students. Such tools can become the heart of a laboratory experience in which
         teachers collaborate around their possible responses to student reasoning. Our design-based
         research suggests a laboratory experience for teachers should include four components: a case
         that challenges teachers, research-based resources that can inform teachers' thinking, a tool
         for respond constructively to the challenge, and a rubric for formative assessment.

Major Issue Addressed
Engaging students in learning 21st century skills is a major thrust of educational reform globally. From the
CSCL perspective, one of the most relevant 21st century skills is argumentation ­ using discourse to explain and
justify reasoning and to engage others in collectively improving the group's reasoning (Andriessen, Baker &
Suthers, 2003).  Another    highly relevant   skill is   model-based   reasoning   ­  using   simplified, abstract
representations to reason more effectively about more complex underlying situations (Lehrer and Schauble,
2006). Argumentation and model-based reasoning are now specifically identified as mathematical practices that
characterize successful student reasoning in the new Common Core State Standards in the United States.
         In the context of our Proportionality Dynabook project, we have been conducting design experiments
relevant to this challenge at two California universities that prepare future mathematics teachers. California is in
the midst of transitioning to a "clinically-based model" of teacher professional development, which aims to
engaging  teaching candidates   in situations  that authentically elicit the    "problems of  practice"   (Darling-
Hammond, 2008). This includes supervised field experiences for preservice teachers, but also includes the idea
of simulating real teaching during coursework.
         In this poster, we report on a particular insight arising from design research: that new tools for teachers
to construct, share, and iteratively refine idealized dialogues with imagined students can become the heart of a
DynaLab, a laboratory experience in which preservice teachers collaborate in order to understand what teaching
argumentation, model-based reasoning, or other advanced practices might look like at the level of teacher-
student interactions. We focus on one of several labs under development, a lab in which teachers read and
discuss  the research-based learning progression    for the concept of   ratio, then watch  a video  of a  student
struggling to solve a ratio problem, then in collaborative dyads  develop a script for how they would teach that
student, and engage in formative assessment.

Potential Significance
We see our contribution as deeply reflecting the conference theme, "to see the world and a grain of sand." At the
"world" level, policy documents are changing to reflect the importance of new kinds of knowledge and skills.
Yet, the important acts of teaching and learning that develop these skills often occur at the "grain of sand" level.
New activities and tools, such as we propose in our DynaLab concept, are necessary to enable teachers to
connect broader goals to specific classroom practices.

Methodological Approach
The methodological approach in our Dynabook project has been Design-Based Research (DBR, Cobb et al,
2003) ­ our process aligns with Wang and Hannifan's (2005, p. 6) characterization of DBR as "a systematic but
flexible methodology aimed to improve educational practices through iterative analysis, design, development,
and implementation, based on collaboration among researchers and practitioners in real-world settings, and
leading to contextually-sensitive design principles and theories." Our specific approach to DBR emphasizes co-
design (Penuel, Roschelle & Shechtman, 2007) between researchers, technologists, and practitioners.

A DynaLab Design using Dynalogue
Schematically, a DynaLab    has four components.    First,  a DynaLab  has a    plan with specific objectives and
accompanying materials that stimulate or elicit the participants' engagement with an open-ended "problem of

© ISLS                                                                                                        347
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                  Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

practice." Ideally, such materials should evoke authenticity and present opportunities for collaborative work
among teachers. Second, a DynaLab has research-based knowledge resources which can help participants to
learn how to better address the problem of practice. Third, a DynaLab has specific tasks aligned with objectives
that give participants the opportunity to respond to these challenges collaboratively, to compare and critique
their solutions, and to engage in reflection and refinement of their solutions. In particular, a DynaLab activity
engages participants in constructing a detailed artifact as their response. Fourth, a DynaLab has an assessment
rubric that can be used for formative assessment, to improve the solutions and to improve the design of the lab,
and the discourse that evolves in the process.  The most innovative feature of our design is "Dynalogue," a new
tool for writing, sharing, and revising dynamic dialogues. As shown in Figure 1, the dialogue is written in
bubbles that are spoken by two animated characters, in the style of familiar smartphone messaging tools.

       Figure 1: A Dynalogue, showing how a teacher might use a visual model to interact with students

Preliminary Findings and Next Steps
We have    found  that the  DynaLab    concept is highly  attractive to teacher educators  who  are  charged  with
preparing a new generation of mathematics teachers. The DynaLab concept is seen as useful as it is grounded in
authentic problems of practice but allows for cycles of constructing, sharing, reviewing, and refining teacher-
student dialogues within the structure of existing teacher preparation courses. Going forward, more research is
needed to   establish  the  comparative    advantage   of DynaLabs    for   developing  teachers' knowledge    and
pedagogical skills, relative to other forms of teacher professional development.

References
Andriessen,  J., Baker,   M., &   Suthers, D.  (2003). Arguing   to  learn:  Confronting  cognitions in  computer-
        supported collaborative learning environments. The Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Cobb,  P., Confrey,   J., diSessa, A., Lehrer, R.,  &  Schauble, L.   (2003). Design   experiments   in educational
        research. Educational Researcher, 32(1), 9-13.
Darling-Hammond,    L.    (2008).  Teacher learning  that supports   student learning. In B. Z.   Presseisen (Ed.),
        Teaching for intelligence (Vol. 1, pp. 91­100). Thousand Oaks CA: Corwin Press.
Lehrer, R., & Schauble, L. (2006). Cegultivating model-based reasoning in science education. In K. Sawyer
        (Ed.), Cambridge Handbook of the Learning Sciences. New York: Cambridge University Press. pp.
        371-388.
Penuel, W. R., Roschelle, J., & Shechtman, N. (2007). The WHIRL co-design process: Participant experiences.
        Research and Practice in Technology Enhanced Learning, 2(1), 51-74.
Wang, F., & Hannafin, M. J. (2005). Design-based research and technology-enhanced learning environments.
        Educational Technology Research and Development, 53(4), 5-23.

Acknowledgments
This material is based on work supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant No. 0918339. Any
opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation.

© ISLS                                                                                                        348
