CSCL 2013 Proceedings                  Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

    Automated and Adaptive Support for Educational Discussions:
                     Results to Guide in Making this a Reality

     Oliver Scheuer, Bruce M. McLaren, Armin Weinberger, Saarland University, Saarbrücken, Germany
        Email: o.scheuer@mx.uni-saarland.de, bmclaren@cs.cmu.edu, a.weinberger@mx.uni-saarland.de

         Abstract: A potential way to enhance CSCL systems with adaptive support is to capitalize on
         the pre-structuring of student input that comes from the use of sentence openers and diagram
         references. An analysis of students' use of structuring elements reveals differences in the level
         of their adoption and a variety of ways in which students interpreted their task and used the
         learning  environment   for their purposes.  We  discuss    possible enhancements    to facilitate
         automated interpretation that might guide students towards more effective discussions.

Introduction
A focus in CSCL has been on promoting high-quality forms of argumentation (Scheuer, Loll, Pinkwart, &
McLaren, 2010). Precondition for adaptively supporting argumentation is the complex task of analyzing verbal
discourse automatically.  We   explore the  potential of two  structuring   elements  to facilitate such automated
analyses: sentence openers (SOs) and argument diagrams. Combining these two elements helps classify chat
contributions along two crucial dimensions: (1) communicative intentions (through SOs), and (2) propositional
content (through diagram references; DRs). We present results regarding students' use of SOs and DRs and
discuss changes to our learning environment that would maximize the amount and precision of information that
can be derived from student discussions. The goal of our research is to use inferences made from a heuristic
interpretation of SOs and DRs to inform automated feedback to help students have more effective discussions.

Background
SO-based interfaces are designed to encourage specific interaction patterns considered conducive to learning.
Students choose from short predefined phrases when composing new messages (e.g., "I disagree because," and
"Can you explain why/how"). It has been proposed to also exploit SOs to make inferences regarding dialogue
structure and meaning (Soller, 2001). Yet, there are several problems in the interpretation of SOs. (1) When the
use of SOs is optional, students might not use them, so no inferences can be drawn (Lazonder, Wilhelm, and
Ootes, 2003). (2) When the use of SOs is obligatory, students might misuse them when none of the offered
choices  satisfies their needs (Soller,  2001). (3)   Even   if  the   SO   matches  the message    body,     multiple
interpretations might be possible (Lazonder et al., 2003). (4) Messages might express multiple ideas at once,
which not only violates guidelines regarding efficient communication but also hampers the interpretation of SOs
(Israel &  Aiken,  2007).  Our second   structuring  element  is argument     diagrams.  Diagrams   decompose     the
discussion domain into referable chunks of knowledge (e.g., claims, arguments, and facts). While students use
the diagrams as a resource and guide during their discussions (Suthers & Hundhausen, 2003), they can also
explicitly refer to diagram elements, e.g., to create a joint focus of attention with their learning partner.

Method
The study used a control group design with 22 dyads. Dyads used the LASAD argument-diagramming system to
analyze and discuss two conflicting texts on climate ethics. The learning task comprised four phases: analyzing
(phase 1; individual), discussing (phase 2), and interrelating (phase 3) the two texts with the goal to generate a
joint conclusion (phase 4). The treatment group (12 dyads) used the full version of the system including a chat
tool with SOs. The control group (10 dyads) used an ablated version of the system with a standard chat with no
SOs. As for SOs, we analyzed the treatment group alone (the control group did not include SOs). As for DRs,
we analyzed phases 2 and 3 only (phase 1 is an individual phase; phase 4 is about students' own opinions with
less need to use DRs). DRs were coded based on references to diagram box numbers in the chat. Results
regarding process and learning are reported in Scheuer, McLaren, Weinberger, and Niebuhr (in press).

Results
Students used an SO in one out of five chat messages (20%) with notable differences between dyads: five dyads
made frequent use (> 25% SO messages), three dyads made occasional use (> 10% SO messages), and four
dyads rarely used SOs (< 10% SO messages). Note that 25% SO messages is already considerable since a
substantial portion of each discussion (about 1/3) is not about the subject matter. Students within the same dyads
significantly influenced each other in terms of the extent of SO uses (ICC = 0.83; F = 10.6; p < .001). That is, if
one student decided   to use (or not  use) SOs, it  was  very   likely that the other student decided    so   as well.
Although students rarely misused SOs (4%), some SOs were used with varying meanings. For instance, the SO

© ISLS                                                                                                            349
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                    Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

"Could you explain to me" was used not only to elicit explanations in a neutral way, but also to raise concerns or
objections against previous points. The SO "For instance" was used not only to illustrate some previous point,
but also  to  list one or  more  exemplary   arguments   to support    a previous    point. Some  messages     expressed
multiple independent ideas at once. For instance, some students presented an argument and asked a question
within the same message. In other cases, students provided several independent reasons to support a claim in the
same message. Finally, the point of reference of messages was not always clear. For instance, sometimes the SO
"A supporting argument is" was used to present an argument regarding a recent claim. In other cases, they
referred to the general discussion topic. In either case, supporting SOs are typically used to support one's own
position and opposing SOs to oppose the partner's position, a useful heuristic.
         Across all dyads about 12% of all messages contained a DR, again, with notable differences between
dyads:   five dyads   made  frequent use  (> 25%   DR    messages), five     dyads made  occasional  use    (> 10%   DR
messages), and twelve dyads rarely made use of DRs (< 10% DR messages). That is, almost half of all dyads
(45%) used DRs in their contributions at least occasionally. A rate of 10%, or even 25%, is substantial, since
about 1/3 of all messages are not about the subject matter. It is also not unusual that students exchange multiple
messages regarding one and the same diagram element. Also, we did not require that students use DRs, we only
hinted at the possibility to do so. DRs were used in a variety of ways. For instance, DRs were added to messages
to cite the diagram element as the source of the information used in the message, to comment on the content of a
diagram element, or as a shortcut / placeholder for the content of the referenced element, which saves the effort
of typing the entire statement of the DR into the chat. One student complained about this practice, annoyed with
searching for the referenced contents in the diagram. Finally, students had different approaches about where to
post DRs: in the very message that contained a statement based on or related to the referenced element, or in a
separate message before or after that message.

Discussion
In summary, we found that most students made reasonable use of SOs and DRs. Whether the extent of use
provides sufficient information to effectively support students with automated feedback is an empirical question
still to be investigated. Even if students make frequent use of the provided structures, they may use them in
different ways, giving rise to multiple possible interpretations, a difficulty in generating precise feedback. A
more effective and uniform usage may be achieved through: (1) message categories (clearer interpretation of
intention compared to SOs), (2) threaded discussions (unambiguous point of reference of messages), (3) more
explicit instructions  (clearer expectations), (4)   incentives for use   (e.g., highlighting  of referenced    diagram
elements when hovering over chat messages to save time-consuming search in the diagram), and (5) explicit
feedback (e.g., sending of messages to students who rarely use SOs).
         The generation of effective feedback is only one concern in the design of adaptive CSCL systems and
sometimes is at odds with usability and pedagogical concerns. That is, improving the precision of an automated
analysis may   lead   to undesirable side effects. Some   relevant  tradeoffs    are: A more   restrictive  script / user
interface may: (pros) (1) provide better-structured user inputs to inform the automated analysis of interactions in
a more precise way and (2) guide students towards modes of interaction closer to the ideal model of interaction
the instructional   designer had  in  mind   vs. (cons)  (1) lead   to   more    mechanical   and unnatural    forms    of
interactions, or obstruct fruitful forms of interaction, and (2) lead to user frustration, decreased engagement, and
unintended forms of use, particularly when users perceive the structure as a burden rather than an aid.

References
Israel, J., & Aiken, R. (2007). Supporting collaborative learning with an intelligent web-based system. Intl. J. of
         Artificial Intelligence in Education, 17, 3-40.
Lazonder, A. W., Wilhelm, P., & Ootes, S. A. W. (2003). Using Sentence Openers to Foster Student Interaction
         in Computer-Mediated Learning Environments. Computers & Education, 41(3), 291-308.
Scheuer, O., Loll, F., Pinkwart, N., & McLaren, B.M. (2010). Computer-Supported Argumentation: A Review
         of the State of the Art. Intl. J. of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 5(1), 43-102.
Scheuer,  O.,  McLaren,    B.M.,  Weinberger,    A.,  &  Niebuhr,   S.   (in press).  Promoting   Critical, Elaborative
         Discussions through a Collaboration Script and Argument Diagrams. Instructional Science.
Soller,  A.   (2001). Supporting  social  interaction in an  intelligent  collaborative  learning  system.   Intl.   J. of
         Artificial Intelligence in Education, 12, 40-62.
Suthers, D. D., & Hundhausen, C. (2003). An experimental study of the effects of representational guidance on
         collaborative learning processes. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 12(2), 183-219.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the German Research Foundation under the grant "LASAD--Learning to Argue:
Generalized Support Across Domains."

© ISLS                                                                                                               350
