CSCL 2013 Proceedings                   Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

 Comparing "in the Wild" Studies With Laboratory Experiments: A
                      Case of Educational Interactive Tabletops
                        Bertrand Schneider, Stanford University, schneibe@stanford.edu
                           Consuelo Valdes, Wellesley College, cvaldes@wellesley.edu
                      Kelsey Temple, Wellesley College, ktempel@firstclass.wellesley.edu
                             Chia Shen, Harvard University, chia_shen@harvard.edu
                               Orit Shaer, Wellesley College, oshaer@wellesley.edu

         Abstract:   In this paper,  we  describe  our attempt  at   implementing   an   interactive learning
         activity on  a multi-touch   tabletop  in an  actual college   classroom.  In  our  previous   in-lab
         experimental   study,  we   found that this  tabletop learning   activity outperformed     the same
         learning task on paper. Students had a higher quality of collaboration and learnt more when
         interacting with an interactive multi-touch tabletop display. Here we compare those results
         with an  "in the   wild" implementation    of our   system.  We  found    that learning gains  were
         significantly lower in the classroom compared to a laboratory setting. Our paper investigates
         this difference and suggests reasons for such a discrepancy.

Introduction
The introduction and increasing availability of multi-touch, high-resolution displays in the form of handhelds,
tabletops, and whiteboards, open the opportunity to consider these technologies as a prominent alternative to
current learning technologies. Given the potential of these novel technologies, numerous research prototypes
have been developed by Human-Computer Interaction researchers, exploring how these emerging technologies
will impact  education.    However,  to date, only  a  small  fraction of prototypes    have materialized  outside  of
research lab settings and studied in actual classroom settings. A foundational work in this domain was presented
by Brown (1992), who introduced Design Experiments as complex interventions implemented in educational
settings. This approach generated controversy due to the large number of confounding variables present in
classrooms. However, Brown was able to identify the fundamental tensions between a natural and artificial
setting. Many    researchers   followed  her  example   and   recognized   the    importance  of testing  educational
interventions in  an  ecological  way.  However,   to date,  little research has  been  devoted  to  investigating the
strengths and limitations of utilizing interactive surfaces in college-level learning.

Comparing Laboratory and Classroom Experiments
Phylo-Genie,  a   learning  activity to help  college-level   students  grasp  basic concepts    in  phylogenetics, is
implemented   on   an interactive  multitouch   tabletop display      (Microsoft  SurfaceTM).  This   work  has  been
previously  presented   at the ACM    SIGCHI    conference   (Schneider   et al., 2012).  In particular, Phylo-Genie
provides students opportunities to build their own phylogenetic trees through a learning scenario.
         In this section we summarize the two studies that we conducted to evaluate Phylo-Genie. The first
study, a controlled experiment, was completed in a laboratory setting with college-level students; the second, in-
class study, was conducted in a college classroom.

Participants: controlled experiment: 28 undergraduate and graduate students (28 female, 28 male, average age =
21.28, SD = 3.70) volunteered to participate in the study, composing 14 dyads. Classroom setting: 32 students,
enrolled in an introduction to biology course in a women college (all females), participated in our study. None
of the participants had received college-level instruction in evolutionary biology before the study.

Materials: The materials used in both studies were similar. A post-test was provided by a university professor
who teaches introductory phylo-genetics to college-level students. We rated the quality of collaboration among
dyads by using Meier's rating scheme (Meier, Spada & Rummel, 2007).

Procedure: We conducted the experiment in two private laboratory spaces for the controlled experiment, and in
the classroom for the second study. Subjects received a 5-minutes introduction to phylogenetics before the
Phylo-Genie activity. They then went through all the steps of the learning scenario and completed a post-test.
Each session was approximately 60 minutes long. Due to limitations in hardware availability, some students had
to work in groups of three in the classroom condition.

Results: we found that students in the laboratory setting outperformed students in the classroom on the learning
test: F(1,58) = 4.32, p < 0.05 (mean=0.9, SD=0.11 for the laboratory, mean=0.83, SD=0.13 for the classroom).

© ISLS                                                                                                             351
    %"of"correct"answers"
                                                                   Quality(of(Collabora.on(
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                                                Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

We also rated the quality of collaboration of each dyad participating in the tabletop activity in the classroom and
in the laboratory according to Meier's, rating scheme (Meier, Spada & Rummel, 2007). We found that overall,
students had a better quality of collaboration in the classroom: F(1,16) = 4.26, p = 0.056, eta squared = 0.21 (for
the classroom, mean = 21.00, SD = 8.68; for the laboratory, mean = 13.67, SD = 6.19).

                          Learning"Gains"                                                                                       Quality(of(Collabora.on(on(the(Tabletop(Ac.vity(
                                                                                              3#

                          0.94%                                                             2.5#
                          0.92%
                           0.9%                                                               2#
                          0.88%
                                                                                            1.5#
                          0.86%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Classroom#
                          0.84%                                                               1#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Laboratory#
                          0.82%
                                                                                            0.5#
                           0.8%
                          0.78%                                                               0#
                          0.76%
                                                                                            !0.5#
                          0.74%                                                                    SUST.#MUT.#  DIALOGUE#     INFO.#      REACH.#   TIME#MGMT.#    RECIP.#     TASK#DIV.#   IND.#TASK#  TECH.#COOR.#
                                  Laboratory%   Classroom%                                   !1#  UNDERSTAND.#    MGMT.#     POOLING#   CONSENSUS#               INTERACT#                   ORIENT.#
                                Figure 1. Quality of collaboration in each group and setting (based on Meier's rating scheme).

                                The sub-dimensions dialogue management (F(1,16) = 16.67, p = 0.001), reaching consensus (F(1,16) =
5.50, p = 0.032), reciprocal interaction (F(1,16) = 7.27, p = 0.016), task division (F(1,16) = 3.16, p = 0.094, eta
squared = 0.035) and technical coordination (F(1,16) = 4.26, p < 0.001) showed a statistical difference (Figure
1). Interestingly, only task division was correlated with a positive learning gain across our two groups.
                                An interesting detail is that the five lowest scoring students in the classroom (in terms of learning
gains) were all in different triads; compared to the mean learning-gain score of the classroom tabletop condition,
two                       of these   students      were      below                                 two standard            deviations,            one was       below       one standard               deviation      and  the
remaining two were within one standard deviation of the mean. If we remove the two outliers (lowest scoring
students)                        from the       analysis,    the                                  difference      in      terms      of learning       gains      between       the        classroom        and        the lab
conditions become non-significant: F(1,56) = 2.45, p = 0.123. We also have more data concerning students'
territoriality and discourse, but due to space constraint we cannot describe them here.

Discussion
Our initial results suggest that triads seem to be more likely to have one "weak" student in the group.                                                                                                                    We
believe that these students were not less able, but they may have been excluded (to some extent) from the rest of
the group.                        The  "task       division"                                 sub-dimension                of  the     collaborative             rating     scheme         was  able        to detect       this
difference between dyads and triads. More fine-grained studies should look at how students in triads become
disengaged or get excluded from the learning activity.
                                Our preliminary results suggest that hardware availability may have caused students in the classroom
to learn less than in a laboratory setting. By having students work in triads instead of dyads, groups were more
likely to have a "free rider" (e.g. a student who does not engage in the activity). This effect is described by
Salomon                         &  Globerson       (1989),                                  where      implicit           coalitions     are       detrimental     to       collaborative              learning.      From            a
technical standpoint, this is a critical issue. Interactive tabletops are expensive, and most schools cannot afford
to buy multiple devices. Consequently, researchers should pay a special attention to the ratio of interactive
tabletops per students when implementing this kind of technology in the classroom. For future work, we plan to
conduct more in-depth analyses of students' interaction to unpack (and suggest ways to prevent) group coalition
in the classroom.

References
Brown, A. L. (1992). Design Experiments: Theoretical and Methodological Challenges in Creating Complex
                                Interventions in Classroom Settings. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 2(2), 141­178.
MacKinnon, K. (2012) Context matters: The value of analyzing human factors within educational contexts as a
                                way of informing technology-related decisions within design research. ijcscl 7 (3)
Meier, A., Spada, H., & Rummel, N. (2007). A rating scheme for assessing the quality of computer-supported
                                collaboration processes. ijCSCL, 2(1), 63­86.
Shaer,                       O.   et al.,      The Design,                                  Development,                  and Deployment              of a       Tabletop       Interface              for Collaborative
                                Exploration of Genomic Data, International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 2012.
Schneider, B., Strait, M., Muller, L., Elfenbein, S., Shaer, O., Shen, C. (2012). Phylo-Genie: Engaging Students
                                in Collaborative `Tree- Thinking' through Tabletop Techniques. In Proc. ACM Conference on Human
                                Factors in Computing Systems (CHI'12),ACM Press.

© ISLS                                                                                                                                                                                                                     352
