CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                             Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

Epistemic Trajectories: Mentoring in a Game Design Practicum
                     Padraig Nash, University of California-Berkeley, pnash@berkeley.edu
             David Williamson Shaffer, University of Wisconsin-Madison, dws@education.wisc.edu

        Abstract: We use two constructs to examine mentoring in this practicum. Epistemic frames--
        the   configurations  of the    skills, knowledge,    identities, values,   and  epistemologies    that
        professionals use to think in innovative ways--provide a model for looking at professional
        expertise  (Shaffer,   2006).   Building   on  epistemic    frames   is epistemic    network  analysis
        (Shaffer, et al., 2009), a method for quantifying changes in epistemic frames (Shaffer, 2010).
        Our claim here is that the mentor, using Schön's "Follow me!" coaching model (1987), leads
        the team on a path that illuminates the nature of learning to think professionally and on the
        function of a mentor in that process.

Introduction
There is growing concern that the 20th century mode of education, with its focus on problems with standardized
answers, is leaving increasing numbers of young people unprepared for the future (Collins & Halverson, 2009).
The  professions--and   more   specifically,  the  processes  of  creating  new   professionals--offer    an alternative
model for educational activities better aligned with the abilities required to navigate a complex and changing
future (Gee & Shaffer, 2010; Shaffer, 2006). Innovative professionals, who face nonstandard problems that
come up in practice, often learn their particular way of solving problems in simulations of professional practice,
such as apprenticeships and practica (Goodwin, 1994; Schön, 1987; Sullivan, 1995).
        Recent   work   has   described   the   pedagogical  and    developmental   benefits  of  apprenticeship-based
learning models in which young people are guided by mentors (Halpern, 2010; Rose, 2004). Other work looking
at the processes by which mentors instill professional ways of thinking is also informed by an interest in how
the training  practices of professionals   can   serve as   models   for  the development     of technology-supported
learning environments for K­12 students (Nash & Shaffer, 2010; Shaffer, 2006)
        In this paper, we examine the learning relationship between a mentor and team of college students
through an   ethnographic  study    of a  game   design  practicum   at   a European    arts school.  We   use  a novel
ethnographic technique, called Epistemic Network Analysis (ENA), to analyze the process of mentoring in this
professional setting, and argue that such an analysis is useful for further studies of professional education, as
well as for studies of apprenticeship-based programs for youth.

Theory

Professional Problem-solving

Professional  problem-solving    is itself problematic.   Problems     in   real-world  practice are  ill-formed,  with
potentially unlimited relevant facts and features (Schön, 1987). Thus, the problem for professionals is not only
how  to solve   problems   but how     to  identify them.    Different   professions   approach  ill-defined  situations
differently. Charles Goodwin     calls   the  shared   way   that   professionals see   and  categorize   their domain
"professional   vision" (Goodwin,      1994).   Professional vision,   according   to  Goodwin,    is employed    by   a
community    of practitioners who   expect    from  each  other   a common      way  of organizing    the world   that is
consistent with the values and methods of the profession. In other words, each profession is a "community of
practice" (Lave & Wenger, 1991): a group of people who share similar ways of seeing and solving problems.
Professional  communities   of practice    rely on  systemically    organized   professional  values, preferences,  and
norms that inform their ways of seeing and solving problems (Schön, 1987). Thus, to learn to be a professional,
one must be initiated into a professional community of practice.

Practica Mentoring
Many professionals join their community of practice via a practicum. In practica, novices "take on real-world
projects under close supervision" (Schön, 1987, p. 37). While Schön offers some insight into the nature of the
"close supervision" that mentors in practica use to help novices develop professional ways of thinking, there has
been relatively little study into the ways that professional mentors do the actual work of mentoring. Schön
argues that students cannot be taught, but they can be coached (Schön, 1987, p. 17). At the beginning of a
practicum, learners lack both the vocabulary to talk about the work and the experience that would give that
language any meaning. As they begin to do the work and talk about it with the mentor, novices imitate the
mentor's talk and actions until it is internalized. Characterized by Schön as a "Follow me!" model of coaching,
this way of mentoring is fundamental to the practicum experience (Schön, 1987).

© ISLS                                                                                                             352
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                           Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

          Implicit in the "Follow Me!" coaching model is that the learner ultimately goes to where the mentor is:
to the professional vantage where expert decisions are made. Less clear, however, is where the mentor needs to
take them within the practicum. If it is the mentor's job to arrange, as Schön puts it, the "right" kinds of
experiences for the learners, by what logic is an experience "right"? Schön is clear that professional expertise
must be grasped as a whole in order to be grasped at all. It cannot be learned in a molecular way. If the path to
professional expertise is not linear what is the path that is taken? And, what would be the logic of such a path?

Epistemic Frame Theory and Epistemic Network Analysis
In this study, we use two theoretical constructs for examining and measuring the modeling and development of
professional thinking: epistemic frame theory and epistemic network analysis. The professional way of seeing
the world that Schön describes as "the competence by which practitioners actually handle indeterminate zones
of practice" (1987, p. 13) has been further explicated by Goodwin (1994), who describes the ways practitioners
highlight and elide things that are important or not according to their professional perspective, and Sullivan
(1995), who explains how professionals employ an ensemble that includes intellectual, practical, and ethical
components.   Shaffer  extends    these  insights   by  pointing   out that  it is   "the combination--linked      and
interrelated--of values, knowledge,     skills, epistemology,   and  identity"  that characterizes the  professional
ensemble.  This  combination,    what he calls  the epistemic   frame, emphasize   the ways   that ways  seeing    and
solving problems are linked in practice (Shaffer, 2010). For example, a reporter may write a certain way because
she views her job as serving the societal function of being a community watchdog. In this epistemic frame, a
particular journalistic skill is informed by a specific journalistic value and a sense of professional identity.
          ENA is a technique for quantifying and analyzing an epistemic frame (Shaffer, et al., 2009). It adapts a
social network analysis framework--for mapping social elements--to instead map the constituent elements of
complex   thinking. In social  network   analysis,  the objects  of interest are not  the  individual actors but   the
structure of the relationships   among  those   actors. Similarly,  epistemic  frame  theory suggests  that  complex
thinking is not characterized merely by a collection of values, knowledge, skills, epistemology, and identity, but
rather by a particular structure of relationships or connections between these components of expert practice.
Thus, analyzing thinking in terms of simple counts of frame elements in an (aspiring) professional's frame is not
sufficient to account for the development of expertise. Instead, ENA uses co-occurrence of frame elements in
discourse to model the pattern (or patterns) of association characteristic of a particular professional community.
By quantifying the relationships between epistemic frame elements, ENA describes and quantifies the structure
of an epistemic frame. Where one frame may have one set of important relationships between its constituent
elements, another frame may emphasize different relationships. ENA provides a method for examining when
and how often frame elements are linked, and can show trends in how epistemic frames change over time,
between individuals, or across different interactional contexts (Nash & Shaffer, 2010). ENA is thus a potentially
useful tool for comparing the epistemic frames of a team of learners and a mentor in a practicum.
          Many of the studies that examine the learning that takes place in a practica rely on surveys (Ryan,
Toohey, & Hughes, 1996), which do not measure learning in situ and rely on self-report data, or are qualitative
ethnographies (see, for example, Hutchins, 1995). While both of these methods shed light on the processes of
learning and of mentoring in a practicum, ENA is a potentially useful addition to the scholarly toolkit because it
can quantify thinking in the context of action. In the case of a practicum, the conversations between mentor and
learner provide the occasion for the mentor to model professional thinking and for the learner to imitate that
modeling (Schön, 1987).Using ENA to examine the reflective conversations in the practicum, we can examine
whether (and, more important, how) the team of learners "follows" the mentor, as suggested by Schön's model.
          We operationalize such a question by comparing the "distance" between a mentor's frame and the
learners' collective frame when they have meetings together across the time of the practicum. By distance, we
mean the projection of the structure of the epistemic frame, as quantified by ENA, in to a high dimensional
space. Using multi-dimensional scaling, we can visualize epistemic trajectories: models that show the distances
between team and mentor's frames throughout the practicum change over time. Finally, constructs borrowed
from social network analysis can help us interpret these trajectories. For example, the relative centrality of a
frame element quantifies the extent to which it is connected to other elements in the professional discourse, and
therefore can help us interpret the mathematical concept of "distance" by suggesting in what ways two different
frames are similar or different.

This study: Game design practicum
The starting point for this study is the idea that in a practicum a mentor leads learners through the authentic
work of a professional practice and that though his coaching the learners develop a particular epistemic frame.
As in all practica, the students in a game design practicum do the work that professional game designers do.
They seek to create games that feature meaningful play, which game design experts describe as occurring "when
the relationships between actions and outcomes in a game are both discernable and integrated into the larger
context of the game" (Salen & Zimmerman, 2004, p. 34). In other words, a critical job for game designers is to

© ISLS                                                                                                            353
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                          Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

make a game in which players can perceive the immediate outcome of the actions they take--the relationship
between action and outcome in games is often called gameplay (or game mechanic)--and that those outcomes
are consistent with the game as a whole. The game as a whole, also known as the game concept, can be simple
(e.g. Angry    Birds) or complex    (e.g. World   of Warcraft),  and encompasses   the vision of the  overall player
experience of the game. It often includes narrative elements, and in the case of educational or "serious" games,
learning goals (Abt, 1970; Gee, 2003; Squire & Jenkins, 2004). Both gameplay and game concept simulate
some phenomena that is usually, but not exclusively, real-world phenomena (Salen & Zimmerman, 2004, p.
457). Thus, one important activity in game design is researching the phenomena to be simulated, which are
referred to as the content domain. Learning to link these three elements of game design--gameplay, game
concept, and concept domain--is a fundamental task of building a game.
          This study looks at the role of mentoring on the learning trajectory of the team of students as they
develop these and other elements of game design's epistemic frame. Although the study is, of course, situated in
an examination of one particular practicum, our hope is to show how this analytical method can reveal learning
processes in practicum and similar settings. We ask three questions:

      1.  Does the team "follow" the mentor in the sense that the team and mentor's frames during meetings
          become more similar over time?
      2.  Where does the team follow the mentor? Specifically, do the team and mentor's frames converge in
          linear trajectories?
      3.  Whether the convergence is linear or not, why does it have the observed form?

To answer these questions, we first conduct a qualitative (ethnographic) analysis of the practicum. Then, we
triangulate this analysis in quantitative terms using ENA.

Methods

Setting and participants
The game design practicum took place in an undergraduate level arts school. The semester-long practicum wass
organized around the production of a single game. Student teams were assigned a client, who provided the team
with their assignment. In this case, the team learned that they needed to create a game to encourage consumers
to choose sustainable fish to eat. The team was comprised of seven students. The mentor assigned to work with
the team is a professional designer and developer of educational software.

Data Collection
We    observed  every  team    meeting  until the midterm   review.  Meeting  data were  collected in digital audio
recordings. Recordings were transcribed to provide a detailed record of interactions. We interviewed the team's
mentor twice during the two months, asking general questions about game design, as well as specific questions
about    the progress of the   team and   his ideas  about his role  as a mentor. We   conducted the  same type  of
interview with two other mentors assigned to different teams.

Data Analysis: Coding Scheme
From interviews conducted with three mentors at the school, we used a grounded theory approach (Strauss &
Corbin, 1998) to generate a set of 32 qualitative codes representing the epistemic frame of game design. Three
frame elements were of particular interest in this study: the knowledge of game mechanics, the knowledge of
the content domain, and the skill of developing a game concept.

Data Analysis: Segmentation and coding
This study is based on three team meetings at which the mentor was present. We segmented the three meetings
into interactive units ("stanzas") which were defined as sequences of utterances with a consistent topical focus.
For   example,  if the team    started discussing their strategy for an   upcoming meeting with  a client and  then
switched to discussing the profile of their target users, the switch in discourse topic would indicate two separate
interactive units. There were 14 stanzas in the first meeting, 17 in the second, and 24 in the third. For the three
team meetings, we coded each stanza for the contributions of both the mentor and the team for articulations of
the elements of the game design frame (as generated from the interviews with the three mentors). If discourse in
the stanza was determined to meet the criteria of a code's definition, that stanza was coded with a `1' for that
code. If none of the discourse in that stanza met the criteria of the code's definition, that stanza was coded for a
`0' for that code. The team's contributions were coded collectively: if no team member discussed a given frame
element, that stanza would be coded with a 0 for that element, but if at least one team member talked about a
given frame element, that stanza would be coded with a 1 for that element.

© ISLS                                                                                                          354
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                       Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

Data Analysis: Measuring frames

Adjacency Matrices
We created an adjacency matrix for each coded data segment (each stanza of each meeting). Adjacency matrices
record the links between individual frame elements. When a pair of elements co-occur within a stanza, they are
considered conceptually   linked  (Shaffer, 2010). We   summed   each meeting's constituent  stanzas' adjacency
matrices to construct final adjacency matrices for the team and mentor for each meeting.

Relative Centrality
For the mentor and the team in each meeting, we calculated the relative centrality of each of the frame elements
that constitute their epistemic frames. Relative centrality is a measure of how often each element is connected to
all of the other elements in discourse; in other words, it is a measure of the relative weight of an epistemic
frame's constituent elements (Shaffer, et al., 2009). To compute the centrality of a frame element, the square
root of the sum of squares of its associations with its neighbors is calculated. To compute the relative centrality
of an individual frame element, its weight is divided by the frame element with the greatest weight in the
network (Shaffer, et al., 2009).

Data Analysis: Comparing frames

Frame Similarity Index (FSI)
The Frame Similarity Index provides a testable measurement of the similarity between two epistemic frames.
The Euclidean distance between two frames is calculated by finding the root mean square of the differences of
the relative centrality of each frame element between the two frames. Thus, identical frames would have an FSI
score of zero. The maximum theoretical distance between two frames is the Euclidean distance between a frame
where every element has a relative centrality of 100 (all possible connections) and a frame where every frame
element has a relative centrality of 0 (no connections). The maximum theoretical distance between two frames
with 32 constituent frame elements would be 565.68. Dividing the distance between the two frames by the
maximum possible distance between those two frames provides the distance expressed as a percentage of the
maximum possible distance.
         To estimate confidence intervals for the difference between two frames, a jackknifing method can be
used, in which the relative centralities are systematically recomputed leaving out one stanza at a time. The
standard deviation and confidence intervals of the FSI statistic are then estimated from the variability within the
calculated subsamples.

Data Analysis: Epistemic frame trajectories
To see all of the team and mentor's meeting frames in relation to each other, and to more accurately compare
those frames, we require a more sophisticated model: epistemic frame trajectories. First, the distances between
all points of interest are calculated using FSI. In the case of this study, those points of interest are the mentor
and team's frames in each of the three meetings. These distances are organized in a symmetric distance matrix,
made up of 6 distance vectors. A classical multidimensional scaling (MDS) algorithm is applied to the distance
matrix in order to identify the dimensions that capture the most variance in the data. Because MDS does not
preserve  directionality,  specific  dimensions  in   the  low  dimensional  projection  are   not  interpretable
(Bartholomew, Steele, Moustaki, & Galbraith, 2008). However, relative position in space is still meaningful in
that points closer together in the high-dimensional space have more similar patterns of co-occurrence than
points farther apart.
         Using these tools, we operationalize our research questions in the following ways:

Research Question 1
Does the team follow the mentor? In other words, do the team and mentor's frames during meetings become
more similar over time? To answer this question, we used FSI to measure the distance between the team and
mentor's frames in each of the three meetings. We looked to see whether the distance between the team's frame
and the mentor's frame was reduced with each successive meeting.

Research Question 2
Where does the team follow the mentor? In other words, do the team and mentor's frames converge in linear
trajectories? To answer this question, we constructed epistemic frame trajectories to show the distances between
the team and mentor's frames across the meetings in a two dimensional projection of a multidimensional space.
We used   multi-dimensional   scaling  (specifically principal coordinates analysis) to create two  dimensional
trajectories from the six dimensional space of the team and mentor's meeting frames. We used the second and
third of the resulting six dimensions to display the two dimensional trajectories. Although the first dimension

© ISLS                                                                                                     355
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                          Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

captured the most variance, and  thus could     be argued to be      the most important, it appeared to be highly
correlated with time. Since we already knew that the meetings were separated by time, we considered the
second and third dimensions more revealing.

Research Question 3
Why do the trajectories have the observed form? To explain the logic behind the trajectories, we examined the
change in relative centralities of the frame elements across the three meetings for both the team and mentor.
Since the positions in the epistemic trajectories are determined by FSI scores, which in turn are calculated by the
similarity of the relative centrality of the frame's constituent elements, changes in relative centrality would
influence the position of the team and mentor's epistemic frames with each meeting.

Results
We describe our observations of the game design practicum in four parts below. The first part is a qualitative
look at the three meetings, and the final three parts quantify what was observed in that qualitative investigation.

Qualitative results
The team had met before their first meeting with the mentor and had brought a list of brainstormed game
concepts. The mentor ran the first meeting, and was critical of the team's work. He felt that not enough work
had been done, that the team was not adequately organized, and that they were prioritizing the wrong things.
When one student observed that they had "mostly just talked a lot," the mentor agreed, telling them to "quit the
endless brainstorm and start working." None of the team's game concepts were grounded in either a vision of
gameplay or rigorous research; as one student admitted, "There isn't any gameplay yet." In response, the mentor
reinforced the link between gameplay and game concept, telling the team that "the challenge of your game has
to be in line with your educational challenge."
         The mentor was similarly explicit about the link between game concept and the content domain. Noting
that the team's research into the content domain was "okay", the mentor urged the team to "do the next step of
research... if you want to do the fish tycoon concept that means you have to do a lot of extra research on fish
management and business." The main problem with the team's work in this stage was that their game concepts
were not connected to game play or a content domain. The mentor sent the team away with instructions "to fill it
in. A lot of concepts seem nice, but then you [need to] fill it in."
         The second meeting was run by the team. They had, as the mentor had instructed, done "the next step
of research." They spent most of the second meeting reporting their research on the content domain. The mentor
prompted the team to be explicit about the utility of their new information, at one point asking, "So, what is the
main question you need to know for your game with respect to the storing of the fish?" Much of the activity in
the meeting  was precisely this kind of decision    making.  For     example, a student  remarked how   "it's very
important to be more specific about what fish we're going to use." When the mentor asked whether the team was
deciding to abandon fish farms as part of their game concept to focus more specifically on fish marts, one
student responded, "we have to map the game completely." Mapping the game completely required the team to
describe the concept and game play in terms of the content that they had researched. Although the second
meeting focused on content, the mentor still reinforced the link between game mechanic and game concept; as
the team was figuring out what to do next, the mentor reinforced again the three elements together, explaining,
"it's important to first get your idea of gameplay clear.... to rev up the research.... [and to] elaborate on the
design idea" Although all three are important, he suggested that the team now turn their focus on game play.
         The third meeting was also run by the team. They were planning on conducting play-tests of some of
their game prototypes, in order to get feedback on the game mechanics, and also preparing for a mid-term
presentation, at which they needed to present their game concept and reports of the research they had done to
support their design. The team discussed a number of prototypes for mini-games within their game concept. The
mentor continued to give advice about the three key frame elements. In a discussion about one of the mini-
games the team was creating for their game, the mentor talked about the "story" of the game:

The story has to be matching the reality. If you say there's always bad-catch, you can only say that if that's the
reality. Or you could say, this is just ordinary fishing.... Then later in the story maybe you say something about
environmental, dolphin-friendly tuna. Or you play this game again and the score is really [about how you] find
and get no dolphins or throw the dolphins out again.

The game story is a way of talking about the game concept: the sequence of challenges the player must face in
order to complete the game and, since this is a "serious game," to learn the intended lesson. Both the sequence
and the individual challenges must make sense internally (in terms of the game mechanic) and externally (in
terms of the content domain). One student demonstrated these connections in their discourse by using content
domain language to describe how the gameplay must be persistent in their concept:

© ISLS                                                                                                        356
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                       Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

One game is like fishing in the Baltic Sea and avoiding environmentalists. The other is scaring off locals with
your bulldozer. The other one we haven't defined yet....in the end, all those things have to be present again.

Result 1: Following the mentor?
The frame  similarity index (FSI)  was calculated to   compare the   team's epistemic  frame  and the mentor's
epistemic frame in each of the three meetings. In the first meeting the distance between the team and mentor's
frame is .208 (95% CI [.212, .214]), in the second meeting the distance is .166 (95% CI [.162, .169]), and in the
third meeting is .128 (95% CI [.127, .129]). With each successive meeting, the team's game design frame was
closer to the mentor's in the same meeting. This result suggests that the team increasingly mirrored the mentor's
game design discourse in the meetings.

Result 2: Following the mentor where?
To examine the team and mentor's paths, we created epistemic trajectories of the mentor and team's frames
across the three meetings. The trajectories show the convergence reported above, with the team and mentor
frames becoming successively similar with each of the three meetings (Figure 1).

Figure 1: Team and Mentor Epistemic Frame Trajectories

Although the distance between the team and mentor's frame was reduced with each meeting, both the mentor
and team's frames in the second meeting were much further from the frames in either the first or third meetings.
In other words, the team's third meeting and first meeting frames were more similar than their frame in the
second, and the same   is true for the  mentor. These   trajectories suggest  that the team's epistemic frame
development did not proceed uniformly from the first to the final meeting.

Result 3: Why that path?
To see what might have caused the nonlinear trajectories, we looked at the change in the relative centralities of
three key frame elements across the three meetings (Figure 2). This figure shows the relative centrality of the
skill of concept development, the knowledge of game mechanic, and the knowledge of the content domain in the
mentor and team's frame in each of the three meetings.

© ISLS                                                                                                         357
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                         Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

Figure 2: The change in importance of frame elements.
The development of a concept is important for both the team and mentor in all three meetings. In the second
meeting, and only the second meeting, content research becomes the most central concern. Finally, we see that
the game   mechanic   becomes   increasingly  important  across  the   three meetings.   The  spike   in the  relative
centrality of K/Content Domain would appear to explain the large distance between the frames in the second
meeting and the other meetings.

Discussion
The results presented here describe how a team of novices in a practicum come to think like professionals under
the guidance of a mentor. By the time the practicum was half over, which was the end point of this study, the
team needed to have a game concept and game mechanic that were tightly bound together and that simulated a
well-researched content domain. This study is about the path and mechanism by which the team arrived there.
        First, the team imitated the discourse of the mentor. The team's epistemic frame grew more similar to
the mentor's frame with each meeting. A feature of the "Follow Me!" coaching style is the mentor's demand that
the learners imitate (Schön, 1987). It is possible that the increasing similarity of discourse in the later meetings
is due to differences in the degree of freedom in the conversational topics: perhaps earlier in the practicum the
conversations were  simply  more   "open-ended."   We    argue, however,     that the  convergence  of   professional
discourse is by design, not happenstance. The conversations the team had in their meetings were informed by
the particular intentions and direction of their mentor as well as the general construction of the practicum.
Regardless of  whether  any particular  topic  of  conversation  was   due   to   one or the other, the   conceptual
development of the game designer frame requires this convergence. The "Follow me!" coaching model serves to
guide learners who are doing work without necessarily knowing how to do it or why they are doing it.
        The epistemic frame trajectories show the path down which the mentor led the team by offering an
additional perspective on how the team and mentor's frame's converged. Mentors and students did not take a
"direct route" from where they started to where they each ended. Instead, their second meeting, distant from the
first and third meetings, indicated a developmental "detour." The change in the importance of three key frame
elements-- similar  for the mentor  and   team    across the three meetings--helps       explain indirect  path. The
development of a concept was important in all three meetings. In the second meeting, the content domain
became the most central concern. The game mechanic became increasingly important across the three meetings.
Although the game ultimately must have a mutually reinforcing concept and mechanic, the mentor first led the
team to other connections: to the connections between the content domain that the game is simulating and both
the game concept   and  mechanic.  That   is, the development   of   a concept    and  game  mechanic    rely on  the
development of an understanding of the content domain. The students progressed from where they "mostly just
talked" without "any gameplay yet" to where they used content domain language to link their game mechanics
to their game concept. In other words, the mentor concentrated on one part of the frame in order to scaffold
another part of it, which suggests that the detour in the epistemic trajectories was not a detour at all. Rather, the
shortest distance from novice to professional thinking may not be to simply model best expert practice.
        That the team has this indirect trajectory is perhaps unremarkable. After all, sometimes learners take
steps backward on their trajectory forward. That both the team and the mentor share this type of trajectory, on
the other hand, implies a learning experience quite different from the way traditional curricula, instruction, and
assessment are organized. Most school subjects, for example, are organized to be taught in a strictly atomized
and sequential manner. If learning to think like a professional requires rather than just accommodates indirect
learning trajectories, as these results suggest, then the type of coaching by which mentors scaffold different
connections within an epistemic frame is a type of learning relationship that deserves more attention.
        Another valuable finding of this study is that ENA was shown to be a useful way to quantify the
development of epistemic frames, as well as the relationship between the students' and mentor's frames. Other
methods of discourse analysis may offer similar or additional results to those found in this study. However, the
promise of ENA is that it is driven by frequencies of the co-occurrence of qualitative codes, and thus captures
how practitioners connect the aspects of professional vision. In particular, projecting the distances between
interactive units--whether they be meetings, activities in within meetings, turns of discourse within activities, or
who the unit is associated with--by creating epistemic trajectories is a promising way to explore the nature of
developing epistemic frames and complex ways of thinking in general.
        The results presented here have several limitations. The ethnographic nature of this study means that
any conclusions are limited to what one particular group did in the context of one particular practicum. Further,
this study focuses on a limited amount of data. Team activity without the mentor may have added information
about aspects of the epistemic frame the team internalized. Similarly, examining epistemic trajectories within
meetings would allow us to map how frames developed in relation to the activity and discourse in the meetings.
In addition, when looking at the relationships between the mentor and student frames, this study treated the
students as a team, and so does not show individual development. The "Follow me!" coaching strategy might
work  differently for different students, differently during    different activities  or at different stages  of  the

© ISLS                                                                                                           358
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                     Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

practicum. Finally, ENA is a new method for understanding the development of an epistemic frame. As such,
we expect it to develop in ways that allow us to better test significant events in frame development. Despite
these limitations, the results here suggest that focusing on how mentors coach learners to develop epistemic
frames should be useful for further studies of professional education or of apprenticeship-based programs for
youth, and that epistemic network analysis is a useful tool for uncovering these learning processes.

References
Abt, C. C. (1970). Serious Games. New York City, NY: The Viking Press, Inc.
Bartholomew, D. J., Steele, F., Moustaki, I., & Galbraith, J. I. (2008). Analysis of Multivariate Social Science
         Data. Boca Raton: Chapman & Hall/CRC
Collins, A., & Halverson, R. (2009). Rethinking Education in the Age of Technology. New York, NY: Teachers
         College Press.
Gee,  J. P.   (2003). What   Video  Games   Have   to Teach    Us About Learning   and  Literacy.     New   York:
         Palgrave/Macmillan.
Gee, J. P., & Shaffer, D. W. (2010). Looking where the light is bad: Video games and the future of assessment.
         Phi Delta Kappa International EDge, 6(1).
Goodwin, C. (1994). Professional vision. American Anthropologist, 96(3), 606-633.
Halpern,  R.  (2010). The   Means  to Grow   Up:  Reinventing  Apprenticeship as a  Developmental     Support     in
         Adolescence. New York: Routledge.
Hutchins, E. (1995). Cognition in the Wild. Cambridge, Mass: MIT press.
Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge: Cambridge
         University Press.
Nash, P., & Shaffer, D. W. (2010). Mentor modeling: the internalization of modeled professional thinking in an
         epistemic game. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 27(2), 173-189.
Rose, M. (2004). The Mind at Work: Valuing the Intelligence of the American Worker. New York: Penguin
         Books.
Ryan, G.,  Toohey,    S., & Hughes,   C. (1996). The  Purpose, Value, and Structure of the Practicum     in High
         Education: A Literature Review. Higher Education, 31(3), 355-377.
Salen, K., & Zimmerman, E. (2004). Rules of Play: Game Design Fundamentals. Cambridge MA: The MIT
         Press.
Schön, D. A. (1987). Educating the reflective practitioner: Toward a new design for teaching and learning in
         the professions: Jossey-Bass San Francisco.
Shaffer, D. W. (2006). How computer games help children learn. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Shaffer, D. W. (2010). The Bicycle Helmets of "Amsterdam": Computer games and the problem of transfer.
         Madison: University of Wisconsin-Madison.
Shaffer, D. W., Hatfield, D. L., Svarovsky, G. N., Nash, P., Nulty, A., Bagley, E. A. S., et al. (2009). Epistemic
         Network Analysis: A prototype for 21st Century assessment of learning. The International Journal of
         Learning and Media, 1(2), 33-53.
Squire, K. D., & Jenkins, H. (2004). Harnessing the power of games in education. Insight, 3(1), 5-33.
Strauss, A., & Corbin, J. (1998). Basics of qualitative research (3rd ed.). Thousand Oaks: Sage Publications,
         Inc.
Sullivan, W. M. (1995). Work and integrity: The crisis and promise of professionalism in America. New York:
         Harpercollins.

Acknowledgments
This work was funded in part by the MacArthur Foundation and by the National Science Foundation through
grants REC-034700, DUE-0919347, DRL-0918409, DRL-0946372, and EEC-0938517. The opinions, findings
and conclusions do not reflect the views of the funding agencies, cooperating institutions, or other individuals.

© ISLS                                                                                                       359
