CSCL 2013 Proceedings                   Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

          Come_IN@Palestine: Adapting a German Computer Club
                        Concept to a Palestinian Refugee Camp

  Kai Schubert, Konstantin Aal, Volker Wulf, Anne Weibert, University of Siegen, 57068 Siegen, Germany,
                     {kai.schubert, konstantin.aal, volker.wulf, anne.weibert}@uni-siegen.de
   Meryem Atam, International Institute for Socio Informatics (IISI), Stiftsgasse 25, 53111 Bonn, Germany,
                                              meryem_atam@web.de
                 George P. Yerousis, Birzeit University, PO Box 14, Birzeit, West Bank, Palestine,
                                              gyerousis@birzeit.edu

          Abstract: The come_IN computer club is an approach to foster learning and integration in
          intercultural neighborhoods of Germany. We have tried to adapt this concept to a different part
          of the world:  a Palestinian  refugee  camp. Similar   to intercultural German neighborhoods,
          refugee camps are also the result of migration moves, however, in this case of an enforced
          one. Our findings indicate a successful adaptation of the approach to a Palestinian context.

Introduction
The intercultural computer clubs, called come_IN, offer a place to share practices among children and adults of
diverse ethnical backgrounds. Once a week the participants voluntarily gather in the computer club, work on
joint projects, study, play, or realize individual ideas supported by the use of information and communication
technology (ICT). Together the participants are creating personal meaningful artifacts to express themselves
(Schubert & Weibert 2012). These situated and shared practices are apt to develop an effect on an individual as
well as on a community level (Veith et al. 2009). Via computer supported project work the club participants can
establish new  social  contacts,  learn about the  ideas  of the other participants ­ within  their own  and from
different cultures. Since 2003 we have built a network of come_IN intercultural computer clubs in Germany
(Schubert et al. 2011). The main goal of this work is to investigate into the transfer of our experiences from the
German context and adapt it to the specific needs of Palestinian refugee camps and their inhabitants. Through
the use and appropriation of ICT these marginalized Palestinian refugee communities can positively engage into
their own    society and   in the Palestinian-Israeli  conflict-to-peace transformation  process.   Another  major
objective to transfer our approach and to build a network of computer clubs among refugee camps is to network
Palestinians across different sites, at the same time promoting their integration into the local societies and finally
enabling their access to the information society.

State of the Art
The concept of the come_IN computer clubs follows the tradition of computer clubhouses in the US. The first of
these computer clubhouses was established for underprivileged youth in Boston in the year 1993; the principles
of situated, collaborative learning and constructionist thinking offered them opportunities to express themselves
with  the use  of ICT   and   new media   (Kafai   2009). The pedagogical  concept    behind the clubhouses  is an
extension  of the  constructivist-learning paradigm,   known   as   constructionism (Papert  1980). The  come_IN
approach developed this concept further, applying it to issues of inter-generational learning and the integration
of migrant communities in Germany. The computer clubs were based in schools, which serve a central point of
exchange among the people of the city district, to provide opportunities for elementary school kids, their parents
and tutors to engage in group-oriented project work. The digital divide between the students in a refugee camp
and those outside is obvious. The term "digital divide" was defined by Mehra (2004) as "the troubling gap
between those who use computers and the Internet and those who do not." To narrow this digital gap and
empower the students in the refugee camp Sawhney (2009) hosted over three years several workshops about
storytelling in Palestine. Storytelling can also used to work through intractable conflicts; this enables people
with traumatic social experiences to digest these experiences and learn to live with the happenings. Bar-On
(2004) demonstrated with a Palestinian-Israeli group that storytelling could help to handle painful events.

Jalazone: A Palestinian Refugee Camp in the West Bank
Jalazone is a Palestinian refugee camp in the West Bank approx. 7 km north of Ramallah. Like most of the other
refugee camps Jalazone was established in 1949. The inhabitants of the camp were expelled or fled from their
homes  in  nowadays   Israel. A  high   population density as  well as crowded    and precarious living conditions
characterizes the camp. The unemployment rate is at a very high level (40% compared to the average of 20 % in
the entire West Bank). The council running the camp estimates that approx. 30% of the families have Internet
access at home. There are also some Internet cafés. These places have a bad reputation since they were rarely
controlled by adults and considered to be used for computer gaming, gambling, and pornography watching.

© ISLS                                                                                                        353
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                  Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

Research Methods
Grounded Theory (Strauss & Corbin, 1990) was chosen as a theoretical framework to be grounded in the field.
Also we adhere to principles of Participatory Action Research by Kemmis & McTaggert (2004) regarding the
question "how  to act  in the  field". With  this  approach  we   as authors were   part of  the   field to investigate
meaningful, field-oriented insights. We conducted the research presented in this paper over a period of 28
months,  from  May 2010   to  September     2012.  The first visits were documented    via   field notes  and   photos.
Extensive documentations   were  written    every  evening   of the respective day. At   the last  visit an accredited
translator was part of the research team, so it was possible to do workshops and interviews in Arabic with the
tutors, the children and inhabitants of the refugee camp. During our last stay in August and September 2012 we
conducted 7 semi-structured interviews (with durations between 30 minutes and 3 hours) and more than ten
informal interviews, almost all of them were audio recorded. Additionally protocols from the weekly computer
club sessions written by the tutors and other materials have been collected.

Discussion and Conclusion
While the come_IN approach itself was inspired by Resnick's (1996) work, it was yet another stretch to move
this socio-technical approach to learning and social integration to a Palestinian context. The challenge was to
share insights gained  in Germany      while adapting  the   socio-technical concept  to the  different   context. We
assumed that our publications and written materials would only provide limited insights into our experiences
made during almost ten years of project work. Therefore, we very much believed in an exchange of expertise
among the partners at different points in time. Different members of the German project team spent substantial
amounts of time in understanding the local context and preparing for the clubs opening. Moreover, we invited
the Palestinian project manager for one week to Germany to make him see the computer clubs in action. In the
West Bank, we have decided to work with a local university, Birzeit, to build the club, which adds a second
university player into the support structure. While they coordinate the local activities and engage undergraduate
students to tutor the club, their social attribution in the camp is quite distinct. In future visits we want to evaluate
the further development of the computer club and its participants within and outside the refugee camp. To
became a network the opening of further computer clubs within the West Bank is planned as a long term
perspective.

References
Bar-On, D. & Kassem, F. (2004). Storytelling as a way to work through intractable conflicts: The German-
         Jewish experience its relevance to the Palestinian-Israeli context. Journal of Social Issues 60 (pp. 289-
         306)
Kafai, Y. B., Peppler, K. A., Chapman, R. N. (eds.) (2009). The Computer Clubhouse. Constructionism and
         Creativity in Youth Communities. New York: Teachers College Press.
Kemmis, S., & McTaggert, R. (2004). Participatory Action Research: Communicative action and the public
         sphere. Handbook of Qualitative Research, Denzin, N and Lincoln, Y (eds.), 3rd ed.,(pp. 559-604) Sage,
         Thousand Oaks CA
Mehra, B., Merkel, C., & Bishop, Ann P. (2004). The internet for empowerment of minority and marginalized
         users. New Media and Society 6
Papert, S. (1980). Mindsotrms. New York: Basic Books.
Resnick,  M.  (1996).  Towards a  Practice   of "Constructional     Design."  In L. Schauble   &   R.    Glaser (Eds.),
         Innovations in learning: New environments for education. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Sawhney, N. (2009). Voices Beyond Walls: The Role of Digital Storytelling for Empowering Marginalized Youth
         in Refugee Camps. International Conference on Interaction Design and Children, Workshop on Difital
         Technologies and Marginalized Youth. Como, Italy
Schubert, K., & Weibert, A. (2012). How the Social Structure of Intercultural "come_IN" Computer Clubs
         Fosters Interactive Storytelling. International Journal of Arts and Technology (to be published)
Schubert, K., Weibert, A., & Wulf, V. (2011). Locating computer clubs in multicultural neighborhoods: How
         collaborative project work    fosters integration   processes. International Journal  of  Human-Computer
         Studies 69 (pp. 669-678)
Strauss, A., & Corbin, J. (1990). Basics of Qualitative Research: Grounded Theory Procedure and Techniques.
         Sage Publications. Newbury Park, CA
Veith, M., Schubert, K. Wulf, V., 2009. Fostering Communities in Urban Multicultural Neighbourhoods: Some
         Methodological   Reflections,  in:  Foth, M.  (eds)  Handbook   of  Research  on    Urban  Informatics:   The
         Practice and Promise of the Real-Time City, Hershey

© ISLS                                                                                                             354
