CSCL 2013 Proceedings                    Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

   Extending the Reach of Embodied Interaction in Informal Spaces
                         Brian Slattery, Leilah Lyons, Brenda López Silva, Priscilla Jimenez
             University of Illinois at Chicago, 851 S. Morgan (M/C 152), Chicago, IL 60607-7053
                  Email: bslatt2@uic.edu, llyons@uic.edu, brendita@uic.edu, pjimen5@uic.edu

         Abstract: Exhibit designers in informal institutions are exploring the potential educational
         benefits of embodied interaction experiences. But are these exhibits--often relying on a single
         user for control--practical for settings with thousands of daily visitors? We present results
         from an observational study of an embodied interaction exhibit at a major zoo, focusing on
         how   to  make     single-user embodied  performances     more  inclusive   and participatory   for
         spectators.

Background
Zoos and museums have a long history of providing interactive learning experiences to visitors, and have been
exploring more "naturalistic" embodied interaction approaches, from tangible user interfaces to whole-body
interactives (Alisi et al., 2005). Embodied interaction is thought to confer usability benefits, but most designs
only allow a small proportion of visitors to directly participate. However, thousands of visitors might encounter
an  exhibit in a  day,   so designers   must extend the experience   so  that it is beneficial   for non-participating
spectators. This paper builds on existing work on extending spectator experiences, which has stressed increased
display size (Diamond et al., 1995) and visibility of user/system interaction (Reeves et al., 2005). Spectators
need to know what the participant is doing, and how it affects the system, to understand what is happening.
Many embodied interactions unintentionally obscure this information, as the kinesthetic nuance is felt only by
the person in control. In this work we explore how "visible" the lessons of existing single-user embodied
designs are to spectators, and explore how to extend that "visibility".
         Our exhibit prototype, A Mile in My Paws, uses physical effort to illustrate the challenge polar bears
face as they react to the changing climate. Zoo visitors control a polar bear avatar that must traverse the arctic
environment in multiple sessions of past, present, and future time periods, as they search for food. Users control
the bear by  "swimming"      with weighted   motion-sensitive   gloves (fashioned   as  plush polar   bear paws)  and
walking in place on a pressure sensitive plate. As sea ice decreases over time, polar bears must work harder to
travel the same distance, as they burn more calories swimming versus walking. This embodied experience is
intended to prime learners for understanding the rate and magnitude of climate change (Lyons et al., 2012).

Methods
The Paws game was deployed in the underwater polar bear viewing area at Brookfield Zoo in Chicago, IL. The
pilot data in this paper was gathered during two days of deployment, where the Paws interactive exhibit was
available for use by the visitor population for a period of roughly one and a half hours each day. Ten zoo
interpreters joined the research team across the two days, working as a team to run the exhibit. Zoo interpreters
vary in  age   and experience,  and   are typically in  charge  of  explaining   phenomena    at exhibits, answering
questions, and facilitating specialty content like scheduled talks and specimen carts.
         Interpreter and visitor behavior was captured through video and audio recordings. On the second day,
interpreters passed out simple paper ballots for visitors to indicate whether they thought swimming or walking
was more difficult for the polar bear--a key learning goal for the Paws exhibit, but one which is non-obvious to
non-playing observers, who cannot feel the difference in effort while swimming versus walking.

Results & Discussion
Since the Paws game relies on the player's perception of effort to convey the difficulty that polar bears are
facing, our initial concern was that not all visitors would have access to this embodied experience. During the
pilot, 26 visitors played as the virtual Paws bear, but this was only 2% of the 1049 total visitors who passed
through the space (see Figure 1 for visitor participation with Paws over time). Using the paper ballots, we
compared the responses of Paws players and non-players; while 82% of the players (9 of the 11 surveyed)
answered    correctly that  swimming    was  more   difficult than walking,   only  70%  of   non-playing  peripheral
audience members (21 of the 30 surveyed) produced this response. This indicated to us that visitors who didn't
have the opportunity to embody the polar bear needed additional support to learn from the Paws exhibit, since
they didn't have direct experience of the relative difficulty of swimming versus walking.
         Our first strategy for engaging non-playing spectators was "pantomiming"--having visitors mimic the
swimming and walking actions of the person playing the game. This activity was created by the zoo interpreters
during  the design    of Paws, as a   means  for supporting   peripheral participation. While    child visitors didn't
spontaneously engage in pantomiming, they participated enthusiastically when prompted to by interpreters.

© ISLS                                                                                                           355
CSCL 2013 Proceedings              Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

              Figure 1: Number of playing, pantomiming, and peripheral visitors during the pilot.

       When we gave the paper ballots to children who had pantomimed, 75% of them (9 of the 12 surveyed)
marked that  swimming  was  more  difficult, an improvement  over   the more   peripheral    spectators. Using  a
Kruskall-Wallis analysis of non-parametric variance to compare the playing, pantomiming, and peripheral (non-
playing/non-pantomiming) groups, we found that the difference between groups is significant with p < 0.001
(K=34.6, df = 2). The drop-off in correctness among these groups suggests that while spectators are generally
able to figure out the core, embodied message of Paws, visitors that engage in pantomiming have additional but
indirect access to the Paws player's experience. Pantomiming supports multiple simultaneous visitors, and could
be further enhanced by giving pantomimers "dummy" weighted gloves disconnected from the system. Thus,
pantomiming is a promising approach for helping an extended audience directly experience the kinesthetic
differentiation between swimming and walking.
       The downside to the pantomiming activity is that adults would not engage in pantomiming, even when
it was encouraged by interpreters. Adult spectators would therefore require a different approach to engage them
in the activity and make the player's kinesthetic experience "visible". We thus designed a mobile tablet app to
facilitate discussion around Paws for non-pantomiming spectators. The interface included a live map of player
progress and graph of the bear's simulated caloric expenditure. Our expectation was that by making visible
multiple representations of the player's current state, this would allow an alternative access point for adults (and
potentially some children) who might not     want to participate in pantomiming.       Interpreters were aided in
scaffolding discussion around climate change through pop-up questions on the tablet as well as by being able to
select information from the tablet to present on a large shared display. Although the tool was designed for
spectators' needs, interpreters also used the tablet to interact with pantomimers and the visitor controlling the
bear. Interpreters' decisions around what information to display or mention may reflect their dynamic judgments
about what would be most engaging for visitors at different participation levels. Our team is in the process of
analyzing the interaction between interpreters, visitors, and the mobile support tool, to see how learning with the
alternate representations compares to the embodied learning that players and pantomimers engage in.
       Our results indicate that for zoos to engage multiple audiences in exhibits with participatory, embodied
content, they need to pursue multiple simultaneous strategies for different audiences. In our case, pantomiming
affords child visitor interaction with Paws, but engaging adult spectators required a different strategy. We found
success with a mobile support tool that displayed the player's progress and effort. These strategies enabled a
wider audience of visitors to access and learn from a single-user interactive exhibit.

References
Alisi, T.M., Del Bimbo, A., & Valli, A. (2005). Natural interfaces to enhance visitors' experiences. Multimedia
       12, 3, 80-85.
Diamond, J., Bond, A., Schenker, B., Meier, D., & Twersky, D. (1995). Collaborative multimedia. Curator 38,
       3, 137-149.
Lyons, L., Slattery, B., Jimenez, P., Lopez, B., & Moher, T. (2012). Don't forget about the sweat: Effortful
       embodied interaction in support of learning. In Proc. TEI '12, 77-84.
Reeves, S., Benford, S., O'malley, C., & Fraser, M. (2005). Designing the spectator experience. In Proc. CHI
       '05, 741-750.

Acknowledgments
This work is supported by NSF CCEP-I Grant 1043284.

© ISLS                                                                                                       356
