CSCL 2013 Proceedings                Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

                                 Discovering Dependencies:
            A Case Study of Collaborative Dynamic Mathematics
                            Gerry Stahl, Drexel University, Gerry@GerryStahl.net

         Abstract: The Virtual Math Teams (VMT) Project is exploring an approach to the teaching
         and learning of basic school geometry through a CSCL approach. As one phase of a design-
         based-research cycle of design/trial/analysis, two teams of three adults worked on a dynamic-
         geometry task in the VMT online environment. The case study reported here analyzed the
         progression  of their computer-supported   collaborative interaction, showing   that each team
         combined in different ways (a) exploration of a complex geometric figure through dynamic
         dragging of points in the figure in a shared GeoGebra virtual workspace, (b) step-by-step
         construction of a similar figure and (c) discussion of the dependencies needed to replicate the
         behavior of the dynamic figure. The teams thereby achieved a group-cognitive result that most
         of the group members might not have been able to achieve on their own.

Based on a Vygotskian perspective, our CSCL approach to the teaching of geometry involves collaborative
learning mediated by dynamic-geometry software--such as Geometer's Sketchpad or GeoGebra--and student
discourse. During the past decade, we have developed the Virtual Math Teams (VMT) environment and have
recently integrated a multi-user version of GeoGebra into it (Stahl, 2009; Stahl et al., 2010). Our environment
and associated pedagogy focus on supporting collaboration and fostering significant mathematical discourse. In
developing this system, we have tested our prototypes with various small groups of users. Recently, two small
groups worked together on a problem based on the construction of inscribed equilateral triangles (see Figure 1).

                            Figure 1. Discussion of the inscribed triangles problem.

         The geometry problem is adapted to the VMT setting from (Öner, 2013). In her study, two co-located
adults were videotaped working on one computer screen using Geometer's Sketchpad. We have "replicated" the
study with teams of three adults working on separate computers with our multi-user version of GeoGebra in the
VMT environment, allowing them to construct, drag, observe and chat about a shared construction. Öner chose
this problem because it requires students to explore a dynamic-geometry figure to identify dependencies in it
and then to construct a similar figure, building in such dependencies. We believe that the identification and
construction of geometric dependencies is central to the mastery of dynamic geometry (Stahl, 2012b; 2013).
         In this study,  we analyzed the processes   through which  the  two   groups  (A and   B) identified and
constructed the dependencies involved in an equilateral triangle inscribed in another equilateral triangle. We
were able to replay the entire sessions of the groups in complete detail, observing all group interaction (text chat
and dynamic-geometry actions) that group members observed--for logs and analysis, see (Stahl, 2013, Ch. 7).
         Group A went through a collaborative process in which they explored the given figure by varying it
visually through the procedure of dragging various points and noticing how the figure responded. Some points
could move freely; they often caused the other points to readjust. Some points were constrained and could not
be moved freely. The group then wondered about the constraints underlying the behavior. They conjectured that
certain relationships were  maintained by  built-in dependencies.  Without having     figured out  the constraints
completely, they began trying to construct the figure as a way of exploring approaches experimentally using
trial and error. Finally, the group figured out how to accomplish the construction of the inscribed equilateral
triangles by defining the dependencies into their figure using the tools of GeoGebra.
         Team    B went  through a similar process,  with differences in the   details of their observations  and
conjectures. Interestingly, Team B made conjectures leading to at least three different construction approaches.
Like Group A, they initiated a collaborative process of exploring the given diagram visually with the help of
dragging points. They developed conjectures about the constraints in the figure and about what dependencies
would have to be built into a construction that replicated the inscribed equilateral triangles. They decided to

© ISLS                                                                                                        357
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                   Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

explore trial constructions as a way of better understanding the problem and the issues that would arise in
different approaches. Eventually, they pursued an approach involving dependencies among line segments in the
three congruent smaller triangles.
         Although both groups reached a similar conclusion, their paths were significantly different. First, they
defined their problem differently (Zemel & Koschmann, 2013). Group A focused on listing the constraints that
they noticed by dragging points and then on proving that the given triangles were in fact equilateral. Group B, in
contrast, quickly realized that it would be difficult to construct triangle DEF to be both inscribed and equilateral,
since these characteristics required quite different constraints, which would be hard to impose simultaneously.
Whereas   Group  A  coordinated    its work  so  that the   members    followed  a   single  path  of   exploration and
conjecture, Group B's members each came up with different conjectures and even engaged in some divergent
explorative  construction on  their  own  before sharing    their findings. Despite  these   differences,  both  groups
collaborated effectively. They   listened attentively and   responded   to  each  other's comments.       They solicited
questions and agreement. They generally followed a shared group approach. Together, they reached an accepted
conclusion to a difficult problem, which they might not all have been able to solve on their own, illustrating
effective group cognition (Stahl, 2006).
         The case study of Groups A and B illustrates the approach of collaborative dynamic geometry. The
groups  took advantage    of the  three central  dimensions    of dynamic     geometry--dragging,     construction  and
dependencies--to  explore    the intricacies of  a geometric    configuration   and  to reach--as     a group--a    deep
understanding of the relationships within the configuration. They figured out how to construct the diagram and
they understood why the construction would work as a result of dependencies that they designed into it.
         The   inscribed-triangle   problem  illustrates   well   the importance     of dragging,     constructing  and
dependencies in dynamic geometry. This argues against the current tendency in classroom usage of dynamic
geometry software--and in the related research--to emphasize just the dragging. In our log analyses, we can
observe clearly the role of all three aspects working together: in Öner's data of the dyad, in our case study of
Group A and B as well as in subsequent logs of groups of math teachers collaborating on this problem.
         In the Virtual   Math   Teams  Project, we   are   currently  refining the  VMT    software    and developing
curriculum (Stahl, 2012b) to guide the use of collaborative dynamic geometry in in-service-teacher professional
development and high-school geometry (Stahl, 2012a). The curriculum centers on activities like the one in the
case study. The curriculum is closely aligned to the new Common Core State Standards for basic geometry and
their recommended mathematical practices (CCSSI, 2011). It covers the most important propositions of Euclid's
Elements,   translating them  into   research-based,  contemporary     approaches    to geometry      and mathematical
discourse in a CSCL environment. We will continue to study the results of collaborative dynamic geometry
through analysis of the discourse and geometric explorations (Stahl, 2012c). On the basis of a continuing series
of trial studies like the one just reported, we feel that the approach of collaborative dynamic geometry can
translate the geometry of Euclid into an effective tool of computer-supported collaborative learning.

References
CCSSI. (2011). High school -- geometry. In Common Core State Standards Initiative (Ed.), Common core state
         standards for mathematics. (pp. 74-78).
Öner,  D. (2013). Analyzing    group   coordination   when   solving  geometry   problems    with  dynamic     geometry
         software. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning. 8(1).
Stahl, G. (2006). Group cognition: Computer support for building collaborative knowledge. Cambridge, MA:
         MIT Press. Web: http://GerryStahl.net/mit/.
Stahl, G. (2009). Studying virtual math teams. New York, NY: Springer. Web: http://GerryStahl.net/vmt/book.
Stahl, G. (2012a). Designing a learning environment for promoting math discourse. Paper presented at the 12th
         International     Conference        on     Mathematical        Education.       Seoul,       Korea.       Web:
         http://GerryStahl.net/pub/icme_design.pdf,    Slides: http://GerryStahl.net/pub/icme2012.ppt.pdf.
Stahl,  G.   (2012b).    Dynamic-geometry       activities  with   GeoGebra      for    virtual  math     teams.   Web:
         http://GerryStahl.net/vmt/activities.pdf.
Stahl, G. (2012c). Evaluating significant math discourse in a learning environment. Paper presented at the 12th
         International     Conference        on     Mathematical        Education.       Seoul,       Korea.       Web:
         http://GerryStahl.net/pub/icme_discourse.pdf.
Stahl, G. (2013). Translating Euclid: Creating a human-centered mathematics: Morgan & Claypool Publishers.
         Web: http://GerryStahl.net/pub/translating.pdf.
Stahl, G., Ou, J. X., Weusijana, B. K., Çakir, M. P., & Weimar, S. (2010). Multi-user GeoGebra for virtual math
         teams.  GeoGebra:       The   New   Language      For    The  Third    Millennium.     1(1),   117-126.   Web:
         http://GerryStahl.net/pub/geogebra_romania.pdf.
Zemel,  A.,  &  Koschmann,    T.  (2013).  Online  math    problem    solving as a   process of   discovery  in  CSCL.
         International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning. 8(1).

© ISLS                                                                                                              358
