CSCL 2013 Proceedings                     Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

        An Approach for Supporting Hybrid Learning Communities:
                        The Case of a Regional Parent Community
        Sven Strickroth, Niels Pinkwart, Department of Informatics, Clausthal University of Technology,
                            Julius-Albert-Str. 4, 38678 Clausthal-Zellerfeld, Germany
                             Email: {sven.strickroth, niels.pinkwart}@tu-clausthal.de

         Abstract: This paper presents an approach for supporting regionally bound hybrid learning
         communities     combining    traditional face-to-face   elements   with   web     based media   (online
         community platform, content recommendations, email and SMS newsletters). The main idea
         behind this approach is to make use of synergy effects based on a tight connection of online
         and    offline aspects. The   proposed   approach   was    piloted in the   Mobile2Learn    project,  a
         regionally bound parent community, in order to motivate and support (especially hard-to-
         reach underprivileged) parents to educate their young children.

Introduction
Early   childhood  education    lays  the basis   for later (educational)   success.  Particularly   the  education    and
development of children below three years of age is of tremendous importance (Becker & Becker, 2008). One
obvious way to support early childhood education is to directly interact with children, either with or without
technology  (Yelland,    2005).  Another    feasible  way   to improve  early   childhood    education   is to  motivate,
encourage, and support parents to educate their children. Parents have a major influence on the early childhood
education of their children since the family is the first and most important education authority in the first years
of children's lives (Büchner, 2003). Traditional face-to-face trainings are well established and have shown to be
an effective way to educate parents. Here, trainers and trainees know each other, trust can be established, and
trainers can adapt to their trainees needs easily. However, those trainings do not scale and are problematic
regarding participation of underprivileged parents (Bauer & Bittlingmayer, 2005). With the advent of the social
web, several internet online parent communities emerged where parents can get access to educational resources
and can also interact with each other. Contrary to local face-to-face trainings, interactive online trainings and
platforms scale better, provide a low-threshold access to educational resources, and allow parents to get in
contact with each other easily. Nevertheless, most online trainings and platforms are not regionally bound, the
users are distributed (thus it is hard for trainers to adapt to parent's needs) and often totally lack professional
pedagogic support. Specific research on parent communities is missing ­ despite the fact that several online
parent communities are established (like eltern.de or community.parents.com; with the described shortcomings).
         In order to fill this gap, we propose a hybrid community approach which combines the advantages of
face-to-face trainings with the advantages of an interactive online platform. In our approach, the online and
offline aspects   of the  community     are tightly   connected  to  each   other   (e.g., via regular   email and  SMS
newsletters informing about local face-to-face events). Our main goal is to show that this hybrid approach is
more effective than the two components separately and that synergy effects occur in the sense that face-to-face
events promote the online platform and vice versa.
         Using community based approaches in educational contexts is, in general, not a new approach. Typical
examples of hybrid communities can often be found in school or university scenarios, connected to terms such
as "extended classrooms" or "blended learning". In a university context, Harrer et al. (2006) allowed students to
use a wiki and discussion boards (in conjunction with a presence lecture) in order to work on group projects.
They found that none of the two communication forms proved to be superior, however, a combination produced
better  results (according  to  final grades). Also,   in a related  study  of Koch   (2003),    email   notifications and
newsletters were found to be a key feature of their community platform.

Mobile2Learn: A Hybrid Community Approach
Mobile2Learn is a small parent community which is based on the proposed hybrid community approach and
which focuses on early childhood education topics. The Mobile2Learn project was started by the community
college Goslar (an institution for rural parent education) and Clausthal University of Technology. The online
community platform was launched in November 2010. As early as this date, users found a small number of 30
articles on that website and the first face-to-face events took place. The project (funding) ended in February
2012. Even though the project was aimed at reaching underprivileged parents, the community website and the
face-to-face events were advertised and accessible for all parents without any costs or fees.
         The    educational activities were  structured   into  six areas   (e.g., "learning   with all  senses", musical
education, nature    discovery,  and  "speaking   and  listening"). For each   area   (except    "nature discovery"),   six
different regional kindergartens in the district of Goslar were chosen where thematically related events were
conducted. All parents were invited to attend (not only parents whose children attend the facility hosting the

© ISLS                                                                                                                 359
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                   Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

event). While focusing on parents, the events/trainings were designed in a fashion so that parents could attend
along with their children. Goals of the face-to-face events included that parents could get to know each other so
that trust could be   established, and  that trainers could  meet the   needs  of the parents  and  could get  direct
feedback.
         In    addition  to   the   face-to-face   events,   an   online    community    platform    was   available
(http://www.Mobile2Learn.de). This platform enabled parents to get in into contact with the Mobile2Learn
project and community (anonymously) with low threshold. The online platform provided educational articles,
photo galleries and interactive quizzes. All articles and photo galleries could be rated with one to five stars
(dislike to like) and could be commented on by community members. Forum posts and a few articles were
available for reading without registration on the platform to motivate parents to register. A registration in the
system was required, however, to access most articles, all photo galleries, user profiles, and to post ratings,
comments    or forum    threads. For registration, users  had to  enter an  e-mail-address,   mobile phone  number
(optional), nickname, date of birth, gender and residence.
         Most of the articles and photos on the platform were provided by pedagogues, but it was possible for
registered parents to submit their own articles or photos (reviewed by pedagogues before publishing).
         Through the hybrid approach, a mutual support of both the online and offline aspects of the community
was aimed at: After all events of a thematic area were conducted, photos taken and articles about the contents of
these events were put online. As such, parents who participated could look up all contents and also find further
information. Moreover, parents who did not attend any events could view the photo galleries and educational
resources, thus could getting motivated to attend events in the future. In addition to this material about face-to-
face events, the community platform also included a forum and an internal messaging system. This way, parents
who had met face-to-face could easily stay in contact with each other online (cf. Haythornthwaite et al. 2000).
         A key factor of the online platform was that personalized messages were sent to parents via SMS and
e-mail regularly in campaigns. Between April 2011 and February 2012, such messages were sent approximately
every other week. These campaigns informed parents about upcoming events, (new) articles or pictures. Also,
automatically generated personalized recommendations were included on the homepage (for registered users)
and in all e-mail campaigns (cf. Strickroth, 2012). This direct and repetitive way of contacting community
members    was  chosen   to  continuously  and   actively "push"  information  about    educational opportunities to
parents. This way, parents were regularly reminded that the project still exists and could easily access all new
and "interesting" items ­ we expected this to be a vital factor for the success of this community.

First results and outlook
Our approach was piloted in a field study over more than one year. At the end of the funding period, the total
parent community consisted of 505 parents who got into contact with the Mobile2Learn project. 234 of these
registered on the online platform (46 %). In total, 182 educational articles (plus 14 articles by partners) and 6
quizzes  with  28 questions   were   created  and  published  on  the   online platform   (as of September    2012).
Additionally, 51 photo galleries (one gallery for face-to-face event plus several additional thematic galleries)
containing approximately 3000 photos were available on the platform.
         Preliminary results allow assuming that using the hybrid approach more parents could be reached.
Parents seem to be used to email-newsletters and are quickly reachable using this communication channel. Also
there seems to be a strong correlation between campaigns and access peaks on the website. Next steps are to
analyze collected usage data and the results of a paper-based questionnaire which was sent to all members of the
community.

References
Bauer, U. & Bittlingmayer, U. H. (2005). Wer profitiert von Elternbildung? In ZSE: Zeitschrift für Soziologie
         der Erziehung und Sozialisation, 25(3) Elternbildung, 263-280
Becker,  N.,  &  Becker,  P. (2008).  Developing   Quality  Care  for Young    Children:  How   to  Turn Early Care
         Settings Into Magical Places. Corwin Press.
Büchner,   P. (2003). Stichwort:   Bildung   und soziale  Ungleichheit.  In Zeitschrift für Erziehungswissenschaft,
         6(1), 5-24.
Haythornthwaite, C., Kazmer, M. M., Robins, J., & Shoemaker, S. (2000). Community Development Among
         Distance Learners: Temporal and Technological Dimensions. In: JCMC, 6(1), 1-26.
Harrer,  A.,  Zeini, S., &   Pinkwart,   N.  (2006).  Evaluation  of  communication     in  web-supported  learning
         communities ­ an analysis with triangulation research design, In: IJWBC, 2(4), 428­446.
Koch, M. (2003). Community Support in Universities ­ The Drehscheibe Project. In: Proc. C&T'03, 445-464.
Strickroth, S. & Pinkwart, N. (2012). High Quality Recommendations for Small Communities: The Case of a
         Regional Parent Network. In: Proc. RecSys'12, 107-114.
Yelland,   N. (2005).   The  Future  Is Now:  A  Review    of the Literature   on the   Use of Computers   in  Early
         Childhood Education (1994 - 2004). AACE Journal, 13(3), 201-232.

© ISLS                                                                                                         360
