CSCL 2013 Proceedings                      Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

        Visualization and Elaboration of Students' Group Reading
                                                   Processes
                                        Sarah A. Sullivan, Sadhana Puntambekar,
                   Department of Educational Psychology, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI
                          Email: sasullivan2@wisc.edu, puntambekar@education.wisc.edu

          Abstract: This study discusses the contribution of data mining of log file data to video and
          interview data for studying students' collaborative engagement with digital texts presented
          online. Given that reading is generally an individual activity, understanding this group process
          is important.   Data analyses    at multiple levels can  reveal  group   processes of    knowledge
          construction, but can also give conflicting results, particularly related to students' perceptions
          of the process.

As part of learning through inquiry, students often work in collaborative groups to use multiple digital text
resources to  follow  their own  investigation   paths while  engaging  with information. Data     mining   techniques,
such as log file analyses, help to identify diverse navigational styles used to process and integrate multiple
sources of information from digital text environments by allowing examination of navigation paths taken by
different groups   of learners   (e.g., Puntambekar,   Stylianou, & Hübscher,    2003).  But, given    that reading  is
generally an individual activity, understanding group processes of interacting with and making sense of multiple
texts during  group   collaboration is   important. Data  mining  techniques    can be used  to    uncover  patterns of
navigation through digital systems that are not directly observable (Reimann, Yacef, & Kay, 2011). However,
navigation profiles provide only one perspective on groups' processes of information selection and integration.
Multiple scales of analysis are important to both understand phenomena at various levels and understand the
relationships across scales (Suthers & Medina, 2011). This study discusses the contribution of data mining and
visualization of log file data in the form of navigation paths to understanding group processes revealed by other
measures, such as group video and interview data. The question addressed is: What processes do students use to
construct knowledge from multiple digital texts and how can data mining techniques combined with other data
sources increase understanding of these processes?

Procedure
The log file analysis focused on 19 students in a 6th grade science classroom in which students read multiple
digital texts using   the CoMPASS       system   (Puntambekar, 2006)   as  part of  a project-based   inquiry physics
curriculum. CoMPASS helps students engage in inquiry about the physics related to multiple topics, such as
simple  machines,   and   provides navigable    concept  maps  designed to mirror   the conceptual    structure in   the
domain    of physics  and   help students   gain a  rich understanding  of concepts   and relationships.    CoMPASS
provides two representations: a navigable concept map and textual descriptions. The concept that is being read
about becomes the focal point of the map and the other concepts move accordingly based on the strength of their
relationship to the concept of focus.
          Navigation log files were used to look at the students' navigation behavior while using CoMPASS for
approximately 15 minutes to learn about physics concepts to help them with the challenge of lifting a water
bottle off of a table with the least amount of force. The topics and concepts that students visited and the time
spent on each were recorded in chronological order. The log files were later used to develop navigation profiles
to help understand students' meaning making processes while using CoMPASS by making students' navigation
choices   visible. In another    iteration of  the physics  curriculum, video   was    collected   of students' group
interactions with CoMPASS in order to investigate their processes of interacting with the texts and making
navigation decisions. Further, five student small groups (N=4 in each group) were interviewed at the end of the
curriculum to examine students' reasoning behind their group's interactions with the texts and whether their
perceptions of their processes for selecting concepts align with the analyses of strategies from the video data and
the previous navigation profiles developed from the log file data.

Analysis and Findings
The log files of students' interactions with CoMPASS were analyzed using Pathfinder (Schvaneveldt, 1990).
Pathfinder is a graph theoretic technique used to create network representations consisting of nodes and links
that  characterize  navigation   patterns  in CoMPASS,     allowing us  to look  at   similarities and  differences  in
navigation paths. Navigation patterns (see Figure 1) show the number of times students "navigated to" a concept
and the number of times students "navigated from" a concept and from which concepts students navigated to
others.

© ISLS                                                                                                             361
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                 Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

        The log file data reveal distinct ways in which students structured their paths through information
presented in the CoMPASS system. For example, two clusters that were found highlight the differences between
students who focused on concepts within a single topic versus those who chose to explore concepts in multiple
topics. Cluster 1 (N=15) reveals that students investigated how all of the concepts within pulley may apply to
the challenge and also looked at the topics of other simple machines. However, students did not look at any
concepts within these other machines. Cluster 2 (N=4) reveals that students explored all concepts within pulley
with regard to their challenge as well as many of those same concepts and how they apply in a wedge.

                         Cluster 1                                             Cluster 2
         Figure 1. Navigation patterns of the two clusters. Each node has the name of the concept and the topic,
                   so work_P means students visited the concept of work in the topic pulleys.

        From the log data, it appears that students in Cluster 1 were relatively goal-focused in their navigation.
Log file data for Cluster 2 revealed search processes that appear to be less focused. However, the analysis of the
video data revealed that log file data only captures the navigation preferences of a subset of students when
working in collaborative groups. Students struggled at times to take up and consider all navigation suggestions,
and some students tended to be deferred to more than others. Despite these collaboration issues revealed by the
video data, in the interview data, students often perceived their group processes as conducive to conducting
research related to their goal. Students also reported that they were able to use the concept maps to focus on
content, but the navigation profiles indicate that students' navigation behaviors are not always goal-focused.
        The multiple forms of data used for this study provide different perspectives on students' processes of
interacting with multiple texts. The analyses also give insight into how the use of multiple data sources can shed
light on the importance of different levels and scales of analysis and interpretation when studying engagement
with multiple digital texts. Of particular concern is that, despite the issues revealed by the navigation profiles
and video data, students perceived their processes for engaging with multiple texts as a collaborative group as
productive and goal-focused overall. Kulikowich & Young (2001) have argued for making the collaboration
process visible to  learners in order to  enhance  their performance.  This study underscores     the   need   for
investigating collaboration at multiple levels to not only inform understanding of the collaborative process for
researchers and teachers but also to collect information for learners to help them understand their processes of
navigation and  collaboration.  Perhaps, allowing collaborative reflection  on navigation     profiles may     help
students to make productive navigation choices.

References
Kanungo, T., Mount, D. M., Netanyahu, N., Piatko, C., Silverman, R. & Wu, A. (2000). The analysis of a simple
        k-means clustering algorithm. Symposium on Computational Geometry.
Kulikowich, J.  M., & Young,    M. F. (2001). Locating   an Ecological Psychology Methodology     for   Situated
        Action. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 10(1&2), 165-202.
Puntambekar, S. (2006). Learning from digital text in inquiry-based science classes: lessons learned in one
        program. Proceedings of the 7th International Conference of the Learning Sciences (pp. 564-570).
Puntambekar, S., Stylianou, A., & Hübscher, R. (2003). Improving navigation and learning in hypertext
        environments with navigable concept maps. Human Computer Interaction, 18(4), 395-426.
Reimann, P., Yacef, K., & Kay, J. (2011). Analyzing collaborative interactions with data mining methods for the
        benefit of learning. In S. Puntambekar, G. Erkens, & C. Hmelo-Silver (Eds.), Analyzing Interactions in
        CSCL: Methods, Approaches & Issues, New York: Springer.
Schvaneveldt, R. W. (1990). Pathfinder associative networks. Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Suthers, D., & Medina, R. (2011). Tracing interaction in distributed collaborative learning. In S. Puntambekar,
        G. Erkens, & C. Hmelo-Silver (Eds.), Analyzing Interactions in CSCL: Methods, Approaches & Issues,
        New York: Springer.

© ISLS                                                                                                         362
