CSCL 2013 Proceedings                  Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

             Improving Academic Essays by Writing and Reading
                       Peer Annotations on Source Documents
Satoshi V. Suzuki, Human Innovation Research Center, Aoyama Gakuin University, 4-4-25 Shibuya, Shibuya-
                               ku, Tokyo 150-8366 Japan, ssv@hirc.aoyama.ac.jp
 Hiroaki Suzuki, Department of Education, Aoyama Gakuin University, 4-4-25 Shibuya, Shibuya-ku, Tokyo
                                     150-8366 Japan, susan@ri.aoyama.ac.jp

         Abstract: We attempted to improve written arguments made by undergraduate learners of
         academic writing based on their intuitive and affective response to reading peer comments on
         source   documents.  To  do  so, we  developed    and  utilized a  previously    developed       CSCL
         environment called EMU (emotional and motivational underliner) for the addition, provision
         and review of annotations. The analysis of the learners' use of EMU implied that learners who
         wrote good essays tended to focus on annotations that used affective tags to express negative,
         sceptical and surprised attitudes toward the document, as opposed to comments in general; in
         contrast, low-scoring writers tended to apply equal attention to all comments.

Introduction
The aim   of  the present   study was  to examine   whether    reading and   writing   peer   comments         on    research
documents acting as sources for academic essays (in other words, annotating those documents and reviewing
annotations) promotes the development of students' writing in their argumentative essays. When students write
essays, they review related documents, come to understand relevant issues, and produce positive or negative
opinions toward arguments made in the documents. Then, they plan what and how to construct an argument.
         Intervention in this process can potentially help students write better essays. To explore this possibility,
Suzuki & Suzuki (2011) developed a Web-based collaborative environment, EMU (emotional and motivational
underliner). The  left side of Figure  1  shows a   screenshot  of EMU.     The system    provides        students   with    a
document to be reviewed. Students can freely underline and comment using affective tags (seen at the right of
Figure 1). These tags were designed to naturally extract students' initial ideas when reading the material, and
they have been found effective for students' own purposes in writing academic essays (Suzuki & Suzuki, 2011).
These annotations are not only shared with peers, but can also be commented on by them. The centre of Figure
1 shows the input form for peer comments. The system provides many means for students to enhance their
writing: externalizing their own ideas (Shirouzu, Miyake, & Masukawa, 2002), encountering different ideas,
comparing others' ideas with their own, and providing comments on others' ideas (Cho & MacArthur, 2011).
         We introduced EMU to an undergraduate academic writing class and analysed the access log to explore
the relationship between the use of the system and the quality of the essays composed after the activity.

                                                                               Really!  Add   this when   you  want   to say
                                                                               "Really, that's right," or "Good!" (blue).
                                                                               Aha! Add this when you want to say "I
                                                                               haven't  realized   this," or   "It's great!"
                                                                               (green).
                                                                               Yuk!   Add  this  when     you  want   to say
                                                                               "Hey,   that's wrong,"     or  "It's  awful!"
                                                                               (red).
                                                                               Um...  Add  this    when   you  want   to say
                                                                               "You bet?" or "I don't get it" (black with
                                                                               "?,").
                                                                               Crucial. Add this when you want to say
                                                                               "This part is crucial" (black).

       Figure 1. EMU (left), input form for the peer comment (centre), and affective tags on EMU (right).

Analysis
         We analysed data from a class of 28 students learning academic writing. First, they read a document,
and underline and gave `self-comments' or SCs. Next, they read through others' SCs and commented on them
(`peer comments' or PCs). Finally, they composed an essay on the material.
         The  essays   were rated  on a  five-point scale  (1: poor to   5: excellent)  by    the  authors     themselves
independently. Since the scores were highly correlated (Pearson's r=.67, t(24)=4.41, p<.001), we averaged these
scores and divided the students into high-score (HS: n=12) and low-score (LS: n=10) groups by the median
(3.0). Four  students, whose   score  was exactly   3.0, were  excluded   from  the   analysis.    We     then  examined
differences in EMU usage between groups.

© ISLS                                                                                                                   363
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                  Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

Results and Discussion
In all, the students produced 315 SCs and 1,164 PCs for others' SCs. Two judges, who did not know the aim of
the study, classified the SCs (correspondence rate: 95%) and PCs (correspondence rate: 90%) according to the
following categories:
SCP (self-comment: pro) Comments that agreed with or were surprised by the content of the document.
SCC  (self-comment:   con)  Comments    that disagreed with     the document   or wondered   about  the underlined
content.
PCP (peer comment: pro) Comments that agreed with or were surprised by others' SCs.
PCC (peer comment: con) Comments that disagreed with or wondered about the content of others' SCs.

 Figure 2. Frequency with which students read others' SCs by group and tag (left) and correlation between the
                number of sentences contained in the produced SCC-PCPs and essay scores (right).

          The left side of Figure 2 shows the frequency with which students read others' SCs by group and
affective tags. While students  in the  LS group tended  to    read  others' SCs  regardless of the affective tags,
students in the HS group seemed to read the comments with `Aha!' `Yuk!' and `Um...' tags more frequently
than other tags. This tendency was statistically significant.
          A distinct difference was observed in the number of PCPs toward SCCs (SCC-PCPs) between the HS
and LS groups. Thus, we examined the correlation between students' essay score and number of sentences of
produced SCC-PCPs, including the data of the students excluded above. The right side of Figure 2 is a scatter
plot of this analysis, showing a positive significant correlation between SCC-PCP sentences and essay score
(Pearson's r=.53, t(24)=3.09, p<.01). This result implies that HS learners mainly focus on the SCs of others that
show a negative attitude toward the document, and that they tend to add PCs that support such SCs.
          Thus, the results show that HS learners tend to read others' SCs with affective tags such as `Aha!'
`Yuk!' and `Um...' more frequently than do LS learners. Moreover, HS learners tend to elaborate their own
ideas by producing PCs commenting on others' SCs rather than just reading PCs from other learners. This
implies that high-performance learners focus strategically on finding and evaluating issues in the documents as
part of their problem-finding process.
          In past research (Cho & MacArthur, 2011), in peer reviews of each other's paper drafts, learners who
pointed out many problems and suggested many ideas for improvement of the drafts tended to compose a high-
quality paper. These past findings and the results of the present study suggest that the ability to detect problems
and suggest alternatives may be crucial skills in various phases of the academic writing process. By exploring
the learning process of academic writing by high-performance learners in a CSCL environment, taking into
account human cognitive mechanisms and the role of collaboration, we should be better able to improve the
collaborative learning environment of academic writing and enable learners to compose essays that employ
these learning techniques.

References
Cho, K., & MacArthur, C. (2011). Learning by reviewing. Journal of Educational Psychology, 103(1), 73­84.
Shirouzu, H., Miyake, N., & Masukawa, H. (2002). Cognitively active externalization for situated reflection.
          Cognitive Science, 26, 469­501.
Suzuki, S. V., & Suzuki, H. (2011). Reading for problematizing in essay writing activity with annotation and
          affective tagging. Educational Technology Research, 34(1&2), 153­163.

Acknowledgments
This research   was partially supported by the Japanese  Ministry     of Education, Culture,  Sports, Science  and
Technology, Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research (B) 20300271, 2008, and Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research
(C), 24501147 2012.

© ISLS                                                                                                        364
