CSCL 2013 Proceedings                  Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

        Extending Inquiry: Collaborative Learning with Immersive,
                                       Interactive Projection
 Vanessa Svihla, Nicholas Kvam, Jeffrey Bowles, Joe Kniss, University of New Mexico, 1 University of New
                                       Mexico, Albuquerque NM 87131,
                vsvihla@unm.edu, ndkvam@unm.edu, jeff71@unm.edu, joe.kniss@gmail.com
               Matthew Dahlgren, BASIS Phoenix, 11850 North 32nd Street, Phoenix, AZ 85028,
                                       matthew.dahlgren@basisphoenix.org

          Abstract:   We   report  two studies  that  highlight  how  immersive, interactive   projection
          technology supported collaborative STEM inquiry learning. The immersive experience was
          brief (15 minutes) but inquiry extended well beyond. In study 1, this extension was provoked
          by a student noticing a pattern and leading the class to derive a formula. In study 2, students
          graphed data from the dome, provoking questions about superficially-understood phenomena.
          We  found pairing    immersive, interactive projection with problem-based    lessons provoked
          generative learning.

Major issues addressed and potential significance
Engaging and inspiring all students to participate in STEM learning is a major challenge; with new standards
focused   on  STEM    practices, our understanding    of how  to  support all learners is limited. Our    research
investigates the potential of immersive, interactive projection to support inquiry. Our research team has the
capacity to develop low-cost immersive, interactive projection kits for use in classrooms. We are interested in
considering how our designs can transform corners of classrooms into the Rings of Saturn, carbon nanotubes,
field trips to the Devonian, etc., providing collaborative contexts for inquiry learning. In this paper, we present
results from two pilot studies, which sought to explore how immersive, interactive technology (Figure 1) might
provide context for inquiry teaching and learning. To achieve these objectives, we are developing technology,
codesigning projects with teachers, and studying implementations and student learning. We are investigating, in
what ways might an immersive experience provide a context for inquiry learning, before, during, and after the
experience? We explore the design affordances for using immersive projection to support collaborative inquiry.
The focus of this paper is to compare two designs that were tested. Virtual learning environments enhance
learning when they offer a situated experience (Dede, 2009), which is an effective inquiry approach (Rivet &
Krajcik, 2008). Although little research has explored the use of immersive projection technologies for learning
(Apostolellis & Daradoumis, 2010), studies have found benefits for viewing immersive displays in terms of
recall (e.g., Sumners, Reiff, & Weber, 2008). Open questions about the role of immersive environments for
learning remain; in particular, Dede (2009) highlights that research is needed on supporting transfer by blending
learning across virtual and real settings. We explore how learners proceeded through real and projected settings.

    Figure 1. Our dome can accommodate about 12 people. Novel control devices allow for interactivity.

Methodological approach
These studies use a design-based approach (The Design-Based Research Collective, 2003), leveraging findings
for refinements to the inquiry lessons and technology, and leading to design guidelines for supporting inquiry
with immersive technology. This project brings together expertise in computer science, mathematics, science,
teacher education,  and  learning   sciences. We  examine    learning  through  interaction  analysis (Jordan  &
Henderson, 1995) and as evidenced in assessments and artifacts. Two teachers (co-authors MD and NK) were
recruited  to  design  and  implement     highly-scaffolded  problem-based    lessons  incorporating  immersive,
interactive media. Mr. Dahlgren co-designed a lesson on arithmetic and geometric sequences with a narrative

© ISLS                                                                                                       365
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

context of asteroids threatening to destroy all life on Earth; DomeStroids (DS) allows users to navigate through
space with a skateboard and use the Wii-mote to blow up asteroids into a pre-specified number of pieces. Mr.
Kvam co-designed a lesson that used a short version of a previously tested unit on Global Climate Change
(Svihla & Linn,  2012). ClimateDome    (CD) was used   to reinforce understanding   of the greenhouse     effect,
allowing the users to control the level of CO2 with the Wii-mote, and then export data. In both cases, students
took on roles (e.g., pilot, asteroid spotter, model engineer, CO2 specialist). Participants included pre-service
elementary teachers (DS, n=9) and pre-service secondary science teachers (CD, n=8). In both studies, students
completed a 60 minute pre-dome activity that introduced a challenge; they began solving related problems. The
dome session   involved  15 minutes   of immersive,   interactive projection and    additional 40  minutes    of
collaborative problem solving. A post-dome session involved whole class discussion.

Findings and Implications
In both studies, student work shows evidence of learning; whereas previously, only 10% of students developed
understanding of sequences, in this case, 66% of students reached a medium or high level of understanding of
sequences using DomeStroids; on the pretest, half of the students provided a normative explanation of the
greenhouse effect, but after using ClimateDome, all students provided a detailed, normative explanation.
        In DomeStroids, Mr. D guided students with prompts that helped them to notice specific details, such
as how many strikes it took to break the asteroids up into small enough pieces, or how many pieces resulted
from each strike. We observed a transition point when Ignacio - a student who rarely participated in class and
who struggled with the math content --answered one of Mr. D's questions by posing his own question about
whether there would "be a formula" for what they were seeing. We see this as a critical moment for two
reasons: 1) it marks a change from Mr. D primarily asking procedural questions to primarily prompting the
students to help each other; and 2) Ignacio engaged the class more deeply with the math and led them to write
an abstract formula. We conjecture that the activity in the dome was different enough from school experience
that it may have enabled connections to informal experiences (such as video game play), allowing a student to
find purchase on an activity that ­ had it been conducted in a more traditional manner--he may not have.
        Students returned from ClimateDome with data sets exported from their experiments in the dome; they
explored these data during class, constructing graphs. They struggled to interpret them, provoking numerous
questions and discussion about how variables related to one another (e.g., why did infrared radiation increase
when the level of CO2 was increased?). In prior experiences with the non-immersive version, when a teacher
projected a visualization, student learning was typically narrow and worse (as compared to allowing student
pairs to interact with the visualizations on their own). In this case, there may be an advantage for the immersive
component, which affords pointing and gesturing by all present, and supporting the development of shared
understanding.
        While our studies are exploratory and findings tentative, we can report that the dome sessions engaged
students and supported learning beyond the brief immersive, interactive experience. Although the problem-
based lessons were designed with a high degree of scaffolding, students engaged in a more generative manner.

References
Apostolellis, P., & Daradoumis, T. (2010). Exploring Learning through Audience Interaction in Virtual Reality
        Dome Theaters. Knowledge Management, Information Systems, E-Learning, and Sustainability
        Research, 444-448.
Dede, C. (2009). Immersive interfaces for engagement and learning. Science, 323(5910), 66.
Jordan, B., & Henderson, A. (1995). Interaction Analysis: Foundations and Practice. Journal of the Learning
        Sciences, 4(1), 39 - 103.
Rivet, A. E., & Krajcik, J. S. (2008). Contextualizing instruction: Leveraging students' prior knowledge and
        experiences to foster understanding of middle school science. Journal of Research in Science
        Teaching, 45(1), 79-100.
Sumners, C., Reiff, P., & Weber, W. (2008). Learning in an immersive digital theater. Advances in Space
        Research, 42(11), 1848-1854.
Svihla, V., & Linn, M. C. (2012). A Design-based Approach to Fostering Understanding of Global Climate
        Change. International Journal of Science Education, 34(5), 651-676.
The Design-Based Research Collective. (2003). Design-based research: An emerging paradigm for educational
        inquiry. Educational Researcher, 32(1), 5­8.

Acknowledgments
This research is supported by an Interdisciplinary Research grant from the College of Education in cooperation
with the Office of the Provost, University of New Mexico. We also acknowledge prior NSF funding (PFI
#917919) for the technology development, though the views presented are our own.

© ISLS                                                                                                       366
