CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                               Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

The Role of Identities in the Process of Knowledge Construction in
                                                 CSCL settings

            Murat Oztok, OISE / University of Toronto, 252 Bloor Street West, Toronto, Canada,
                                                murat.oztok@utoronto.ca

         Abstract: The learning scientists have argued that knowledge construction is a process of
         collective   thinking   within     a   learning  community.      Thus,    knowledge    construction   is
         simultaneously an individual and social process that requires group cognition and situated
         meanings. However, while the CSCL researchers have investigated the situated knowledge in
         the process of collective thinking, little work has been done to fully understand how different
         identity categories play a role in sense-making and knowledge construction. This research,
         therefore, explored in detail how individuals utilize their different identity categories to make
         situated   meanings   when   they    collaborate   with  each  other   in  the process   of knowledge
         construction in online learning environments. Results demonstrated that individuals do not
         experience online learning through only one aspect of their identity but rather that learning
         experiences   evoke   different    elements  of  their   identities  that are  used continuously    and
         simultaneously    when   they    collaborate with    each other   at the  every  phase   of knowledge
         construction.

Introduction
The   learning sciences   literature has  long   argued   that learning   is simultaneously  an   individual, social,  and
cultural process that involves collaboration and active participation in learning communities (Brown, Collins, &
Duguid, 1989). Exploring active participation in online learning communities, CSCL literature suggests that
there is a close    relationship between      collaboration and   identity   development   (Ke,   Chávez,   Causarano,  &
Causarano, 2011). Socio-cultural learning theories explains this link by arguing that learning is about practices
and activities in cultural worlds (Holland, Lachicotte Jr, Skinner, & Cain, 2001), where identities are central for
participation  (Gutiérrez  &  Rogoff,     2003). Analyzing     relationships  among     practice, identity, and    learning,
scholars have conceptualized learning as an aspect of practice-based identity and defined identity as a result of
learning through practice (Lave & Wenger, 1991). Such an understanding is particularly important since it
"reconceptualizes   learning  from   an   in-the-head phenomenon      to  a   matter of  engagement,   participation,  and
membership     in a community"       (Nasir  &  Cooks,   2009   p. 42).   Thus, building   upon   socio-cultural   learning
theories, learning scientists have argued that learning is tied to the context (Cole, 1996) and that identity is one
concept through which individuals make sense of their context (Wenger, 1998).
         However, while CSCL research has deemed identity as an important concept in understanding how
students engage with each other (Oztok, 2012), little work has been done to fully understand how different
identity categories (e.g., race, gender, class, profession, or ethnicity) play a role in sense-making and knowledge
construction. Previous research has understudied how students make sense of the subject-matter in relation to
how   they perceive   themselves     and  their peers as   they   involve  in the  process  of knowledge     construction.
Specifically,  understanding  the    role of  identities in the   process  of knowledge    construction  is  still a major
challenge for the learning sciences (Nasir & Hand, 2008) and CSCL research (Ke et al., 2011). This research,
therefore, explores how individuals utilize their different identity categories to make situated meanings when
they collaborate with each other in the process of knowledge construction in online learning environments.

Background and Rationale
Since knowledge construction is not a mere exchange of information but requires coherence and convergence
among    participants (Suthers,  2006),   individuals    need  to  make   situated  meanings   in  collaborative   learning
practices (Stahl, 2010). Considering the importance of sense-making for collaboration (Scardamalia & Bereiter,
1994)  and  knowledge     construction    (Stahl &   Hesse,    2009), I   argue that   by exploring   how   identities  are
manifested  in    threads and  how   students    utilize their identities  to  cultivate, share,  discuss,  and    negotiate
meanings,  CSCL     research  can understand     the  processes   by  which   individuals  make   situated  meanings   and
construct knowledge in online learning environments. Indeed, employing the concept of identity for exploring
how   individuals  make   sense  of  the  context invites   a  discussion    about the  meaning   of the concept    and its
appropriateness as a theoretical framework to explore knowledge construction.
         The concept of identity has always been at the center for many political, philosophical, economic, or
academic debates. Academically, it has been deemed vital by many disciplines; yet, identity means different
things to different scholars from different disciplines. Indeed, notions of identity are as diverse as the bodies of
literature that have taken up the concept. Fields as diverse as psychology, sociology, humanities, and philosophy
offer discipline-specific conceptualizations and definitions of identity. While other definitions exist, the field of

© ISLS                                                                                                                 368
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                                  Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

education is mostly influenced by psychological and sociological conceptualizations and much of the debate
around identity in educational research derives from the tensions between these two perspectives (Buckingham,
2008). Psychological perspectives are built upon the idea that identity is a single state that one achieves over
time and development (Erikson, 1968). According to this perspective, individuals have a coherent and authentic
self that is internally consistent and inexorable. Currently, socio-culturally informed learning scientists have
begun to move from this normative perspective and have suggested that identity is a complex and continuously
shifting phenomenon and that it is context-based and linked to the learning practices (Esmonde, 2009).
          Socio-cultural learning theories conceptualize identities as enactments within figured worlds (Holland
et al., 2001), where individuals' practices are constrained or enabled through sets of norms (Nasir & Cooks,
2009): "[w]ithin these figured worlds, identity is constructed as individuals both act with agency in authoring
themselves and are acted upon by social others as they are positioned ..." (p. 41). In this sense, identities are
subject positions readily available for individuals and these identities are performed or enacted as individuals
engage  with   each   other. That    is, identity  is something   people   perform   or  practice in   collaborative    learning
situations,  as  opposed     to  something      people    have.   However,     identity  enactments     are   not  neutral   or
straightforward; rather, they are guided through social, cultural, political, or historical symbols (Jenkins, 2008):
"[identity do] not, and cannot, make people do anything; it is, rather, people who make and do identity, for their
own reasons and purposes" (p.9). Thus, identity is conceptualized as simultaneously an individual and a social
practice.
          Employing the concept of identity as a theoretical lens to analyze threaded discussions can provide
means   for  understanding    how    individuals   perceive    themselves   in  relation  to  others  when    they engage    in
collaborative learning practices. Particularly, depending on the context in which individuals collaborate, they
choose  to   saliently use   different    identities   (Wenger,   1998),   through     which  they    analyze their     previous
experiences (Holland et al., 2001) while they make sense of the present subject-matter (Nasir & Cooks, 2009).
Individuals'  identities, in    this sense,  reflect   sets of   meanings      derived from   negotiations,   agreements,    or
disagreements that occur in the process of collaboration (Gutiérrez & Rogoff, 2003). Indeed, the CSCL research
has  already  shown    that  students    engage    in  shared  knowledge-building      discussions    when  they   share  their
experiences with one other and build on each others' thoughts to interpret the learning materials (Arvaja, 2012).
Therefore, by analyzing how individuals enact their identities in threaded discussions, one can understand the
cognitive processes by which collaboration enables knowledge construction, meaning-making (Stahl, 2010) and
shared  understanding   (Suthers,    2006).     Thus,  CSCL    research    should  explore   how  identities  play  a   role in
cultivation, distribution, and construction of knowledge.

Current Research
This study   explores  how    individuals    manifest   and    utilize different  aspects  of   their identities  (i.e. gender,
profession,  or ethnicity)   in the  process    of knowledge     construction   through   multiple    case studies (Creswell,
2006).  In  order  to  purposefully   select    cases, we   (the author   and  his colleagues)   analyzed   the   participants'
biography pages (or profile pages, which allow students to create their identities and their online existence by
introducing themselves with their own words along with their picture or avatar) and identified two individuals
who can maximize the exploration of the phenomenon. For deciding the cases, we paid considerable attention to
choosing individuals who utilize a number of identities. For each of the two case studies, we created an online
persona by analyzing their profile pages and examined how these online personas are enacted when individuals
engage with each other in a collaborative knowledge construction process.
          Data  is collected  from    a   fully online  graduate     education  course  (N=13)    offered  at a   large  North-
American    research   university that    took  place  in Winter     2012. The   course  comprised    twelve  modules,    each
corresponding to one week, in which students discussed weekly readings. Each week, one or two students acted
as moderators. They facilitated discussion throughout the week, kept discussions on track, and finally offered a
summary of the week's issues, providing opportunities for sustained discourse, increased interaction, and rich
discussions.

Analyzing Knowledge Construction and Identity Manifestations
In order to understand how individuals make sense of themselves, of their peers, and of the subject matter
through their identities, we (the author and his colleagues) examined the online discussions through "interaction
analysis model" (inter-rater consistency is .82), identified threads with knowledge construction, and analyzed
identity manifestations in those threads in relation to knowledge construction. For this research, threads are
analyzed semantically since semantic analysis "more accurately represents each groups' development of ideas
over time" (Wise & Chiu, 2011, p. 458).
          Interaction analysis model (Gunawardena, Lowe, & Anderson, 1997) is employed for examining the
process   of knowledge    construction.     It  is based    on   the socio-cultural    learning theories,   theoretically  and
empirically  grounded,    specifically    developed     for analyzing     asynchronous    threaded    discussions,  and   have
already   been  employed     by  CSCL      researchers    (e.g., Ke    et al., 2011;   Wise   &   Chiu,    2011).  The   model

© ISLS                                                                                                                     369
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                               Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

conceptualizes    knowledge      construction as   a process   of   negotiation  in which    meanings,     perspectives,  and
perceptions   play   roles.  While   not  strictly sequential,  interaction   analysis model    suggests    five phases    for
knowledge construction to occur: 1) sharing and comparing of information, 2) discovery and exploration of
dissonance or inconsistency among participants, 3) negotiation of meaning of knowledge co-construction, 4)
testing  and  modification,    and   5)  phrasing   of agreement    and   applications   of  newly  constructed    meaning.
According to this model, interactions begin by sharing and elaborating ideas (phase 1), leading individuals to
identify  potential  conflicts   among   each other    (phase 2). Individuals   build  on   these  conflicts by  negotiating
meanings    and   perspectives   (phase   3); then,    they  revise their  ideas and   perceptions    (phase   4), allowing
individuals apply their new knowledge (phase 5).
          Since individuals do not exist as physical beings but enact their identities through language-in-use in
online learning environments, discourse analysis is employed to explore how language-in-use mediates between
identities, meanings,   and    practices. Discourse    analysis   reveals how    identities  regulate   particular forms   of
meanings and social experiences by deconstructing the relationships among saying, doing, and being in the
language-in-use (Gee, 2011):
          If I say anything to you, you cannot really understand it fully if you do not know what I am
          trying to do and who I am trying to be by saying it. To understand anything fully, you need to
          know who is saying it and what the person saying it is trying to do. (p. 2)
According to this perspective, language-in-use not only gets its meaning from the context in which it is used but
also  it creates, sustains,   or transforms   meanings,     negotiations, and   practices  in the  context.  Thus,  it is  an
essential   tool  to critically  analyze  the  otherwise     hidden   intersections  between      identity enactments     and
participants' pedagogical practices in technologically-mediated environments.
          In order to understand how identities are manifested in language-in-use, I employ seven interrelated
building    tasks to  analyze    the discourse     (Gee, 2011):   (1) Significance,    (2)   Practices, (3)   Identities,  (4)
Relationships, (5) Politics, (6) Connections, and (7) Sign systems and Knowledge. Specifically, we semantically
analyzed    each  note in   a thread  and interpreted    the  meanings    and identities  in  that particular note  through
building tasks in order to explain how individuals choose to enact particular identities and how such identities
affect their engagements with each other. Indeed, while all building tasks may not be readily available in all text
and while some building tasks may be more salient then others, each building task can provide means for
understanding how individuals move through and within the online learning environment. Therefore we used
the building tasks in relation to each other and triangulated between them.
          Furthermore, it is important to note that I do not conceptualize identity manifestations in a Cartesian
sense (that identities are either present or absent in a particular note) but rather argue that identities exist in
various forms and are almost always so well blended into practices and meanings. That is, language-in-use not
only conveys academic knowledge but also communicates bits of identity manifestations; either explicitly (i.e.
As an artist, I think ...) or implicitly (i.e. I don't agree with you because I had problems with my Grade 7 class,
...)

Results
We identified 16 threads in which knowledge construction happened while students collaborated with each
other. Of those 16 threads, we identified 9 threads in which our both case studies engaged with each other. Here
I present 3 instances (due to space limitations) of how the two cases utilize their identities in those knowledge-
construction threads.
          Meet Michelle and Xiaomei. Michelle is a part-time PhD student. As a White-Canadian, she lives in
Beijing with her daughter, where she works as an English lecturer at a university. She defines herself as an
activist and hopes to employ critical pedagogy in her dissertation. Xiaomei is from China. She is a full-time
PhD student and teaching assistant at her university. She got her master's degree from an English university,
where she taught English as a Second Language courses. Her research interest is teaching English with digital
media.
          In week 2, class discussed the pedagogical potentials of web 2.0 and digital media. While Michelle has
many identities to choose from, she enacted her "political-activist" identity and drew attention to political issues
as she engaged with subject-matter. Michelle deconstructed the social and political aspects of using digital
media in schools. This is, indeed, what Gunawardena et al. (1997) identify as "phase 1: sharing and comparing
of information"    in  their  interaction analysis   model.   Then,   Michelle   challenged   the  perspectives    offered in
weekly readings by articulating her concerns about the tyranny that social media creates (phase 3) and, in later
notes, invited her peers to consider the motives behind the knowledge produced in social media (phase 4). Her
peers built on these ideas by noting the importance of social, political, and historical structures and power
relations in the reproduction of knowledge (phase 5). In response to her peers, Michelle further analyzed how
mainstream newspapers influence both public opinion and public policies regarding schooling (phase 5). In the
same threaded discussion, however, Xiaomei enacted her "teacher" identity and drew from her experiences as a
teacher to make sense of the weekly readings (phase 1). Specifically, Xiaomei embedded her disagreement with

© ISLS                                                                                                                    370
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                            Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

her  peers (that cell phone   use  should  be restricted  for students)  in her  teaching  experience  (phase   3). She
explained   how  she  lets her  students  use a  dictionary application  on   their cell phones   for  writing  courses,
suggesting such technologies are useful in class (phase 4). Xiaomei further posited that although a few students
surfed on the internet instead of studying, her experience also suggests that mobile phones have a pedagogical
value (phase 3). She concluded that, "as teachers, we need to be not only innovative but also motivate our
students to use technology for teaching and learning" (phase 5). In this threaded discussion, while Michelle
enacted her identity as an activist, Xiaomei enacted her teacher identity. However, either an activist or teacher,
they both interpreted the subject-matter according to their own perspectives or backgrounds and in return their
peers perceived    them    as how    they  enacted  their  identities in that   particular thread.  As    this example
demonstrates, identities can provide situated-meanings by which individuals can make sense of their learning
practices.
          The topic in week 4 was teaching and learning in Computer-Mediated-Communication (CMC) and
social-networking sites. In a thread about communication types, Michelle drew from her teaching and living
experience in China for more than a decade and suggested that asynchronous communication suits her students
best (phase 1). In another note, Michelle disagreed with a claim in the readings (that since Chinese students are
shy,  they  prefer not    to  participate in  discussions;  thus, they   underachieve    compared   to  their  Western
counterparts) (phase 2). She further argued that while her Chinese students are shy, online courses suit them
because they are comfortable expressing their thoughts and opinions (phase 3). She concluded that, contrary to
the readings, her Chinese students are successful in online courses (phase 3). In a later note, one of her peers
asked Michelle whether she would think differently if her students were asked to use wikis (since wiki-based
web   applications allow   individuals to  edit each others   work)   instead of   asynchronous  threaded  discussions
(phase 4). Responding to this note, Michelle reappraised her thoughts (phase 3) and considered the different
pedagogical  values   that different asynchronous    communication     types  have  (phase  5). In the  same   threaded
discussions, Xiaomei directly engaged with Michelle enacting her Chinese and teacher identity while drawing
from her experience in England and Canada. She articulated her perspective about communication types (phase
1) and particularly provided her insights about editing someone else's work in a wiki-based application (phase
2). Xiaomei indicated that the idea of changing another's work without permission is intimidating since she
believes that "it is like saying that you think that what you have to say is more important or more valid than
what someone else has to say" (phase 1). She suggested that when she was teaching in China no one edited
anyone's work to maintain the group harmony; thus, she saw no pedagogical value in collaborative wiki-based
web applications (phase 2). Therefore, based on her experience in China, Xiaomei disagreed with her peers as
well as with the weekly readings (phase 3). However, in a later note, she elaborated on her teaching experience
in England   and   suggested  that wiki-based   applications  has  certain  pedagogical  value   since her students    in
England    were  able  to  work  productively   and comfortably    in  wiki-based   assignments    (phase 4).  As   it is
exemplified in this thread, Michelle and Xiaomei used their different identity traits in a single thread: they both
enacted their teacher identity in interpreting the weekly readings; however, while Michelle further developed
her knowledge as a Western person living in China, Xiaomei further enhanced her understanding building on
her experience as a Chinese person living in a Western country.
          In week 8, the class discussed the social and cultural issues of teaching and learning in CMC settings.
In a thread about authenticity of learning context, Michelle enacted her maternal identity. Even though such an
identity was not salient in Michelle's other notes, being a mother was one of the identity traits to shape her
experience   in  this particular  collaborative  process.  Challenging   one    of  her  peers' perspective,   Michelle
explained how she actively volunteers for her kids' school (and according to her, it is not common practice in
China) and argued that a authentic learning context requires collaboration between parents and teachers (phase
3). Another class-mate (also enacting maternal identity) built on Michelle's perspective by further elaborating
her experience with her kid's school and suggested that the weekly readings offer an idealized understanding of
what authenticity is and unfortunately do not reflect real-life situations (phase 4). Summarizing the weekly
discussion and affirming her classmates (phase 5), Michelle synthesized weekly readings and noted that "most
of us have the best of intentions as teachers and parents, but as you put it so well, life... happens!". In the same
thread, Xiaomei enacted her artist identity to make sense of the weekly readings. She agreed with her peers and
further underscored the importance of social and cultural issues in creating an authentic learning context by
providing examples from her learning art experience (phase 5). Specifically, she analyzed the role of culturally-
relevant materials in learning local arts and explained how such materials helped her as an artist (phase 4).
According to Xiaomei, as an artist, "authenticity is about individuals themselves rather than the material itself or
[its] geographical situation". Furthermore, to some extent, Xiaomei enacted her student identity (though not a
unique identity trait, it was saliently used in this particular thread). Summarizing her learning experience in
China, Xiaomei described she felt disconnected when her arts teacher used Western paintings as course material
and disengaged because the material was not meaningful enough (phase 4). She also reflected on her current
learning experience in Canada and suggested that it did not differ from China in terms of authenticity (phase 1).
As   this instance illustrates,  while Michelle   and Xiaomei     had   similar  perspectives   on the  importance     of

© ISLS                                                                                                              371
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                               Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

authenticity for learning, they enacted two different identity traits: Michelle is a mother and Xiaomei is an artist.
Furthermore, this instance shows that individuals not only utilize their basic identity categories (i.e. ethnicity or
profession) but also draw from their broader out-of-classroom identities when they collaborate with each other
in the process of knowledge construction.

Discussion
Three instances provided in this paper represent three different and unique ways that identities play a role in
collaboration and knowledge construction. In the first example, Michelle and Xiaomei utilized their identities to
make   situated meanings    in  their interpretations    of the weekly    readings.  Furthermore,   when  Michelle    and
Xiaomei enacted certain identities, their peers accepted them as such and engaged with them accordingly. In the
second example, both Michelle and Xiaomei enacted multiple identities at once; that is, while Michelle was a
teacher and a Westerner living in China, Xiaomei was a teacher and a Chinese person living in Western world.
In the   third  example,    Michelle     and  Xiaomei     had  similar   perspectives  and   agreed with   each   other's
conceptualizations, they enacted different identities; thus, they explained their perspectives from different point
of views.
         Taken together, these three instances can provide initial understanding for the role that identities play
in collaborative   learning  activities.  For  example,   this  research  shows   that  individuals bring  their  various
identities into   the   collaborative learning    processes   and   utilize their different  identities under    different
circumstances for different reasons. That is, individuals do not experience online learning through only one
aspect  of  their  identity but  rather   that   learning experiences    evoke   different elements  of   their identities
(Buckingham, 2008) that are used continuously and simultaneously (Gee, 2000) as they collaborate with each
other. However, despite the variety of identity traits being used, in all these situations, identities play a canonical
role: they provide situated meanings for individuals to draw from their experiences in order to make sense of
their learning experiences. Depending on the context in which they participate, they choose to saliently use
different identities, through which they analyze their previous experiences while they make sense of the present
subject matter. Thus, they have different learning experiences and outcomes since learning is an aspect of
practice-based identity (Nasir & Cooks, 2009). Identities, in this sense, become socio-cultural, historical, and
cognitive artifacts by which individuals legitimize their learning experiences (Lave & Wenger, 1991) within
their communities of practice (Wenger, 1998). This finding is align with the learning sciences literature in
suggesting that:
         identities allows a way to understand the intrapersonal dimensions of learning and to capture
         the ways that learning settings can support or fail to support not just the acquisition of skills
         and knowledge but a deep sense of connection with participants. This connection is more than
         just membership or belonging. In this way, participation in learning settings extends beyond
         learning (though learning is certainly critical) to the very definition of who one is and who one
         is in the process of becoming through participation. (Nasir & Hand, 2008, p. 176)
While this research affirms the existing literature, it further explains how identities create, support, and sustain
the "interpersonal dimension of learning" by providing examples of how individuals make sense of each other
and of their learning in relation to their identities.
         This research also provides initial understanding for the role of identities in the process of knowledge
construction. The current CSCL research (e.g., Gunawardena et al., 1997; Wise & Chiu, 2011) suggests that
knowledge construction begins with basic interactions that facilitate the sharing of individuals' experiences.
Once the foundation for common ground is established, meaningful dialogue and collective reflection takes
place. Through the process of negotiations, individuals provide detailed analysis or criticism, drawing from their
experiences  to   construct  new  knowledge.      When    new  knowledge     is constructed, individuals  enhance   their
insights by developing an understanding that enables them to reconsider their understandings. "This reflects the
cohesive   conception    of collaborative    learning  according    to   which  learning   through  discussions   can be
conceptualized    as  developing, challenging,    and  re-conceptualizing    ideas" (Arvaja,  2012,  p. 99). While    this
research   affirms the  current  literature,  it further  explains  that identities are  manifested  at every   phase of
knowledge construction; however, they play a unique role in each different phase. For example, while identities
can provide basic information about an individual in phase 1, they can they provide further detailed information
about individuals and their perceptions in phase 2. In phase 3, individuals rely on their identities to challenge
current perspectives    offered by   their peers   or  by weekly   readings.    While individuals  analyze the   learning
material or the subject-matter in relation to their identities in phase 4, they explain what they learned from that
particular discussion   in  relation  to their   experiences  phase 5.   In other words,   individuals  simply  use their
identities to articulate what their prior thoughts are in the early stages of knowledge construction. Then, they use
their experiences    to further develop    or  challenge  the  existing  perspectives  in  middle  stages of knowledge
construction. Finally, in later stages, they find a common ground and reconsider their thoughts and further
explain what they learned in relation to their identities.

© ISLS                                                                                                              372
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                          Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

Conclusion
This research is built upon the idea that learning is simultaneously an individual and social process that involves
collaborative practices within learning communities (Brown et al., 1989). One approach to understand how
social practices mediate cognitive activity (Cole, 1996) is to understand the role of identities in the process of
knowledge   construction. Indeed,   identities provide  opportunities  for individuals to  make  situated meanings
(Gutiérrez & Rogoff, 2003; Lave & Wenger, 1991) and incorporate aspects of themselves into the learning
practice (Nasir & Cooks, 2009; Wenger, 1998). Analyzing in detail and demonstrating the role identities play in
collaborative  learning activities, this research  suggests that identities  provide  more dialogic and   reflective
interaction; therefore, identities are not tangential to the collaborative learning practice but rather a central part
of it.
         The learning scientists have long argued that collaborative learning is a process of collective thinking
(Stahl, 2006) and that it is manifested in and by dialogue (Sawyer, 2006). The CSCL researchers, therefore,
have   focused on  the  situated    knowledge   in the  process  of collective  thinking   and  contended  that the
development of well-articulated identities in online learning situations can actually build a greater sociology of
learning (Ke et al., 2011). Indeed, using individuals' own experiences as a source of learning "can support
student agency... by giving opportunities to make personal sense through personal lives" to learning activities
(Arvaja, 2012, p. 86). While this research affirms the current perspectives, it further explains in detail how
identities play a role in each and every stage of collaborative knowledge construction processes.
         Along with its epistemological contributions, this research also provides conceptual understandings for
the CSCL research. Studying knowledge construction as a dialog distributed among individuals and exploring
the collective discourse through individuals' identities go beyond focusing on cognitive artifacts and capture the
socio-cultural and historical nature of situated meaning-making. By conceptualizing knowledge construction as
a socio-cultural and historical process can provide opportunities for understanding knowledge construction not
as limited  in temporal   time-scales  (e.g.,  Arvaja,  2012;  Mercer,  2008)  but as  a  long-term identity based
collaborative process.
         The findings should be considered in relation to the limitations of the study. First, while this study
provides  important guidance     toward   understanding    the role of  identities in  the process  of knowledge
construction, it must be noted that this study is just one preliminary investigation. Results are based on one
course  and two  case   studies. Thus,   more  research is needed   in order to make   stronger claims about  such
relationships between identity and knowledge construction. Second, identities in this study are not analyzed in
relation to the concept of power. Indeed, including the concept of power and broader societal structures in
analyzing identity can provide better insights about the constraints of collaborative work. Furthermore, in this
study, identities are striped from their social, political, and historical meanings since the aim of the research was
not to provide hidden curriculum of collaborative learning practices but rather was to analyze the ways in which
individuals utilize their identities for their learning. Thus, a research with more critical agenda should consider
such meanings in its analysis.
         Overall, this research suggests that identities are in the center of collaborative knowledge construction.
As the theme of CSCL 2013 argues, this research supports the current understanding but further explores the
phenomenon at different levels. However, more research is needed to confirm or challenge the findings of this
research in order to provide better and stronger understating of the role of identities in the process of knowledge
construction.

References
Arvaja, M. (2012). Personal and shared experiences as resources for meaning making in a philosophy of science
         course. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 7(1), 85­108.
         doi:10.1007/s11412-011-9137-5
Brown, J. S., Collins, A., & Duguid, P. (1989). Situated cognition and the culture of learning. Educational
         researcher, 18(1), 32­42.
Buckingham, D. (2008). Introducing Identity. In D. Buckingham (Ed.), Youth, Identity, and Digital Media (pp.
         1­22). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press Journals.
Cole, M. (1996). Cultural psychology: a once and future discipline. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Creswell, J. W. (2006). Qualitative Inquiry and Research Design: Choosing among Five Approaches (2nd ed.).
         Thousands Oak, CA: Sage.
Erikson, E. H. (1968). Identity: Youth and Crisis. New York, NY: Norton.
Esmonde, I. (2009). Mathematics Learning in Groups: Analyzing Equity in Two Cooperative Activity
         Structures. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 18(2), 247­284. doi:10.1080/10508400902797958
Gee, J. P. (2000). Chapter 3: Identity as an Analytic Lens for Research in Education. Review of Research in
         Education, 25(1), 99­125. doi:10.3102/0091732X025001099
Gee, J. P. (2011). An Introduction to Discourse Analysis: Theory and Method (3rd ed.). New York, NY:
         Routledge.

© ISLS                                                                                                          373
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                              Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

Gunawardena, C. N., Lowe, C. A., & Anderson, T. (1997). Analysis Of A Global Online Debate And The
       Development Of An Interaction Analysis Model For Examining Social Construction Of Knowledge In
       Computer Conferencing. Journal of Educational Computing Research, 17(4), 397­431.
Gutiérrez, K. D., & Rogoff, B. (2003). Cultural ways of learning: Individual traits or repertoires of practice.
       Educational Researcher, 32(5), 19­25.
Holland, D., Jr Lachicotte, W., Skinner, D., & Cain, C. (2001). Identity and Agency in Cultural Worlds.
       Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Jenkins, R. (2008). Social Identity (3rd ed.). New York, NY: Taylor & Francis.
Ke, F., Chávez, A. F., Causarano, P.-N. L., & Causarano, A. (2011). Identity presence and knowledge building:
       Joint emergence in online learning environments? International Journal of Computer-Supported
       Collaborative Learning, 6(3), 349­370. doi:10.1007/s11412-011-9114-z
Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated Learning: Legitimate Peripheral Participation. New York, NY:
       Cambridge University Press.
Mercer, N. (2008). The Seeds of Time: Why Classroom Dialogue Needs a Temporal Analysis. Journal of the
       Learning Sciences, 17(1), 33­59. doi:10.1080/10508400701793182
Nasir, N. S., & Cooks, J. (2009). Becoming a Hurdler: How Learning Settings Afford Identities. Anthropology
       & Education Quarterly, 40(1), 41­61. doi:10.1111/j.1548-1492.2009.01027.x
Nasir, N. S., & Hand, V. (2008). From the Court to the Classroom: Opportunities for Engagement, Learning,
       and Identity in Basketball and Classroom Mathematics. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 17(2), 143­
       179. doi:10.1080/10508400801986108
Oztok, M. (2012). Tacit knowledge in online learning: community, identity, and social capital. Technology,
       Pedagogy and Education, 1­16. doi:10.1080/1475939X.2012.720414
Sawyer, R. K. (Ed.). (2006). The Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences. New York: Cambridge
       University Press.
Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (1994). Computer Support for Knowledge-Building Communities. Journal of
       the Learning Sciences, 3(3), 265­283. doi:10.1207/s15327809jls0303_3
Stahl, G. (2006). Group Cognition: Computer Support for Building Collaborative Knowledge. Cambridge, MA:
       The MIT Press.
Stahl, G. (2010). Guiding group cognition in CSCL. International Journal of Computer-Supported
       Collaborative Learning, 5(3), 255­258. doi:10.1007/s11412-010-9091-7
Stahl, G., & Hesse, F. (2009). Paradigms of shared knowledge. International Journal of Computer-Supported
       Collaborative Learning, 4(4), 365­369. doi:10.1007/s11412-009-9075-7
Suthers, D. D. (2006). Technology affordances for intersubjective meaning making: A research agenda for
       CSCL. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 1(3), 315­337.
       doi:10.1007/s11412-006-9660-y
Wenger, E. (1998). Communities of Practice: Learning, Meaning, and Identity. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
       University Press.
Wise, A., & Chiu, M. (2011). Analyzing temporal patterns of knowledge construction in a role-based online
       discussion. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 6(3), 445­470.
       doi:10.1007/s11412-011-9120-1

© ISLS                                                                                                          374
