CSCL 2013 Proceedings                    Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

     Motivated Interactions with Digital Games in a Science Center

         Cathy Tran & Ole Smørdal, University of Oslo, Boks 1072 Blindern, NO-0316, Oslo, Norway,
                               Email: ctran27@gmail.com, ole.smordal@uv.uio.no

         Abstract: There is untapped value in adopting motivation theories to inform the design of
         educational technology. Achievement goal theory explains why students whose primary aim is
         to learn and understand (mastery goal) think and act differently from those who focus mostly
         on competition (performance goal). We use self-reports to identify students with different
         motivational patterns and video analyses to understand how learners' motivational profiles
         relate to their interactions with a digital science game with hands-on features.

Introduction
Decades of research point to the crucial role of motivation in students' engagement and learning, suggesting that
deep and  continuous   learning does  not  depend    only   on   amount   of engagement  but  reason  for engagemen t
(Schunk, Pintrich & Meece, 2007). For example, learners can be motivated by their desire for content mastery,
for personal progress,    and for   outperforming    others.  Using  a   mixed-methods   approach,   we   look at how
motivation  relates to visitors'    interactions  with   digital games    in a  collaborative science center   setting.
Specifically, our research question is as follow: How are learners' motivational profiles related to how they
interact with each other and with digital media artifacts in the science center?
         Though research on motivational theories and their applications to education has generated thousands
of journal articles, there is relatively little empirical evidence about whether these theories also hold up in
educational  technology   settings. We   highlight   the  achievement     goal theory (Dweck    &  Leggett, 1988)    of
motivation to offer researchers, educators, and designers useful and theoretically-grounded constructs that can
be empirically studied in digital media learning contexts. Achievement goals reflect both the reasons why an
individual is motivated, as well as the standard against which they judge their success--and these reasons have
different cognitive, affective, and behavioral implications. Researchers have distinguished two achievement goal
orientations toward learning: mastery and performance. A mastery goal focuses on developing and mastering
skills and knowledge whereas a performance goal focuses on appearing competent such as by outperforming
others or by avoiding appearing incompetent (Anderman & Wolters, 2006). Empirical evidence suggests that
adopting  mastery   goals has  positive  effects,   including  increased  cognitive  engagement   in learning,   deeper
cognitive strategies, and greater interest in the task (Dweck & Leggett, 1988). The literature for performance
goals has been less clear, with research indicating that the important distinction is whether students adopt the
approach form of focusing on appearing highly competent or the avoid form of focusing on not appearing to be
the least competent in a group. Furthermore, these goals can be complementary, as a learner can be both high in
mastery and performance-approach goals. Much of the research on achievement goals has been conducted in
classrooms or research labs, and we extend this work by examining implications of such goals in the context of
an out-of-school digital media environment.

Study Design and Analyses
Task: Heat Pump Game
The  heat pump  exhibit   used  in  this study   is part of  a   larger exhibition about energy  of  the  future at the
Norwegian Museum of Science and Technology. The exhibition resembles a carnival with game booths about
sources of energy such as sun, wind, and ocean waves. The heat pump game, designed and produced by our
research lab, teaches students about energy transfer and the relation among pressure, condensation, evaporation,
and temperature. Players learn about the general function of a heat pump--that it moves heat from inside to
outside and vice versa--on the start screen before being shown a screen of the zoomed-in heat pump with
details of its inner workings. Players are challenged to keep the house temperature consistently warm throughout
the year by operating the heat pump through physically rotating a metal crank using the appropriate speed and
direction. Two metal handprints on the table change temperature to align with the movement of heat in the
simulation. As such, students operate the heat pump compressor using the physical crank to heat up or cool
down the house as the heat pump's inner workings dynamically move in real time on the screen. The result
screen following the game shows the percentage of time the house stayed within the desirable zone of warmth as
well as the amount of energy saved.

© ISLS                                                                                                            369
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                 Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

 Figure 1. Screenshots of the heat pump game during the play (left) and of the results screen at the end (right).

Preliminary Analyses
For our heat pump game, we administered self-report measures of achievement goals to identify high school
students with different motivational profiles, as indicated by their reported levels of mastery, performance-
approach, and performance-avoid goals. The self-report items that measured mastery, performance-approach,
and performance-avoid   goal   orientations  were adapted   from    the Patterns  of   Adaptive Learning   Survey
(www.umich.edu/~pals/manuals.html). All three goal orientation constructs were scored on a 7-point Likert
scale ranging from 1 (not at all true for me) to 7 (very true for me). Mastery goals focused on learning and
understanding (e.g., "My   goal  is  to learn as  much   as I can");    performance-approach    goals focused  on
demonstrating ability and outperforming others (e.g., "My goal is to look smarter than other students"); and
performance-  avoid  goals focused   on  not  looking dumb   (e.g., "My   goal is   to avoid looking  like I can't
understand the material"). Individual items in the specific goal constructs were averaged to create a final score
from 1-7. This allowed us to select students of different motivational types, during a classroom field trip, for
video-based analysis of their interactions with the exhibit to complement the quantitative accounts of their
motivation. Our preliminary analyses show differences in the ways students attend to different parts of the
screens such as the temperature meter, the scientific simulation, and the point screen. These choices are related
to their motivation as well as levels of higher-order thinking, help-seeking behaviors, and responses to questions
that press for deeper understanding.

Implications: Theoretical and Practical
Our research illustrates how the same event may have entirely different impacts on motivation and learning
depending on the goals students bring to an activity. In doing so, we extend the current theoretical literature on
achievement goals by providing specific examples of the process by which this may happen in the context of
game-based learning.  On a practical level, understanding how certain game elements afford different types of
interaction for students with different motivations can provide insights about how to design game environments
that promote adaptive motivation and effective learning.

References
Anderman, E. M. & Wolters, C. A. (2006). Goals, values, and affect: Influences on student motivation. In P.
       Alexander & P. Winne (Eds.), Handbook of educational psychology (2nd ed., pp. 369-389). Mahwah, NJ:
       Erlbaum.
Dweck,   C. S., &    Leggett, E. L.   (1988).  A  social-cognitive   approach    to  motivation  and  personality.
       Psychological Review, 95, 256-273.
Schunk, D. H., Pintrich, P. R., & Meece, J. (2007). Motivation in education: Theory, research and applications
       (3rd ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Merrill Prentice-Hall.

Acknowledgements
This research was conducted as part of the Mixed Reality Interactions across Contexts of Learning (MIRACLE)
project, funded by the Research Council of Norway. The authors would like to thank the CHANGE research
group in the Department of Educational Research and InterMedia for their feedback on earlier versions of this
paper.

© ISLS                                                                                                        370
