CSCL 2013 Proceedings                 Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

             Enhancing Pre-Service History Teachers' Historical
 Reasoning Through a Computer-Supported Collaboration Script
          Michiel Voet, Bram De Wever, Ghent University, Henri Dunantlaan 2, B-9000 Gent, Belgium
                          E-mail: michiel.voet@ugent.be, bram.dewever@ugent.be

          Abstract: The study focusses on the use of collaboration scripts to support pre-service history
          teachers' historical reasoning. 18 student dyads collaborated on a historical inquiry activity,
          based on several historical sources. Al dyads were guided by a collaboration script sequencing
          activities, but half of them received additional support to stimulate argumentation. Preliminary
          findings regarding the impact on students' interaction, quality of argumentation and domain-
          specific knowledge will be presented at the conference.

Introduction
Research on history learning has consistently emphasized that students should not only gain insight into the
past, but must also come    to understand   the methods    historians use and  be  able to reason  about    historical
evidence. These competences can be acquired through historical inquiry, which requires students to integrate
information about the past from a variety of sources in order to present their own account of the past (Van Drie
& Van Boxtel, 2008; VanSledright & Limón, 2006). The process of reasoning with information about the past
is generally described as historical reasoning (Monte-Sano, 2010). According to Van Drie and Van Boxtel
(2008), it generally includes one or more of the following components: asking historical questions, analyzing
sources, situating phenomena in context, forming arguments, using substantive concepts and/or using meta-
concepts.  Previous   findings    confirm  that  an  engagement    in  historical  reasoning   promotes     students'
understanding of how historical knowledge is attained, and also increases students' knowledge and recall of the
historical phenomena which they studied (VanSledright & Limón, 2006).
          Although students  cannot  be   expected  to handle  information  in an   experts'  manner,    they   should
nevertheless learn to adopt  an   analyzed approach    when  handling  source  information    (Perfetti, Britt, Rouet,
Georgi, & Mason, 1994). However, this can be very demanding of students, as historical reasoning is a complex
process (Van Drie & Van Boxtel, 2008). Spoehr and Spoehr (1994) argue that argumentation in particular is the
most difficult aspect of historical reasoning. Forming a historical argument is not the same as simply giving
one's point of view, as a claim is worth little without evidence to support it (Monte-Sano, 2010). Within the
domain of history, argumentation is largely a process of informal reasoning, which means that evidence and
arguments have to be weighed against each other to form a conclusion that is never definite, but more or less
probable  (Voss,   Perkings, &    Segal,   1991). Previous   research   confirms   that this  particular   aspect   of
argumentation in history poses a challenge to students. It was found that students generally present several
arguments in support of their claim, but rarely consider counterarguments or weigh arguments pro and contra
(Van Drie, Van Boxtel, Jaspers, & Kanselaar, 2005).
          Van Drie (2005) states that collaborative reasoning tasks can elicit processes that enhance historical
reasoning  and the  learning   of history, as   discussion leads to   higher-level historical reasoning.   Therefore,
computer-supported collaboration scripts seem a fitting approach to support historical reasoning. Collaboration
scripts consist of a set of guidelines describing how students have to collaborate (Dillenbourg & Jermann, 2007).
According to Kollar, Fischer and Slotta (2007), collaboration scripts are particularly suited for open-structured
inquiry activities, such as the ones in history, where a lack of specific instruction may be detrimental to the
learning process. Previous research has demonstrated how a collaboration script can prescribe approaches for
dealing with the task that a student wouldn't spontaneously engage in (Weinberger, Ertl, Fischer, & Mandl,
2005). Therefore, the aim of this study is to examine whether a collaboration script can to stimulate students'
argumentation during historical inquiry activities.

Method
The study was carried out with 36 pre-service history teachers (2 classes) from the second year of a three-year
teacher education program, leading to a bachelor degree of history teacher in the first two grades of secondary
education. The majority of the participants had received no prior higher education before starting with this
program, and enrolled directly after graduating secondary education. Each students was randomly assigned to a
dyad, in which he or she had to collaborate with a student from the other class.
          During a four-hour intervention, student dyads collaborated on an inquiry activity within the WISE
environment (Linn, Clark, & Slotta, 2003). Students had to study a collection of 8 historical sources describing
the English peasants' revolt of 1381. Both fragments of original writings as well as excerpts from texts written
by contemporary historians were included. Each student dyad was asked to review these sources in order to
answer the following question: `What was, according to you, the main cause of the revolt: grievances resulting

© ISLS                                                                                                            373
CSCL 2013 Proceedings               Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

from excessive taxation or complaints about serfdom?" After reviewing all the sources, students had to write an
argumentative text in which they had to explain and defend their point of view.
         Following a quasi-experimental design, students were divided over two conditions. In both conditions,
students received roles to help them study the sources. One student had to act as a critic, while the other one was
assigned the role of summarizer. Each time the students moved on to the next source, they had to change roles.
In both conditions, the task of the critic was to rate the trustworthiness of the source and review the ratings
given to previous sources. In the control condition, the summarizer was asked to examine what information was
important. The summarizer in the experimental condition had to identify the source's point of view regarding
the main cause of the revolts (choosing either grievances resulting from excessive taxation or complaints about
serfdom), and use the information within the source to form arguments supporting or contradicting this point of
view. After studying all sources, student dyads had to discuss the main cause of the rebellion. To stimulate
discussion, each student was asked to defend on of the possible main causes, while their partner had to defend
the other. It is expected that the collaboration script in the experimental condition will result in an increased
attention for argumentation in students' interaction, as well as a higher quality of their argumentative text. It is
also possible that actively using the sources' information to form arguments will promote a better understanding
of the topic.
         Therefore, participants' interaction during the task was be taped and subsequently transcribed, in order
to conduct an analysis focusing on students' participation and the content of their interaction. Next to this,
argumentative text each dyad composed makes it possible to examine the quality of each dyad's argumentation.
Finally, a pre-posttest was conducted to measure students' learning gain. The posttest also included a compact
measure regarding participants` experiences within the CSCL environment.

Results
Whether the experimental condition had an impact on students' interaction, the quality of their argument, or
their learning  gains will be determined through further analysis.     As     the study was recently conducted,
preliminary results will be available by the time of the poster presentation.

References
Dillenbourg, P., & Jermann, P. (2007). Designing integrative scripts. In F. Fischer, I. Kollar, H. Mandl, & J. M.
      Haake (Eds.), Scripting computer-supported collaborative learning (pp. 275­301). New York, NY:
      Springer.
Kollar, I., Fischer, F., & Slotta, J. D. (2007). Internal and external scripts in computer-supported collaborative
      inquiry learning. Learning and Instruction, 17(6), 708­721.
Linn, M., Clark, D., & Slotta, J. (2003). WISE design for knowledge integration. Science Education, 87(4),
      517­538.
Martin, D., & Monte-Sano, C. (2008). Inquiry, controversy, and ambiguous texts: Learning to teach for
      historical thinking. In W. J. Warren & A. D. Cantu (Eds.), History education 101: The past, present, and
      future of teacher preparation (pp. 167­186). Charlotte, NC: Information Age.
Monte-Sano. (2010). Disciplinary literacy in history: An exploration of the historical nature of adolescents'
      writing. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 19(4), 539­568.
Perfetti, C. A., Britt, M. A., Rouet, J.-F., Georgi, M. C., & Mason, R. A. (1994). How students use texts to learn
      and reason about historical uncertainty. In M. Carretero & J. F. Voss (Eds.), Cognitive and instructional
      processes in history and the social sciences. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Spoehr, K. T., & Spoehr, L. W. (1994). Learning to think historically. Educational Psychologist, 29(2), 71­77.
Van Drie, J. (2005). Learning about the past with new technologies. Fostering historical reasoning in computer-
      supported collaborative learning. Retrieved from http://igitur-archive.library.uu.nl/dissertations/2005-
      1220-200137/UUindex.html.
Van Drie, J., & Van Boxtel, C. (2008). Historical reasoning: Towards a framework for analyzing students'
      reasoning about the past. Educational Psychology Review, 20(2), 87­110.
Van Drie, J., Van Boxtel, C., Jaspers, J., & Kanselaar, G. (2005). Effects of representational guidance on
      domain specific reasoning in CSCL. Computers in Human Behavior, 21(4), 575­602.
VanSledright, B., & Limón, M. (2006). Learning and teaching social studies: a review of cognitive research in
      history and geography. In P. A. Alexander & P. H. Winne (Eds.), The handbook of educational
      psychology (2nd ed., pp. 545­570). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Voss, J. F., Perkings, D. N., & Segal, J. W. (1991). Informal reasoning and education. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence
      Erlbaum.
Weinberger, A., Ertl, B., Fischer, F., & Mandl, H. (2005). Epistemic and social scripts in computer-supported
      collaborative learning. Instructional Science, 33(1), 1­30.

© ISLS                                                                                                         374
