CSCL 2013 Proceedings                   Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

           Understanding Participation and Persistence in Online
                                        Peer-to-Peer Learning
                            Sarah Webster, Alisha Alam, June Ahn, Brian S. Butler
                                   University of Maryland, College Park, MD
                 websters@umd.edu, alisha@umd.edu, juneahn@umd.edu, bsbutler@umd.edu

        Abstract:  We   present  early   work    seeking to understand   participation  and persistence   in
        online,  peer-to-peer   learning   environments.  We   obtain   log  data from   the  Peer-to-Peer
        University (P2PU) and: (1) outline our methods to move from raw data to developing metrics
        that can  help  explore  how    to promote  deeper  participation   and persistence   rates  in open
        courses, and (2) describe some preliminary findings about different metrics of participation
        and persistence in P2PU, culled from their log data.
Introduction
Open, online learning is a fast rising phenomenon in computer supported collaborative learning (CSCL). The
growing library of open education resources (OER) combined with increased technology availability has created
trends toward massively open online courses (MOOCs). Highly visible ventures such as Coursera, Udacity, and
EdX have garnered much attention by attracting tens of thousands of learners (and sometimes hundreds of
thousands) to their courses (Pappano, 2012). There are also other types of open online learning paradigms that
are more learner-driven, bottom-up, and peer-to-peer. One such platform is the Peer-to-Peer University (P2PU),
which is the focus of our research. In all of these different online learning platforms, the issue of learner
participation and persistence is critical. Only a small number of learners even finish many of the high profile
MOOC courses (Pappano, 2012), and peer-to-peer learning platforms are directly dependent on teacher and
learner interactions to keep courses robust and active (Ahn, Weng, & Butler, 2013). A ripe area for future
research is to understand metrics of participation and persistence in open, online learning. In this poster, we
describe our early research with raw log data of the P2PU platform. We outline our methodologies in working
with this data and preliminary findings about potential metrics of engagement that will inform future work.
Methodology
This study is a part of an ongoing partnership with P2PU where we are exploring how to create publicly
sharable datasets and conduct analyses of this widely used open education platform. A major challenge of this
type of research is to transform raw log data into a usable dataset that can be used to derive insight into open,
online learning. We obtained data from P2PU that represented a log of all elements of the platform (e.g. courses,
users, and learning activities etc.) in addition to all interactions that learners have had. This data captures a live
snapshot of the system in July 2012. All   measures represent the system at that  point in time.
        We used SQL to identify the tables, relationships, and data they contain. We also conducted direct
observations of the P2PU.org website to identify how members go about: (a) joining learning communities, (b)
interacting with peers, and (c) participate in learning groups. We then identified how these interactions with the
P2PU.org   community    were  represented   in the underlying   database   structure. One   critical issue  in online
platforms surrounds participation and persistence in open courses, so we concentrated our data investigation on
understanding the characteristics of users and courses. We also developed a descriptive understanding of the
P2PU ecosystem. Some of the characteristics we explored include: categories of courses in P2PU, the status of
courses, the participation levels in courses, and the grouping of courses into schools.
        Another   goal  of this initial analysis  was to  derive variables   relevant to concepts    of participation,
engagement, and persistence in courses. Working from the data structures provided in the P2PU platform, we
defined three types of measures that could be salient for future studies:
1.  Basic engagement: The P2PU data allows us to track basic measures of course participation such as the
    number of participants, followers, and organizers associated with each course. We can also understand
    participation from the user's perspective, such as how many courses on average a user is a participant in.
2.  Active   participation:  Beyond     basic  counts of    participation, we   also  defined  examples     of active
    participation where users make explicit contributions to P2PU courses. These measures include statistics
    such as the number of comments shared in courses or learning groups.
3.  Metrics  of  Persistence:   We were     also interested in measures    that reflect  whether learners   complete
    learning tasks and progress through courses. We derived two types of metrics from the P2PU log data.
        a.   Task Completion Rate ­ Many P2PU courses have tasks that learners are asked to complete. We
             were  able to  derive an   average   completion   rate for each  P2PU    course, which     was found by
             calculating how many tasks on average, participants completed, divided by the total number of
             tasks designed in a given course. In this way, we may be able to compare the completion rates of
             different types of courses in P2PU in future work.

© ISLS                                                                                                           375
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

         b.  Badges Earned Rate ­ Learners can also earn digital badges in the P2PU platform. Badges serve
             many social and educational functions (Antin & Churchill, 2011; P2PU, 2012). We are able to
             track the total number of badges earned by each learner across courses, in addition to the badges
             that could be potentially earned in a given course. Using these metrics we can calculate a metric of
             badge earning rate in each course, dividing the average number of badges a person earns by the
             total number they could potentially earn in a given course.
Preliminary Findings
Descriptive summaries of the measures are included in Table 1. We found much variation between P2PU
courses in terms of the level of participation as well as in the range of activity.
Table 1: Descriptive summaries of participation and engagement measures across P2PU course
                                Mean          Std.Dev          Median        Min                  Max
Basic Engagement
   Organizers                   1.5           3.712762         1             1                    98
   Participants                 32.0          88.32164         8             1                    853
   Followers                    5.7           31.46898         1             1                    594
   Participation                3.9           3.8              2.7           1                    24
Active Participation
   Comments/Posts               12.5          44.2             2             1                    388
User Achievement
   Task Completion Rate         51%           20%              50%           2%                   90%
   Badges Earned Rate           62%           27%              50%           18%                  100%
In addition to targeting the specific engagement measures, this research also allows us to create a descriptive
summary of the ecosystem of P2PU. The components of that ecosystem are the schools, courses, learners, tasks,
and badges. We have identified 6 schools in P2PU. There are 1333 total courses. Of these 25% are active.
Courses belong to course types: Study Groups (57%), Challenges (17%) and Courses (26%). A total of 34,777
learners have created  accounts with P2PU,   however    only 4,576 are   active     participants, learners who have
returned to the site multiple times, registered for multiple courses, or created content posts. Finally, as learners
progress through courses, they complete tasks and earn badges to mark their progress. Badges are used as a tool
of motivation to keep the learners engaged in the courses. Task completion and badge earning measures are
described in Table 1.
Discussion and Conclusion
This poster describes the very early work we are undertaking on open, peer-to-peer learning in P2PU. We have
begun the process of converting log data into usable datasets to glean deeper insight into the P2PU platform, and
how learners participate in and persist through open online courses. Initial descriptive analyses are presented
here, but these metrics of participation and engagement will serve as the foundation for future research. For
example, in future work we plan to examine whether the characteristics of courses and learners in P2PU relate
to metrics of persistence such as completion rates and badge earning. These future studies promise to shed light
on factors that might help improve learner engagement in open, online learning, which is a topic that is gaining
tremendous traction and visibility in the coming years.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by a grant from the National Science Foundation (#OCI1257347).                 Thank you to
Philipp Schmidt and Dirk Uys at P2PU for their collaboration and sharing of data.
References
Ahn, J., Weng, C., & Butler, B. S. (2013). The dynamics of open, peer-to-peer learning: What factors influence
         participation in the P2P University? Proceedings of the 46th Annual Hawaii International Conference
         on System Sciences (Learning Analytics and Networked Learning track).
Antin, J., & Churchill, E. (2011). Badges in social media: A social psychological perspective. In Proceedings of
         CHI 2011 ACM SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems.
Bienkowski, M., Feng, M., & Means, B. (2012). Enhancing teaching and learning through educational data
         mining and learning analytics: An issue brief. Washington, DC: Office of Educational Technology,
         U.S. Department of Education.
P2PU.    (2012).  Open    badges    for  lifelong  learning.   Retrieved    on       September     28,  2012   from
         https://wiki.mozilla.org/images/b/b1/OpenBadges-Working-Paper_092011.pdf.
Papano,   L. (November    2, 2012).  The   year   of the   MOOC.   Retrieved         on November     8,  2012  from
         http://www.nytimes.com/2012/11/04/education/edlife/massive-open-online-courses-are-multiplying-at-
         a-rapid-pace.html?pagewanted=all.

© ISLS                                                                                                          376
