CSCL 2013 Proceedings                     Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

       When Ideas Learn How to Fly: Children at the Intersection of
                          Formal and Informal Learning Settings
             Anne Weibert, Konstantin Aal, University of Siegen, Hölderlinstr. 3, Siegen, Germany
                         Email: anne.weibert@uni-siegen.de, konstantin.aal@uni-siegen.de

         Abstract:     With  after-school   initiatives  on  the  rise and  an    increasingly   standardized
         educational   system,  children's  learning  is influenced   from  two   rather  different ends.  The
         children's   learning processes   are torn  between  the necessity    to `function  on demand'    and
         perform   well   in school   lessons, tests and  educational  surveys,    and   the need   for playful
         exploration.   This  study   of computer-related    project work   in an  intercultural  after-school
         initiative explores the interplay and interdependence of child learning in formal and informal
         contexts. Main findings indicate that a close link of both contexts can 1) support the learning
         effect, and 2) strengthen the after-school initiative's standing, 3) increase potential learner's
         motivation to participate in it, and 4) locally support cross-cultural understanding and respect.

Introduction
How can learning be promoted in an everyday life that has become increasingly socially and culturally diverse?
The answer to this question lays the foundation on which learning opportunities in intercultural settings are
successfully implemented. They can help learners of various cultural and social backgrounds see the relevance
of their learning in their everyday lives, newly value the importance of learning as an entrance key to multiple
parts of life, and contribute to cross-cultural respect. Educators have approached these answers from different
ends. The understanding of learning as a lifelong activity has spread, and after-school initiatives have become
increasingly  popular.   Also, the  formal  educational   system  became    much   more   focused   on   excellence  and
performance. This study of computer-related project work in an intercultural after-school initiative explores the
interplay of learning in formal and informal contexts. We analyze how the link of formal and informal learning
can  support  the effect  as well  as strengthen  the informal   learning setting's standing,   increase  motivation  to
engage in it, and thus contribute to cross-cultural understanding and respect on the local neighborhood level.

Related Work
The development of formal and informal learning has long been on the agenda of researchers in education and
the learning sciences. Hsi et. al. describe the `core identifiable features' (Hsi et.al. 2004, p. 12) of informal
learning to  be   the self-directedness,  temporal   absence of  administration;   fluid arrangements    with  regard to
participation, time, and space; and great diversity of learners with regard to age, race, and ethnicities. Clegg et.
al. (2006)  explore   the transferability of   learning experiences,   concentrating   on activities and   artifacts that
worked   well  at motivating   learning.  Several other  studies share  the focus   on   motivation  (e.g. Barkhuus   &
Lecusay 2011). Regarding formal learning, research is concerned with ICT use in schools, with children's ICT
related learning and play strategies, and with teachers' use of ICT in class (e.g. MacFarlane et. al. 2005).
         Computer clubs `come_IN' are situated at the intersection of formal and informal learning. This setting
provides the chance to study not only the development of a project-related learning process, but also see how
formal and informal learning intersects, overlaps and can assemble in a fruitful combination contributing to
integration in an increasingly diverse society. The `come_IN' computer clubs build upon the US initiative of
computer clubhouses. Relying on principles of situated, collaborative learning and constructionist thinking, the
latter address  inner  city  youth  with  educationally  and  socially  deprived   backgrounds,     aiming  to  open  up
chances. Their success is well documented (e.g. Kafai et.al. 2009). Building on this, `come_IN' clubs foster
community dynamics and strengthen social ties on the family, school and neighborhood level. Also, the project
work strengthens individual skills. Schools in intercultural German neighborhoods as the clubs' location are the
starting point for interactions drawing on shared experiences. Project work is conjointly decided upon and often
relates to local issues (e.g. Schubert et.al. 2011). The first `come_IN' club was founded in Bonn Nordstadt in
2004. In Siegen, the transferability of the concept was tested in 2006. Four clubs were founded in 2009: two in a
school complex in Bonn Tannenbusch, one in a primary school in Dortmund (being in the focus of the study
presented here), one in a youth center in Kreuztal. In 2010 another club followed in a school in Kreuztal.

Method and Data
Field notes have been taken by the researchers acting as tutors during club sessions, following a participatory
action research approach (Kemmis & McTaggert, 1988). The club in Dortmund is at the center of this study. It
sees 4-7 adults and 7-10 children every week. The project developed over the course of seven months. Online
trackable log files have also been analyzed. Coding (Strauss & Corbin 2004) was guided by our focus on the
interplay of formal and informal learning and its technological support in an intercultural after-school setting.

© ISLS                                                                                                               377
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                      Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

Intercultural Project Work in Practice: Results
The idea of constructing items that would then be sent as so called trackables on a geocaching `world tour'
appealed  to the    participants. It was decided   to build dragonfly    trackables,  because  the  school  mascot   was a
dragonfly. For the finalizing of their design, participants would write texts about themselves, the computer club,
their dragonfly, and its destination. This text was also put online on the geocaching website. Each trackable was
given a geocaching coin with a unique number used to track the item. Several participants linked the trackable
design to their migration backgrounds, e.g. deciding that the dragonfly should see Albania. Others related travel
descriptions to local things, or to personal issues ­ like one boy, who was facing a lot of conflict at home: he
made his dragonfly fly to places `where there are happy people'. A large nearby cache was identified by means
of GPS-devices, so all club teams could `set their dragonflies free'. The geocaching website was used to follow
the route of the trackables. A map was put on a wall in the computer room, on which the location of each
trackable was updated weekly. As the dragonflies crossed borders the club participants turned to online maps to
keep track of the travels. Children would also watch their trackables online from home, or demand access to the
classroom's PC to view the progress. Children were calculating distances and excitedly handling large numbers
they had just familiarized themselves with in their math classes. Enthusiasm with the `dragonfly world travels'
carried the club that far that the project was never finished but turned into an underlying long-term endeavor.

Intercultural Project Work in Practice: Analysis
Our analysis    saw  the project  work   unfold  in three  subsequent    phases, each    combining  formal  and  informal
learning processes.   There   was    the first phase   of the  project,  where   club  participants   developed  the idea,
familiarized themselves with the concept of geocaching, planned and implemented the actions necessary for the
project to start. We saw how formal learning from regular school lessons had laid a ground that the project
related informal    learning could   build upon.   Children   made   use of the  language   and   writing skills they had
acquired in class, and used it first to negotiate a travel destination, and then to write the accompanying texts for
their trackables. Awareness for individual characteristics and cultural background unfolded on the informal level
of learning, and children explored how these could find an expression. The excursion part provided participants
with the opportunity to familiarize themselves with their neighborhood. By following their trackables online,
this awareness was deepened. The competitive aspect turned out to be a great motivator: not only did children
ask Where    is my   dragonfly?,   they  also  compared   Where  is  my  dragonfly    in relation  to other dragonflies?,
playfully engaging with math. Finally, children informally learned: 1) cool things can be achieved by working
together, 2) some things take time to develop, and 3) supposedly boring lesson contents can serve fun purposes.

Conclusion
In our case study of the geocaching project we saw several formal and informal learning steps unfold. Most
prominently among them was the support of language acquisition and eloquence promoted through the writing
and reading involved. We saw the project trigger self-organization among participants. Also, children and adults
learned more about themselves, their neighborhood, about their position in the city and beyond. Finally, we saw
self-confidence and openness with regard to other people, and patience with regard to backlashes be involved.

References
Barkhuus,   L., Lecusay,   R. (2011).    Technologies  and    Social Learning    in an   Urban After-School   Center.  In:
         Proceedings of CHI 2011, alt.chi: Playing Well With Others, 2011, Vancouver, pp. 273-282.
Clegg,  T.,  Gardner,    C.,  Williams,    O.,  Kolodner,   J. (2006).   Promoting     Learning   in  Informal   Learning
         Environments. In: Proc. of ICLS '06, pp. 92-98.
Hsi, S., Crowley, K., Duschl, R., Finke, C.L., King, H. & Sabelli, N. (2004). Models of Learning and Theories
         of Practice for Informal Learning Environments. In: Proceedings of ICLS '04 Proceedings of the 6th
         international conference on Learning sciences, pp.12-15.
Kafai, Y. B., Peppler, K. A., Chapman, R. N. (eds.) (2009). The Computer Clubhouse. Constructionism and
         Creativity in Youth Communities. New York: Teachers College Press.
Kemmis, S., McTaggart, R. (1988). The action research planner. Victoria, Australia: Deakin University Press.
MacFarlane,     S., Sim,  G., Horton,     M.   (2005). Assessing     usability and    fun in  educational   software.  In:
         Proceedings of the 2005 conference on Interaction design and children, pp.103-109.
Schubert, K.,   Weibert,  A., Wulf,    V.  (2011).  Locating   computer  clubs   in  multicultural  neighborhoods:   How
         collaborative project work fosters integration processes. In: International Journal of Human-Computer
         Studies, vol. 69 no. 10, pp. 669-678.
Strauss, A.L., Corbin, J. (2004). Open Coding. In: Seale, C., Social Research Methods: A Reader. New York:
         Routledge, 303-306.

© ISLS                                                                                                                378
