CSCL 2013 Proceedings                  Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

 SiMSAM: An Integrated Toolkit to Bridge Student, Scientific, and
                 Mathematical Ideas Using Computational Media

           Wilkerson-Jerde, M., Gravel, B., & Macrander, C., Tufts University, Medford, MA, USA
                  Email: {michelle.wilkerson;brian.gravel;christopher.macrander}@tufts.edu

        Abstract: We are developing SiMSAM (Simulation, Measurement, and Stop Action Motion):
        an  integrated  toolkit for middle    school science. SiMSAM      enables  students   to construct
        animations, crop images from those animations to use as programmable simulation objects,
        measure patterns in simulations, and share creations. We present (1) analyses of video data
        from a pilot design studio focusing on patterns in students' representational choices, scientific
        engagement, and attention to causal mechanism; and (2) prototypes of SiMSAM for feedback.

Motivation and Objectives
There are calls for K-8 science instruction to build on students' existing ideas about the world; involve students
in proposing and refining models and explanations; and engage students with the tools and discourse of STEM
professionals (NRC, 2012). Increasingly, computation and simulation are the tools scientists use to explore and
communicate complex ideas and data (Chandrasekharan et al., 2012; NRC, 2010).
        We are developing SiMSAM, a web-based toolkit to engage middle-school students in a technology-
mediated   modeling    continuum:   including  theorizing, model  construction,    testing, sharing,  and  iterative
refinement. SiMSAM enables students to (1) build stop motion animations of kinetic molecular phenomena
using paper drawings    or physical props,   (2) crop images  from   those  animations    and program  them   using
domain-specific visual manipulations to create a simulation of the modeled phenomenon, and (3) analyze the
simulation using measurement and graphing tools. It will also (4) support networked sharing for students to
critique, refine, and build upon their classmates' work.
        SiMSAM is informed by Constructionist (Papert, 1980) and representationally mediated (Kaput, 1998;
Vygotsky, 1978) theories of learning, and is based on the premise that students need a supportive continuum
from  discussing ideas  to mobilizing  those  ideas  for  constructing computational   models.   It builds on prior
simulation and   animation  tools that have   been shown   to support  student   learning and  engagement   around
molecular theory (Chang, Quintana, & Krajcik, 2010; Tinker & Xie, 2008; Wilensky, 2003). We merge these
approaches so that at all levels, students' ideas are the substance of construction: they create or select their own
objects (or those of their classmates), define their own rules to govern object interactions, and define their own
measures to explore simulation outcomes.

Research Questions
We are using SiMSAM prototypes and existing tools as a design-based research environment (Cobb et al.,
2003) to explore how students express and translate ideas across different multi-modal discourses. Data yielded
will speak to two open questions:
RQ1. To what extent can SiMSAM support a "continuum" in which students express and maintain ownership
over their ideas across different representational media?
RQ2. Which aspects of students' understanding of kinetic molecular theory persist, shift, appear or disappear as
students construct models across different representational media?

Data and Preliminary Results
In Fall 2012 we conducted a "design studio" (Druin, 2002) with five sixth-grade girls using existing animation
and  simulation  tools (SAM   Animation    and   StageCast Creator).   We   held four sessions   where participants
theorized and tested one another's ideas about how an orange is smelled by a person standing at the other end of
a room (Schwarz et al., 2009).
        In Day 1 we discussed smell diffusion in a group, and asked students to draw models and create SAM
animations of smell diffusion. In Day 2, we revisited the girls' animations, and introduced them to StageCast
Creator. In Day 3, the girls continued to work on their simulations, and in Day 4 revised their simulations and
began to measure the resulting patterns generated by counting the number of smell particles (what they called
"Oogtum") reaching humans at different places in the simulated world.
        We   analyzed   video   from   all four  workshop   days in    five minute    segments,  using  established
frameworks to code each segment for evidence of modeling practices, scientific inquiry practices, facilitator
moves, reasoning about mechanism, and student ideas related to smell and particulate models of matter. We
present patterns in the ideas and practices that emerged, persisted, or waned as students expressed or tested their
models in different media.

© ISLS                                                                                                        379
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                 Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

References
Chandrasekharan, S., Subramanian, V. & Nersessian, N. (2012). Computational modeling: Is this the end of
        thought experimenting in science? In M. Frappier, L. Meynell, & J. Brown (Eds.) Thought Experiments
        in Philosophy, Science and the Arts. London: Routledge.
Chang, H-Y, Quintana, C., & Krajcik, J. (2010). The impact of designing and evaluating molecular animations
        on how well middle school students understand the particulate nature of matter. Science Education
        94(1), 73-94.
Cobb,  P., Confrey, J., Disessa, A., Lehrer,  R., &  Schauble, L.  (2003). Design   experiments in  educational
        research. Educational Researcher, 32(1), 9-13.
Druin, A. (2002). The role of children in the design of new technology. Behaviour and Information Technology,
        21(1), 1-25.
Kaput, J.  J. (1998). Representations, inscriptions, descriptions and   learning: A   kaleidoscope of windows.
        Journal of Mathematical Behavior, 17(2), 265-281.
Kozma, R., Russell, J., Jones, T., Wykoff, J., Marx, N. & Davis, J. (1997). Use of simultaneous-synchronized
        macroscopic,    microscopic, and   symbolic  representations to enhance   the teaching and  learning of
        chemical concepts. Journal of Chemical Education, 74(3) 330-334.
National Research Council (2010). Report of a workshop on the scope and nature of computational thinking.
        Washington, DC: National Academies Press.
National Research Council. (2012). A framework for K-12 science education: Practices, crosscutting concepts,
        and core ideas. Washington, DC: The National Academies.
Papert, S. (1980). Mindstorms: children, computers, and powerful ideas. New York: Basic Books, Inc.
Schwarz, C. et al (2009). Developing a learning progression for scientific modeling: Making scientific modeling
        accessible and meaningful for learners. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 46(6), 632-654.
Tinker, R., & Xie, Q. (2008). Applying computational science to education: the molecular workbench paradigm.
        Computing in Science & Engineering, 10(5), 24-27.
Vygotsky, L. (1978). Mind in Society. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Wilensky, U. (2003). Statistical mechanics for secondary school: The GasLab multi-agent modeling toolkit.
        International Journal of Computers for Mathematical Learning, 8(1), 1-41.

Acknowledgments
This work is supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant Number IIS #1217100. Any opinions,
findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the NSF.

© ISLS                                                                                                     380
