CSCL 2013 Proceedings                  Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

      Supporting science practices outdoors with mobile devices:
  Findings from the Tree Investigators augmented reality project

Heather Toomey Zimmerman, Susan M. Land, Lucy R. McClain, Michael R. Mohney, Gi Woong Choi, Fariha
      H. Salman; Pennsylvania State University; College of Education, University Park, PA 16802 USA
                            heather, sml11, lucy, mrm126, gxc207, fxh139 @ psu.edu

         Abstract:   This  research  examines   how   Tree    Investigators   supported   families' science
         learning with mobile devices. Researchers coded videorecords of families at an Arboretum to
         understand how augmented reality elements influenced science talk related to observation and
         explanations about tree biodiversity. Findings suggested that augmented images that provided
         contrastive  cases allowed   for families  to   engage   in observations     and  explanations   as
         demonstrated by high levels of perceptual talk (such as describing and identifying).

Theoretical framework
Our research and design intention is to support families to be competent scientific observers and explainers of
natural phenomena through employing mobile technologies. Mobile technologies have been used to support
engagement in outdoor settings (e.g., Liu et al., 2009; Rogers, et al, 2004; Tan et al., 2007), as well as to
augment real-world locations with virtual data and gaming scenarios (e.g., Klopfer, 2008; Squire & Jan, 2007).
Researchers have reported design elements for mobile devices that encourage data collection (Squire & Klopfer,
2007) and   engagement   in discourse  (Rogers,  et al,  2004;   Tan et  al., 2011)  that support   science  learning.
Building on this prior work with mobile technologies, our research framework brings together theory about
technological supports (Quintana, Reiser, et al., 2004) with theory about using talk to encourage observation and
explanation practices (Bell, et al., 2009; Berland & Reiser, 2009; Eberbach & Crowley, 2009). We designed
Tree Investigators as a mobile website (see Figure 1) that uses augmented reality (images and text layered onto
the physical space) to support families to develop observations and explanations related to tree biodiversity. Our
research investigates  the  following  question: How     do  youth   and families    talk together  about    trees and
biodiversity while using the Tree Investigators augmented reality program on mobile computers?

Methodology
We conducted a video-based collective case study at an Arboretum (5 hours of video) to understand how mobile
devices using augmented reality could support scientific talk. The participants were 25 people from 11 families.
Families were videorecorded during a 1-hour guided tour using augmented photographic and textual elements
on tablets, smart phones and mp3-players. Given our interest to support science learning in informal spaces, the
study's  analytical framework  considers  spoken  conversation    elaboration  (Leinhardt   & Crowley,  1998)      as a
product and process of learning. We used a theoretical-driven approach to code transcripts for evidence of
observation and explanation during the Tree Investigators experience. The coding scheme was derived from
Allen (2002) as shown in Table 1; in addition, we included a sixth code: reading aloud.

Table 1: Analytical framework applied to family talk while using Tree Investigators.
      Code                       Description                              Exemplar from our data set
 Perceptual talk     Identification, naming, describing.       ·  . . . all the branches are all on the top.
 Conceptual talk     Inference, interpretation, prediction.    ·  This one drops its leaves.
 Connecting talk     Life, knowledge, inter-species            ·  They do have those ­ we were at the
                     connections                                  Pittsburgh zoo...
 Affect talk         Expressions of feeling                    ·  That one's interesting.
 Device use          Clarification for device functions        ·  . . . you had to hit something to take a picture.

Findings
Based   on a detailed  line-by-line analysis of the families'  talk  using    the Allen (2002) coding   scheme     and
thematic analysis procedures, we found individuals used the Tree Investigator augmented reality images and
text to support their observations and understandings of trees, as shown in right-hand column of Table 1 and in
Figure 2. Families used the mobile devices in the outdoor setting to coordinate observations with scientific
knowledge to support the development of explanations. Images and prompts (see Figure 1) that were part of an
AR mobile website were used to support family observational practice and to develop explanations about the
differences in trees and their characteristics related to biodiversity. The Tree Investigators' program supported
the families so that they:  (a) noticed relevant aspects of the trees in the seasonally dynamic environment; (b)

© ISLS                                                                                                             381
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                    Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

articulated understandings of scientifically-relevant aspects of the trees; and (c) understood differences between
evergreen and deciduous trees. Our findings suggest the importance of augmented photographic elements (such
as flowers, nuts, and leaves that were not seasonally available) as contrastive cases to the onsite specimens to
support deep observational and explanation practices.

Figure 1. The Tree Investigators interface.                  Figure 2. Talk across all the family members.

Discussion and Implications
The  significance of  this line   of work lies in its  contribution to the   growing literature on    technologically-
enhanced lifelong informal learning, as shown through the Tree Investigators program supporting scientific talk
through AR textual information and visualizations on the mobile website. Given our findings on the way that
contrastive images supported elaborated family talk, this study supports efforts to utilize augmented reality
approaches on mobile devices to support informal science education. This study suggests the need for additional
research on how mobile technologies can be used by families and other learners in out-of-school venues.

References
Allen, S. (2002).  Looking   for  learning  in visitor talk: A methodological     exploration.  In G.  Leinhardt, K.
         Crowley, & K. Knutson (Eds.), Learning conversations in museums (pp. 259-304). Mahwah, NJ: LEA.
Bell, P., Lewenstein, B., Shouse, A. W., & Feder, M. A. (2009). Learning Science in Informal Environments:
         People, Places, and Pursuits. Washington, DC: National Academic Press.
Berland, L. K., & Reiser, B. J. (2009). Making sense of argumentation and explanation. Science Education,
         93(1), 26-55.
Eberbach, C., & Crowley, K. (2009). From everyday to scientific observation: How children learn to observe
         the biologist's world. Review of Educational Research, 79(1), 39-68. doi: 10.3102/0034654308325899.
Klopfer, E. (2008). Augmented Learning: Research and Design of Mobile Educational Games. Cambridge, MA:
         MIT Press.
Leinhardt, G., & Crowley, K. (1998). Museum learning as conversational elaboration: A proposal to capture,
         code, and analyze talk in museums. Science. Report available at http://mlc.lrdc.pitt.edu/mlc
Liu, T.-C., Peng, H., Wu, W.-H.,& Lin, M.-S. (2009). The effects of mobile natural-science learning based on
         the 5E learning cycle: A case study. Educational Technology & Society, 12(4), 344­358.
Quintana, C., Reiser, B., Davis, E., Krajcik, J., Fretz, E., Duncan, R., Kyza, E., Edelson, D., & Soloway, E.
         (2004).  A scaffolding design framework for software to support science inquiry. The Journal of the
         Learning Sciences, 13(3), 337-386
Rogers, Y., Price, S., Fitzpatrick, G., Fleck, R., Harris, E., Smith, H., Randell, C., Muller, H., O'Malley, C.,
         Stanton, D., Thompson, M., & Weal, M. (2004). Ambient Wood: Designing new forms of digital
         augmentation for learning outdoors. Proceedings of the 2004 Conference on IDC. (p. 3-10).
Squire, K., & Klopfer, E. (2007). Augmented reality simulations on handheld computers. The Journal of the
         Learning Sciences, 16(3), 371 - 413.
Squire, K. D., & Jan, M. (2007). Mad City Mystery: Developing scientific argumentation skills with a place-
         based augmented reality game on handheld computers. Journal of Science Education and Technology,
         16(1), 5-29.
Tan, T.  H., Liu, T.  Y., & Chang,    C. C. (2007).    Development   and evaluation  of an RFID-based     ubiquitous
         learning environment for outdoor learning.    Interactive Learning Environments, 15(3), 253-269.
Tan, E.,  &  So,  H.  J.  (2011).    Location-based collaborative   learning at a geography    trail: Examining   the
         relationship among task design, facilitation, and discourse type.    In H. Spada, G. Stahl, N. Miyake, &
         N. Law (Eds.), Proceedings of the 2011 CSCL Conference (p. 41-48).

© ISLS                                                                                                          382
