CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                       Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

       Fostering CSCL Adoption: An Approach to Professional
                       Development Focused on Orchestration
     Luis P. Prieto, Yannis Dimitriadis, Juan I. Asensio-Pérez, School of Telecommunications Engineering,
                    University of Valladolid, Paseo de Belén, 15, 47011 Valladolid (Spain)
                       Email: lprisan@gsic.uva.es, yannis@tel.uva.es, juaase@tel.uva.es
Sara Villagrá-Sobrino, Iván M. Jorrín-Abellán, Faculty of Education and Social Work, University of Valladolid,
                                 Paseo de Belén, 1, 47011 Valladolid (Spain)
                                Email: sarena@pdg.uva.es, ivanjo@pdg.uva.es

        Abstract: Conceptual barriers are often cited as an important obstacle for the integration of
        innovative, ICT-enabled practice (such as CSCL) in authentic educational settings. Although
        professional development (PD) can be used to overcome these barriers, there is a dearth of
        descriptions of PD programs that foster change towards CSCL practice. This paper presents an
        approach to PD centered on the notion of orchestrating CSCL activities, and exemplifies it
        through  teacher workshops.   The  evidence  from a mixed    methods    evaluation of   two  such
        workshops   highlights  the potential of this approach   in    driving conceptual  change,    and
        increasing the perceived feasibility of using CSCL, even in limited-time PD interventions. The
        results also show the limitations of the approach when used in isolation, hinting at multi-level
        coordinated actions (e.g. institutional, policy-level ones) to further foster CSCL practice.

Introduction
There exists an increasing concern within the CSCL community about the lack of perceived impact of CSCL
research advancements in the everyday practice of our educational institutions (Looi, So, Toh & Chen 2011;
Chan, 2011). Within the possible reasons for this lack of adoption, the CSCL community has acknowledged the
complexity that coordinating CSCL activities entails, especially for teachers, in authentic educational settings.
This coordination  has been   commonly  referred  to  by researchers   as orchestration (Prieto,     Holenko-Dlab,
Abdulwahed, Gutiérrez, & Balid, 2011b; Dillenbourg et al., accepted).
        Existing  literature on the endeavor  of changing   the classroom   towards   ICT-enabled     practice has
exposed different kinds of barriers, some of them obvious like the lack of ICT infrastructures, but others less
apparent, such as teacher beliefs, attitudes and other conceptual obstacles (Ertmer, 1999). In order to overcome
such barriers, very often teacher professional development (PD) programs have been proposed (Kagan, 1992;
Zhao, Pugh, Sheldon & Byers, 2002; Chai, Hong & Teo 2009; Roschelle et al., 2011).
        However, in the particular case of fostering CSCL adoption among teachers, there is a dearth of studies
depicting concrete PD approaches and programs. Existing studies generally lack concrete descriptions of the PD
actions involved (Chan, 2011; Looi et al., 2011), or do not examine the impact of the PD actions in the teachers'
conceptions and actual practice (Zhao & Rop, 2001; Lin, Lin, & Huang, 2008).
        In this paper, we propose a PD approach centered on enabling practical application of CSCL in a
certain technological and pedagogical context, throughout the different facets and moments of CSCL activity
orchestration, combining both   conceptual and   technological  tools. In order  to  illustrate the  approach, we
describe in detail one short PD action formed by two workshops. These workshops were aimed concretely at
fostering the orchestration of blended CSCL activities in higher education, using Virtual Learning Environments
(VLEs, e.g. Moodle (1)) and other web-based tools. We also present a mixed methods evaluation study of the
workshops' enactment with 36 teachers from multiple disciplines, focusing on the kind of conceptual change
that the PD action brought about (e.g. in beliefs, perception of feasibility and self-efficacy), and assessing the
impact in the teachers' actual everyday practice once the PD intervention finished.

Conceptual Change and Fostering CSCL Practice Through PD
Despite huge investments by governments in applying Information and Communication Technologies (ICT) to
Education, technology is mostly used to support established practices rather than transform them (Cuban, 2001;
Conlon, 2004). Research has shown that providing effective training opportunities for teachers to learn how to
effectively redesign education by incorporating ICT is not simple (Lawless & Pellegrino, 2007), and that such
training should be embedded into their daily practice (Löfström & Nevgi, 2008; Lawless, et. al., 2007).
        Teacher beliefs (e.g. about learning, about technology) have been extensively linked to the integration
of ICT in classroom practice (Ertmer, 1999; Orlando, 2009; Prestridge, 2012), including studies in the context
of integrating CSCL environments in the classroom (Song & Looi, 2012). Thus, a challenge in fostering CSCL
adoption is how to enable teachers not only to overcome technology barriers, but also conceptual ones (Ertmer,
1999; Ertmer & Ottenbreit-Leftwich, in press), empowering them to integrate appropriate technology into the
learning process (Mishra & Koehler, 2006).

© ISLS                                                                                                         383
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                           Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

         Kagan (1992) noted the potential of teacher education and PD programs to promote belief change
among teachers. Teachers should experiment with the innovation that could involve technology, by means of
critical issues discussion with peers and researchers, observing exemplary models, as well as providing them
with opportunities for reflecting on the pedagogical beliefs and teaching practices (Chai, et al., 2009). Thus,
there is a need to empower teachers to understand and deal with the complexities involved in implementing
innovative practices in Technology Enhanced Learning (TEL) settings. PD strategies could provide the catalyst
of change in engaging the teachers in collaborative knowledge building, leading to a deep understanding among
them about teaching in a CSCL environment (Chai & Tan, 2009).
         There is a certain shortage of research examples which describe PD programs in detail, and examine
the impact that such actions have in helping teachers to conduct innovations in technology-enhanced learning
scenarios. In the CSCL field, there have been efforts in PD that encourage teachers to work collectively through
a design-based approach (Putnam & Borko, 2000). Others support teachers' inquiry in TEL settings, from a
knowledge building community perspective (Chan & Song, 2010). There are studies of practicing teachers'
collaborative online interaction for PD that report quantitative data about teachers' rate of participation (Zhao &
Rop, 2001), while others portray the process of knowledge sharing and creation for teachers participating in
virtual teams of a teacher professional community (Lin, Lin, & Huang, 2008). Taking an ecological perspective,
Chan (2011) proposes actions at different levels to bridge the gap between CSCL research and practice in the
context of  scaling    up and sustaining a knowledge    building  model.   In similar multi-level proposals,   from a
design research approach, Looi et al. (2011) indicate the empowerment of teachers to orchestrate the classroom
as an essential feature of meso-level actions towards CSCL practice.
         Roschelle et al. (2011) note that there is a "need to have a new kind of professional development for
teachers which [...] aims to develop teachers' potential as innovators". However, none of the aforementioned
works depict how such concrete PD actions should be implemented, or study the impact of these meso-level PD
actions on teachers after the intervention finishes.

An Orchestration-Focused Approach to PD Towards CSCL Adoption
The professional development approach proposed here draws on several principles and studies outlined above.
However, the central concept behind the proposed approach is that of orchestration, which has been defined as
"the process of productively coordinating supportive interventions across multiple learning activities occurring
at multiple social  levels"   (Fischer & Dillenbourg,   2006). This   notion  captures the increased complexity     of
applying CSCL into authentic educational settings, even if there is a lack of general consensus about its main
components (see Dillenbourg et al., accepted). Orchestration typically covers the whole lifecycle of the CSCL
activity implementation, from its design and preparation to the actual enactment in the classroom (Prieto et al.,
2011b). Despite the lack of consensus, researchers are reaching a common understanding that it provides a more
holistic view of the problems and constraints involved when applying CSCL principles and technologies to
authentic (formal) educational settings in everyday practice (as opposed to dealing with those aspects separately,
e.g. in lab settings).
         Thus, we propose to take the kind of holistic approach to the application of CSCL that orchestration
represents (already hinted by Looi et al., 2011), combining it with PD frameworks such as TPACK (Mishra &
Koheler,  2006)   and   the advice  from  previous   PD  research efforts  regarding  the  need for integration   into
teachers' everyday     practice (Löfström  et al., 2008; Lawless   et al., 2007). The   main   characteristics of our
proposed approach are:

    1.   Multi-aspect: The PD action should address all (or, at least, as many as possible) of the different
         aspects and dimensions that conform the orchestration of CSCL in the concerned educational setting
         (e.g. Prieto et al., 2011b mention up to eight orchestration aspects). For example, it should not focus
         only on assessment techniques, disregarding other aspects like class management or how to adapt the
         activities in the face of such assessments.
    2.   Whole lifecycle: The PD action should address the whole lifecycle of CSCL activities, from their
         preparation and design, through their implementation with ICT and their enactment in the classroom, as
         well as its eventual evaluation and redesign afterwards (as opposed to e.g. centering the PD action only
         in design, disregarding how such design is afterwards implemented).
    3.   Pedagogical and atomic patterns: One of the main distinctive features of this approach is the way in
         which orchestration knowledge is made available to teachers. In order to provide starting points in the
         complex interplay between technology, pedagogy and content that innovative teacher practice requires,
         we propose to provide teachers with pedagogical patterns (Fincher & Utting, 2002) and atomic patterns
         (Prieto,  Villagrá-Sobrino,    Jorrín-Abellán,  Martínez-Monés,      & Dimitriadis,   2011)  elicited  from
         successful    (authentic) CSCL   practice. These patterns   cover and  combine    the different aspects  and
         phases of orchestration, at multiple levels of granularity.

© ISLS                                                                                                            384
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                                                   Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

     4.     Technological tools for orchestration: The PD action should not remain at the level of conceptual
            change towards CSCL (however important it is), but rather it should also provide hands-on experience
            with technological tools that are compatible with the principles being taught (and with the educational
            setting in which the teachers develop their practice).
     5.     Modeling: In order for teachers to get a more accurate idea of how the CSCL activities are enacted,
            and how the experience is like for the students, the PD action itself should be modeled using the same
            patterns, techniques and technologies that are being taught in the PD action.
     6.     Authentic problems: During the PD action, teachers should be able to work on problems that are
            authentic and relevant for themselves, e.g., defining how the orchestration strategies and technologies
            could be applied to a concrete course they teach, within their current contextual constraints.

            In order to illustrate how this approach may be applied in practice to develop a PD action, Table 1
depicts the activities of two PD workshops developed following this approach, which aim at promoting blended
CSCL practice at the university level, using interactive digital whiteboards, Virtual Learning Environments
(VLEs, e.g. Moodle) and other Web 2.0 tools as the main technological support. These workshops combined
Collaborative Learning Flow Patterns (Hernández-Leo, Villasclaras-Fernández, Dimitriadis & Asensio-Pérez,
2010) and atomic patterns elicited from blended CSCL practice with VLEs, as well as specific technological
tools for the orchestration of such activities: the WebCollage (2) authoring tool and the GLUE!-PS system (3) to
deploy and manage learning designs in VLEs. The concrete form of this design was also influenced by local
contextual settings such as the emphasis on Moodle (the official institutional VLE), or the time-frame of the
workshops (12 hours each, agreed with the university PD agency). Indeed, these workshops have been actually
enacted in 2012, and the following section describes a mixed methods study performed during such enactment,
to explore the potentialities and limitations of the approach.

Table 1: Design of two workshops as example of the orchestration-centered approach to foster CSCL practice.

          Workshop 1 ­ conceptual emphasis                                              Workshop 2 ­ technological emphasis
Task/Phase                    Notes                                        Task/Phase                    Notes
 1. Read a sample CSCL         Online. Scenario is hypothetical, but        1. Read a sample CSCL         Online.   Scenario     is  hypothetical,  but
 scenario,          answer     plausible for the audience's teacher         scenario    and    design,    plausible    for  the   audience's     teacher
 questionnaire   on  initial   practice                                     answer   questionnaire  on    practice. Learning design is derived from
 thoughts                                                                   initial thoughts              previous workshop (Pyramid pattern)
 2.  Brief  explanations,      Face-to-face.  Teachers    activities  in    2.  Brief    explanations,    Face-to-face.      Teachers        use    the
 design     using      the     the  session  follow    several   phases     design with WebCollage        technologies involved in dyads. Teachers
 Pyramid    pattern    and     that  conform    a     Pyramid    pattern    and deploy with GLUE!-        are scaffolded with a worksheet detailing
 design- and deploy-time       similar  to    the     one    they    are    PS, on Moodle                 tool usage
 atomic patterns               designing.  Use     of pen,  paper    and
                               atomic pattern cards
 3.   Propose       similar    Online. Teachers work individually.          3. Propose similar design     Online. Teachers    act   individually,  using
 design      for      each     Design   is   expressed     freely,   but    for each    teacher's own     the   provided    WebCollage        tool  and
 teacher's own courses         should   involve    Moodle+Web        2.0    courses,  and  implement      worksheet. Facilitators provide formative
                               tools. Facilitators provide formative        it in WebCollage              feedback  on  the  designs'   feasibility and
                               feedback on individual designs                                             alternatives
 4a.  Reflect/debate    on     Face-to-face.       Multiple     parallel    4a. Finish deployment of      Face-to-face.    Teachers    act individually,
 main       features    of     debates following Think-Pair-Share           individual  design    using   supported     by   the     worksheets     and
 submitted designs             pattern. Debates are traced through          GLUE!-PS and favourite        facilitators
                               ICT     tools  mentioned         in   the    VLE
                               workshop      (e.g.  Moodle,     Google
                               Docs)
 4b. Role-play   scenario      Face-to-face.  Represent       a  set  of    4b.  Face     problematic     Face-to-face.    Teachers    work   in  dyads.
 enactment, supported by       problematic         situations      (e.g.    situations,   and     adapt   Worksheets    of  the   changes   needed  are
 enactment-time      atomic    latecomers,   ICT   failure).  Teachers      designs     supported   by    not provided     until after the  session (for
 patterns                      in  6-people   teams    with     different   GLUE!-PS tool                 future reference)
                               roles       (teachers,           students,
                               observers/critics)
 5.  Second  iteration  of     Online.  Again,     facilitators provide     4c.  Reflect/debate     on    Face-to-face.    Teachers    form    6-person
 individual  design,   and     formative      feedback        on     the    applicability to everyday     focus groups     which    discuss in  parallel,
 questionnaires        for     submissions                                  practice                      and report their conclusions to the whole
 reflection            and                                                                                group   (orally   and     through   a  shared
 evaluation                                                                                               document)
                                                                            5.  Second   iteration  of    Online.    Again,      facilitators    provide
                                                                            individual   design,   and    formative feedback on the submissions
                                                                            questionnaires         for
                                                                            reflection and evaluation

Studying CSCL Adoption in Teacher Workshops

© ISLS                                                                                                                                              385
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                     Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

Context and Methodology of the Study
Multiple CSCL researchers have highlighted the adequacy of using mixed method approaches (Creswell, 2012)
in order to explore the different perspectives and multiple factors that affect CSCL situations (e.g. Strijbos &
Fischer, 2007). This advice is also provided by the Evaluand-oriented Responsive Evaluation Model (CSCL-
EREM,  see   Jorrín-Abellán  and  Stake, 2009), which  we  have used to design and   structure our evaluation.
Regarding the data gathering and analysis, we have adapted the mixed method evaluation approach described by
Martínez-Monés, Dimitriadis, Gómez-Sánchez, Jorrín-Abellán, Rubia-Avi & Marcos-García (2006), in which
quantitative and qualitative data gathering techniques are combined,  triangulating the available  evidence  to
enhance its credibility. The concrete flow of data gathering and analysis techniques used is depicted in Figure 1,
including multiple techniques and data sources used before, during and immediately after the two workshops
(e.g. eight interviews with participants, parallel focus groups during the workshop, observations, questionnaires,
teacher-generated artifacts). Additionally questionnaire was provided to the participants six months after the
second workshop, in order to assess medium-term effects of the PD action.

Figure 1. Data gathering and analysis flow of the study (left), adapted from Martínez-Monés et al. (2006); also
     includes an "anticipated data reduction" diagram (right), inspired from Miles and Huberman (1994).

       Also, following the recommendations by Dillenbourg (2009) regarding research on orchestration, we
have tried to evaluate the effects of our approach in authentic PD actions, situated within the usual activities of
teachers. In this case, the two workshops, designed as described in the previous section, were enacted by a team
of 5 researchers, between February and April 2012, as two separate 12-hour teacher workshops aimed at in-
service university teachers at University of (anonymized for review): the first one aimed at conceptual training
on CSCL and its orchestration; the second one centered on technological tools to make such orchestration
possible, in blended learning scenarios using the official university Virtual Learning Environment (VLE). The
workshops followed a blended learning format and were open for teachers from any discipline (although it was
recommended that, in order to take the second workshop, teachers should have completed the first one, or an
equivalent training in basic CSCL concepts). As indicated in Figure 1, 25 teachers from different disciplines
(from Engineering to Medicine, Education or Law) attended the first workshop, and 24 attended the second one
(with partial participant overlap between them ­ in total, 36 different teachers attended at least one of the
workshops). This lack of consistency between the workshop's participants was due to the situatedness of the PD
action, which prevented the researchers from restricting access or enforcing attendance to both workshops.
       Within this context, our main research question in this study ("did the workshops foster CSCL practice
among the participant teachers?", see Figure 1) is explored through two main evaluative tensions, or issues,
regarding the conceptual change towards CSCL (I1) and the actual changes in teacher practice (I2) that the
workshops brought about. These issues are in turn explored through the evidence gathered, which is grouped
around six topics: teachers' beliefs about ICT and CSCL (T1), teachers' perceived feasibility of CSCL practice
(T2), teachers' perceived self-efficacy to orchestrate CSCL (T3), the immediate practice changes that teachers
expected (T4), the actual teacher practice changes (T5) and the outstanding barriers for change towards CSCL
practice (T6). This kind of "anticipated data reduction" schema (Miles et al., 1994) has been used to analyze the
quantitative and qualitative evidence.

© ISLS                                                                                                      386
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                       Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

Findings and Supporting Evidence
In general, both workshops were considered a success by both the facilitators and the participant teachers (e.g.
the two PD actions were valued at 8.42 and 9.23 respectively, in a 10-point scale [TW1-Q3, TW2-Q2], see
Figure 1). Let us examine the evidences of conceptual and practice change brought about by the workshops:

Conceptual change towards CSCL adoption (I1)
Concerning the topic of the conceptual change achieved by the workshops in the area of the teachers' beliefs
and attitudes towards ICT (topic T1), a majority of the participants in the first workshop reported some kind of
conceptual change regarding (computer-supported) collaborative learning (17 out of the 22 participants that
answered the post-workshop questionnaire - 77%) [TW1-Q3]. Among these, a majority expressed changes in
their concept of collaborative learning in general (65%), like for example: "[to the question: Did the workshop
change your view of collaborative learning?] Totally. I had always reduced collaborative work to working in
dyads, and essentially, I thought they were worthless. The success of this course is that I have seen that they can
be really useful ­ if well designed ­ for the learning processes." [TW1-Q3], a fact that was also confirmed in
the interviews: "[when asked about usage and knowledge about CL prior to the workshop] I have seen that, if
you do it well, you can learn a lot with it [...] designing it with time, thoughtfully, and applying these patterns,
you can get more outcomes from a subject matter." [TW1-I]. Others highlighted the down-to-earth view given
by the workshop, which made inherent difficulties of collaborative work surface (24%), or the importance of
making a   careful pedagogical  design (17%): "[to  the question:     Did  the workshop   change your  view of
collaborative learning?] [...] Maybe the most interesting was [learning about] the preparation of collaborative
activities and seeing what difficulties they entail." [TW1-Q3]. Regarding those participants that reported that
their views had not changed, in some cases it was because their views were already favorable to CSCL, while
others voiced unchanged concerns on the efficiency and uncertainty of such methods, e.g.: "[when asked about
the feasibility of using the provided pedagogical patterns] It demands a time that I am not sure I have, and a big
effort in collaborating, all to reach uncertain results." [TW1-Q2].
       There was also evidence of teachers changing their perception of the feasibility of using CSCL in their
everyday practice (topic T2), from the qualitative responses to the questionnaires, as well as from the in-depth
interviews "[to the  question: Did the  workshop   change your      view of collaborative learning?] The most
important aspect is that real cases are presented and, from them, it is easier to gather ideas that are easily
transferable to my courses. I came out with the impression that I can put in practice a collaborative activity,
really; up to now it did not occur to me anything other than ordering a report and making students present it in
class." [TW1-Q3]. Many participants emphasized the role of atomic patterns in this perception: participants in
the first workshop valued the different kinds of atomic patterns as useful (averages of 4.30, 4.13 and 5.31 in a 1-
7 Likert scale), and this was also brought to attention in some of the interviews "[when asked about the main
value of the workshop] the catalogue of patterns and the catalogue of routines [...] as a reference guide or a
skeleton to structure activities, to begin making things" [TW1-I]; "[when asked about the added value of atomic
patterns] It is the founding, the structure, the skeleton [...] you may have some ideas, but if you don't know
anything about what to do [...] it is like LEGO blocks" [TW1-I]. Others highlighted the fact that the workshop
itself was modeled as the same kind of blended CSCL activity that was being promoted: "[when asked about
the workshop's usefulness] [...] Very useful, playing the "guinea pigs" like students in class, enables you to see
points of view that you had forgotten." [TW1-Q3].
       Regarding the teachers' perception of self-efficacy (topic T3), we observed how all the participants
were able to orchestrate the example scenario given (in the first workshop), and implement such orchestration
through the provided technological tools (in the second workshop). This ability was then transferred to the
individual exercises of application to each teacher's courses in a large majority of the cases (100% and 75%,
respectively) [TW1-A, TW2-A]. Even if we look solely at the evidences of the first workshop, we can see how
the self-perceived ability to orchestrate the design they were doing throughout the workshop raised from an
average of 4.83 (in a 1-7 Likert scale) to 5.23 after the first workshop [TW1-Q2, TW1-Q3]. Teachers mentioned
the advantages of the workshop's practical orientation: "[to the question: Did the workshop change your view of
collaborative learning?] Now I have a much clearer idea of what is a collaborative activity and, especially,
which patterns to use to encourage that those activities are really collaborative. [...] how to complement these
learned [strategies] with the use of ICT, the ICTs that can be used and some of their affordances." [TW4-Q4];
"[when asked about the changes brought about by the workshop] now I'm more convinced [...] because now I
know how to put it in practice [...] up to know you never saw concrete examples, tasks." [TW4-I]. It is also
worth noting that many teachers viewed the presented atomic patterns as not very novel, and reported using
common sense rather than the provided strategies (especially in the role-played enactment, which required a
timely response to events), a view that seems to be somehow tied to prior teacher experience: "[when talking
about the usage of enactment-time atomic patterns during roleplaying] I think we went directly to common
sense [...] I also did the same when doing the individual [design], I used common sense and then asked myself

© ISLS                                                                                                    387
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                        Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

`how is this called in the routines?' [...] and, as you look through them, you also see other [routines] and you
open your mind a bit [...] expand common sense." [TW1-I] [18 years of teaching experience].

Actual Changes in Teacher Practice (I2)
Regarding the actual changes in teacher practice towards CSCL since the second workshop ended (six months,
as of this writing), the evidence is less conclusive, and can be analyzed at different levels. If we look at teachers'
perception and intentions of changing their practice immediately after the workshops (topic T4), we find that
teachers scored atomic patterns as close to their everyday practice (average of 5.22 in a 1-7 Likert scale) [TW1-
Q2], and that  teachers asserted   they would  likely use the   proposed tools in   their everyday practice    in the
immediate future (in a 1-8 Likert scale, avg=6.19, std=1.63) [TW2-Q2]. Moreover, teachers asserted they would
be moderately likely to use the designs they deployed in Moodle in the immediate future (in a 1-8 Likert scale,
avg=6, std=1.64) [TW2-Q2]. Qualitative responses included favorable assertions such as: "[when asked about
using the patterns/routines when doing a CL design in future teaching practice] Sure. Now that I have them, I
would take a look at them [...] I would use this [method] I know" [TW4-I], but also critical voices of the most
skeptical about collaborative work: "[when talking about the usage of routines in the individual design] The
truth is I didn't [use them] [...] people want to appease the teacher who ordered the exercise [...] if you taught
15 things, they think they should introduce at least 10 of them" [TW4-I].
        The evidence of actual changes in teachers' everyday practice (T5) are much less prominent. Only one
teacher reported putting the strategies into practice immediately after the first workshop: "[when asked about
the eventual usage of atomic patterns in real practice] Yes, yes... in fact, the next day I tried, not this [the
individual design] but I did a pyramid in class [...] With pen and paper" [TW4-I]. The questionnaire taken 6
months after the workshop reveals that not many teachers (5 out of 14 respondents ­ 35.7%) had incorporated
elements of the workshop into their everyday practice [QF]. This apparent lack of significant impact can be
attributed to recent massive lay-offs and subsequent re-organization at the university ("[when asked whether the
workshop's strategies had been put into practice] No. Without knowing the courses I was going to teach [...]
The changes in the courses and their quantity [...] prevented me from trying new techniques." [QF]), or to the
lack of institutional support for some of the technological tools provided in the workshop.
        However, leaving aside those circumstantial events, we can also look at which barriers teachers see for
the adoption of CSCL strategies and technologies such as the ones presented in the workshops (topic T6). Some
of the barriers mentioned are well known, such as the lack of adequate ICT infrastructures, training or technical
support. Others relate more to teacher beliefs about ICT technologies in general ("[when outlining one focus
group's conclusions about whether they would use WebCollage/GLUE!-PS in real practice] some of us would
not use it because we think [using ICTs] is complex and not necessary, versus other simpler ways of doing
collaborative  work"   [TW2-FG]),   or  towards   collaborative learning  ("[when   outlining  one  focus     group's
conclusions about run-time problems in blended CSCL] we have also considered whether these collaborative
activities may subtract from the [content] learning [...] we should not mistake the means with the goals" [TW2-
FG]). Teachers were especially concerned with regard to the increased time and effort needed to apply (CS)CL
in practice: "[when talking about doing CSCL in a VLE as in the example courses shown] When I see all those
links, folders, etc [...] I think it is too much work, non-pedagogical work involved [...] does it all compensate in
order to reach what? To make a summary? [...] I'm a skeptic." [TW1-I]. Many others expressed beliefs more
related to students, especially their attitudes towards collaboration, or the sheer number of participants in some
of the classes ("[In   the debate, when  asked about   collaboration in  large groups]     Too much    effort for the
teacher" [TW1-A]).

Discussion
The  quantitative and  qualitative evidence provided   above   shows how   a  PD    action based on    the proposed
approach can bring about conceptual change in teachers at different levels (in their beliefs about CSCL, as well
as their perception of feasibility and self-efficacy). This is even more remarkable given the limited time-frame
of the PD action (24 hours of blended work). There are, however, comparatively few instances of actual practice
change towards CSCL practice among teachers (six months after the workshops).
        Our evidence also found hints of the influence of multiple factors in the amount and nature of such
conceptual change (as it is often the case in the "messy" environment of an authentic situation): the amount of
teaching experience, prior beliefs about ICT, collaborative learning and CSCL, or how the workshop itself was
orchestrated by the facilitators. Teachers also voiced several barriers for the adoption of the concerning CSCL
practices, some of which are well known (teacher beliefs, ICT infrastructure, lack of training or support). Other
barriers, however, are more striking, such as teachers' perception of students attitudes towards collaborative
work, or the general consideration that collaborative work requires lots of effort and might not be feasible in
larger student groups.
        Our   findings seem   to support Looi  et al. (2011)'s  consideration  that multiple   factors limit  teacher
innovation in the classroom (which they adequately illustrate with the metaphor of a broken barrel which only

© ISLS                                                                                                            388
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                               Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

holds as much water as its shorter wood board). In the concrete case of our workshops, we could speculate that
the potential for conceptual and practice change of the PD action is trampled over by other factors that such a
short intervention cannot overcome (e.g. current instability of teaching loads at the university, tendency towards
larger classrooms).  This  points towards   the     convenience     of actions  coordinated at different levels (policy,
institutional, classroom) (Chan, 2011). Interestingly, the persistence of perceived barriers regarding the effort
needed to setup and manage collaborative activities seems to indicate that further efforts on technologies and
strategies for easing such orchestration are needed, in order to make CSCL practice less cumbersome, especially
in large cohorts.
         Naturally, due to the fact that it was gathered by observational methods in a situated PD action, these
findings are hardly generalizable (nor was it our aim to make them so) to other contexts. The lack of consistency
in the attendance to the two workshops is another weakness which limits our ability to trace clear evolutions of
individual teacher conceptions and practices. Our naturalistic evaluation, however, provided hints of several
factors influencing the impact of this kind of PD actions, which should be examined more thoroughly in later
studies.
         Also, the evidence from our study, along with the current evolution in many university settings towards
larger cohorts, prompt us to iterate over the format and materials of this workshop, modifying the strategies and
the technologies we are developing, e.g., in order to make more efficient the orchestration of large student
groups. This is one of our main directions for future work in the near future, in accordance with a recently
approved international R&D project.
         Overall, we have presented a novel approach to teacher professional development that intends to foster
CSCL practice within authentic formal educational settings, with an emphasis on the holistic approach known in
CSCL as orchestrating learning. This emphasis is reified in the usage of conceptual tools that highlight possible
synergies applicable to teachers' contexts (e.g. atomic patterns extracted from successful CSCL practice in
authentic settings), and by the problem-orientedness and authenticity of the PD activities. By presenting an
example   of such  PD action  and  initial evidences        of its usefulness  for conceptual  and practice  change, we
highlight the potential usefulness of this kind of actions to foster CSCL adoption, even if coordinated actions at
other levels are needed as well in order to provide long-standing impact in our educational systems.

Endnotes
(1) http://www.moodle.org (Last visit: 25 Oct 2012)
(2) http://pandora.tel.uva.es/wic2/ (Last visit: 25 Oct 2012)
(3) http://gsic.uva.es/glueps/ (Last visit: 25 Oct 2012)

References
Chai, C. S., Hong, H. Y., & Teo, T. (2009). Singaporean and Taiwanese pre-service teachers' beliefs and their
         attitude towards ICT: A comparative study. The Asia-Pacific Education Researcher, 18(1), 117­128.
Chai, C. S., & Tan S. C. (2009). Professional Development of Teachers for Computer Supported Collaborative
         Learning (CSCL) through Knowledge Building. Teacher College Records, 111(5), 1296-1327.
Chan, C. K. K. (2011). Bridging research and practice: Implementing and sustaining knowledge building in
         Hong Kong classrooms. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 6(2),
         147­186.
Chan, C.  K.  K., & Song, Y. (August 3­6, 2010). Towards a principle-based approach for knowledge creation
         in teacher professional development. Paper presented at the Summer Institute, University of Toronto,
         Canada.
Creswell, J.W., & Plano Clark, V.L. (2012). Designing and conducting mixed methods research. Thousand
         Oaks (CA): Sage Publications.
Cuban, L. (2001). Oversold and underused. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Conlon, T. (2004). A Failure of Delivery: the United Kingdom's New Opportunities Fund programme of teacher
         training in information and communications technology. Journal of In-Service Education, 30(1), 115-
         140.
Dillenbourg, P. (2009). Exploring neglected planes: social signs and class orchestration. Proceedings of the
         International Conference of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning (CSCL 2009), 6-7.
Dillenbourg, P., Dimitriadis, Y., Nussbaum, M., Roschelle, M., Looi, C-K., Asensio, J.I., et al. (accepted).
         Design for classroom orchestration. Collective paper at Computers & Education.
Ertmer,  P.  A.   (1999). Addressing  first- and         second-order  barriers to  change: Strategies   for technology
         integration. Educational Technology Research and Development, 47(4), 47-61.
Ertmer, P. A., & Ottenbreit-Leftwich, A. (in press). Removing obstacles to the pedagogical changes required by
         Jonassen's vision of authentic technology-enabled learning. Computers & Education.
Fincher, S., & Utting, I. (2002). Pedagogical Patterns: their Place in the Genre. Paper presented at the ITiCSE
         2002, Aarhus, Denmark.

© ISLS                                                                                                             389
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                               Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

Fischer, F., & Dillenbourg, P. (2006). Challenges of orchestrating computer-supported collaborative learning.
         Paper   Presented   at   the   8Th Annual     Meeting   of  the American   Educational   Research    Association
         (AERA).
Hernández-Leo,      D., Villasclaras-Fernández,      E. D.,  Dimitriadis,  Y.,  &  Asensio-Pérez,  J. I.  (2010). Pattern
         languages for generating CSCL scripts: From a conceptual model to the design of a real situation. In P.
         Goodyear, & S. Retalis (Eds.), E-learning, design patterns and pattern languages (pp. 49-64) Sense
         Publishers.
Jorrín-Abellán,  I.  M.,  &  Stake,     R. (2009).   Does   ubiquitous   learning call for ubiquitous    forms of  formal
         evaluation?:     An   evaluand     oriented    responsive    evaluation   model.   Ubiquitous    Learning:    An
         International Journal, 1(3), 71-82.
Kagan, D. M. (1992). Implications of research on teacher belief. Educational Psychologist, 27(1), 65-90.
Lawless, K. A., & Pellegrino, J. W. (2007). Professional development in integrating technology into teaching
         and   learning:  Knowns,       unknowns,    and   ways  to  pursue better  questions  and   answers.  Review  of
         Educational Research, 77(4), 575­614.
Lin, F., Lin,   S., &   Huang,    T.  (2008). Knowledge      sharing  and  creation in  a  teachers' professional  virtual
         community. Computers & Education, 50(3), 742-756.
Looi,   C.K., So,   H.J., Toh,    Y., Chen,   W.    (2011).  The  Singapore  experience:   Synergy    of national policy,
         classroom practice and design research. International Journal of Computer Supported Collaborative
         Learning (CSCL), 6(1), 9-37.
Löfström, E., & Nevgi, A. (2008). University teaching staffs' pedagogical awareness displayed through ICT-
         facilitated teaching. Interactive Learning Environments, 16(2), 101-116.
Martínez-Monés, A., Dimitriadis, Y.,        Gómez-Sánchez, E.,       Jorrín-Abellán, I.M.,  Rubia-Avi, B., &      Marcos-
         García,    J.A.  (2006).     Studying     participation  networks  in  collaboration  using     mixed  methods.
         International Journal on Computer Supported Collaborative Learning, 1(3), 383-408.
Miles, M. B., Huberman, A.M . (1994). Qualitative data analysis. Newbury Park (CA): Sage Publications.
Mishra, P., & Koehler, M. (2006). Technological pedagogical content knowledge: A framework for teacher
         knowledge. Teachers College Records, 108(1), 1017-1054.
Orlando, J. (2009). Understanding changes in teachers' ICT practices: A longitudinal perspective. Technology,
         Pedagogy and Education, 18(1), 33-44.
Prestridge, S. (2012). The beliefs behind the teacher that influence their ICT practices. Computers & Education,
         58(1), 449-458.
Prieto, L.  P., Villagrá-Sobrino,     S.,  Jorrín-Abellán,   I.  M., Martínez-Monés,    A.,  & Dimitriadis,    Y. (2011).
         Recurrent      routines:  Analyzing       and  supporting   orchestration  in    technology-enhanced     primary
         classrooms. Computers & Education, 57(1), 1214-1227.
Prieto, L. P., Holenko-Dlab, M., Abdulwahed, M., Gutiérrez, I., & Balid, W. (2011b). Orchestrating Technology
         Enhanced      Learning:   a    literature review   and   a  conceptual   framework.  International    Journal of
         Technology-Enhanced Learning (IJTEL), 3(6), 583-598.
Putnam, R. T., & Borko, H. (2000). What do new views of knowledge and thinking have to say about research
         on teacher learning? Educational Researcher, 29(1), 4-15.
Roschelle, J., Patton, C., Schank, P., Penuel, W., Looi, C.-K., Chen, W., Prieto. L.P., Villagrá-Sobrino, S.,
         Dimitriadis, Y. (2011). CSCL and innovation: In classrooms, with teachers, among school leaders, in
         schools    of  Education.    In Proceedings    of  the  9th International  Computer-Supported     Collaborative
         Learning Conference (CSCL 2011), Vol. 3, 1073-1080.
Song, Y., Looi, C.K. (2012). Linking teacher beliefs, practices and student inquiry-based learning in a CSCL
         environment:     a tale  of  two   teachers.   International Journal   of  Computer   Supported   Collaborative
         Learning, 7(1), 129-159.
Strijbos, J.W. & Fischer, F. (2007). Methodological challenges for collaborative learning research. Learning
         and Instruction, 17(4), 389-393.
Zhao,   Y., Pugh,   K.,  Sheldon,    S.  & Byers,   J.  L. (2002).  Conditions  for classroom  technology   innovations.
         Teachers College Record, 104(3), 482-515.
Zhao, Y., Rop, S. (2001). A critical review of the literature on electronic networks as reflective discourse
         communities for in-service teachers. Education and Information Technologies, 6(2), 81-94.

Acknowledgements
This research has been partially funded by the Spanish Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness Projects
TIN2008-03-23,      TIN2011-28308-C03-02           and IPT-430000-2010-054,     and  the   Autonomous    Government    of
Castilla and León Project VA293A11-2, as well as by the METIS European Project (531262-LLP-2012-ES-
KA3-KA3MP). The authors thank the participants in the teacher workshops and the rest of the GSIC/EMIC
research team, as well as the Learning Design Theme Team funded by the European Union through the Stellar
Network of Excellence for Technology Enhanced Learning (FP7-IST-231913) for their contributions.

© ISLS                                                                                                               390
