CSCL 2013 Proceedings                  Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

 InterLACE: Interactive Learning And Collaboration Environment
                         Eric Coopey, Leslie Schneider, Ethan Danahy, Tufts University
                   eric.coopey@tufts.edu, ethan.danahy@tufts.edu, leslie.schneid@gmail.com

        Abstract:     InterLACE   is a  new   web-based    platform  developed   to  support  collaborative
        learning   in the classroom.   It is  designed to  quickly  and easily capture   student ideas  and
        representations   using   any  computer,   tablet, or  smartphone.     With  a   persistent, shared
        workspace, students' ideas can be visualized and manipulated to support group sense-making
        class-wide.

Purpose
The InterLACE Project aims to develop and test an innovative web-based computer supported collaborative
learning (CSCL) environment to support co-located collaboration in high school physics classrooms. Students
benefit from sharing their ideas as well as viewing, organizing, and refining one another's ideas as they emerge.
InterLACE has been designed to lower the implementation barriers to collaborative learning (Hynes et al, 2012)
for teachers by making it easier to monitor student discourse and adjust lessons on the fly when the situation
demands. The first InterLACE tool, developed and tested in five Boston and New Hampshire high school
classrooms, provides a shared, interactive work space to facilitate collaborative learning. Students can post,
visualize, build on, reorganize, comment on, reflect on and improve their own and/or fellow classmates' ideas. It
enables students to use the virtual artifacts they create to build knowledge together, argue for their point of
view,  make   connections,   and expand   on  one  another's  ideas, resulting in   deepening   and  broadening the
collaborative dialogue and knowledge building activities.

Contributions
Building on lessons from learning sciences, CSCL views learning supported by technology as the "shared effort
of students to build shared meaning interactively" (Stahl et al, 2006) rather than just absorb facts from the
teacher. This involves: active engagement, a focus on knowledge construction, idea improvement, feedback and
adaptive instruction. CSCL technologies support these collaboration activities by providing a "joint problem
space" (Teasley    &  Roschelle, 1993),   or  shared dynamic  interactional  space   where  class-wide   knowledge-
building can take place and students can observe each others thinking.
        To    that end,  the technical team   has created  a flexible web-based     tool that provides   a persistent
whiteboard-like work space (see Figure 1) that makes student ideas available for class-wide visualization,
discussion, joint organization, manipulation, and improvement, all of which can lead to the construction of a
shared understanding of the concepts being studied.
        Learners represent ideas in different ways, so any technology must be flexible enough to support a
variety of representation types. Currently, students can develop their ideas using text, images, screenshots, and
sketched drawings (see Figure 2), with a plan to add videos. These representations are aggregated within the
tool and visible to the entire class on students' computers, smart phones, or tablets, as well as on the SMART
Board or screen at the front of the room. Teachers are also able to embed rich media and simulations into their
lesson plans.
        Both    students and  teachers  can   dynamically  rearrange  these  Post-it note  type  objects to identify
patterns and connections across group responses (see Figure 3). Additionally, members of the class can use
InterLACE's comment feature to build on and refine others' ideas, reflect on work, show support, and critique
or defend ideas in real time. Teachers can contribute to the discussion, provide quick feedback, and monitor
students' understanding. Individual student contributions can be highlighted for viewing, along with side by side
comparisons from multiple students, to engage the entire class in a process of scientific argumentation and
collaborative sense-making (Danahy et al, 2012). Instead of the teacher eliciting and evaluating responses and
then synthesizing them, InterLACE encourages all students to contribute to the conversation and engage in the
evaluation of how ideas relate to one another.
        InterLACE supports and enhances students ability to participate in interactive, class-wide, multimodal
discussions. Students' ideas become the focus of the classroom work. Information contributed by individuals
with  different perspectives  can help    the group  pull  together  pieces of a  problem   other    members  hadn't
considered to create better understanding for everyone. It enables the capacity for on the spot feedback based on
students' ideas. Finally, using InterLACE, students can read and interact with the ideas of classmates, thus
making their own thinking visible. All of these skills are critical to being an educated person in the 21st century.

© ISLS                                                                                                          388
CSCL 2013 Proceedings           Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

                                Figure 1 ­ Whiteboard Work Space

                              Figure 2 - Flexible Idea Representation

© ISLS                                                                                         389
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

                                Figure 3 - Arrangement For Group Sense-making

Demonstration Experience
There will be two main goals of the demonstration. First, to demonstrate the capabilities of InterLACE and give
participants a sense of how it can be, and has been, used in the classroom. Second, to solicit feedback from the
audience about the direction the research should take next.
       Audience members will be given the opportunity to directly interact with each other via InterLACE. A
class session will be created specifically for the conference presentation. Participants will be given the URL and
password, and after logging in they can specify a display name and enter the class. Then we will highlight
several of the novel contributions of InterLACE:

       Idea representation must be flexible - Learners represent ideas in different ways (Rose and Gravel,
           2010), requiring technology flexible enough to allow them to choose the representation that best
           captures their thought process. The demonstration will ask users to provide several different forms
           of rich media and text.
       Multiple platform integration   ­ Built   entirely in HTML5,   InterLACE    can be   used on nearly every
           computer, tablet, phone, operation system, and browser. The research team will provide several
           different tablets that participants can use, in addition to their own computers.
       The power of persistence - As users answers are quickly displayed on the main projector, they must
           take ownership of their idea and be able to explain their thought process. Persistence plays many
           rolls in collaboration, from reducing cognitive load to improving parallel communication (Gergle
           et al, 2004)  (Cherubini   &  Dillenbourg,     2007). Our observations   show  this persistence to    be
           powerful in the evolution of the groups' shared sense-making.
       Simplicity and Speed ­ Through observation and discussion with teachers, we determined that time
           overhead involved in implementing technology-assisted collaboration into the classroom is a major
           barrier to implementation. Installing software or plug-ins takes significant effort. Students forget
           passwords or are confused by overly complex interfaces. InterLACE was designed to quickly
           capture ideas via interfaces that are intuitive and simple to navigate.

       Participants will be prompted to respond to several questions, which will be relevant to the topic at
hand. They will be able to use their own devices (provided there is a good wi-fi connection), as well as devices
the research team will provide.
       For this scenario, the questions would be simple and fun, with the first one being an opportunity to take
a picture of themselves and give a short introduction. Participants can use the camera on their computer or tablet
to take a picture and post their name/affiliation. Subsequent questions will attempt to both demonstrate the
systems capabilities and potential use cases. Once participants have a sense of the goals of the project and the
affordances of the software, they will be asked to provide feedback in areas that we are interested in perusing.

© ISLS                                                                                                      390
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                  Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

         Scaffolding  ­  InterLACE   contains    less  built-in scaffolds than    well-known   CSCL   systems   like
             Knowledge Forum, and instead relies on the teacher to provide much of the scaffolding. How can
             scaffolds   be  introduced  in less  rigid ways,    specifically ones  that build on    users' existing
             affordances learned from social media?
         Assessment ­ Tools are currently in development to assist teachers in evaluating student contributions
             in InterLACE, but what else can be done from both a technology and pedagogical perspective to
             help teachers assess collaborative activities?
         Evaluation ­ How would participants set up controlled experiments to evaluate InterLACE as a CSCL
             system? Users are often co-located when using InterLACE, therefore communication takes place
             both online and off. How would participants combine log file data with information from coded
             video files? What particular aspects should we be looking for, such as inter-group communication?
             What does the role of the actual student content contributed to InterLACE play in evaluation?

         This demonstration design will allow both participants and presenters to learn from one another and
each take something of value from the session.

Supporting Materials
The research team has produced a video demonstration.

Video: http://youtu.be/CaANnbp9ZD4

References
Cherubini, M., & Dillenbourg, P. (2007). The effects of explicit referencing in distance problem solving over
         shared maps. Proceedings of the 2007 international ACM conference on Supporting group work,
         GROUP   '07 (pp. 331­340). New York, NY, USA:          ACM. doi:10.1145/1316624.1316674
Danahy, E., Hynes, M., Schneider, L & Dowling, D. (2012). The Aggregation Tool: Toward Collaborative
         Inquiry in Design-Based Science and Engineering Projects, 2012 ASEE NE Proceedings
Gergle, D., Millen, D. R., Kraut, R. E., & Fussell, S. R. (2004). Persistence matters: making the most of chat in
         tightly-coupled work. Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
         Systems, CHI    '04 (pp. 431­438). New York, NY, USA: ACM. doi:10.1145/985692.985747
Hynes, M., Danahy, E. & Dowling, D. (2012). The InterLACE Project: Examining the Barriers to Implementing
         Collaborative, Inquiry-based Investigations. 2012 ASEE Annual Conference.
Rose, D. H., & Gravel, J. W. (2010). Universal design for learning. In P. Peterson, E. Baker & B. McGraw
         (Eds.), International encyclopedia of education (pp. 119-124). Oxford: Elsevier.
Stahl, G., Koschmann,    T., &  Suthers,  D.   (2006). Computer-supported     collaborative learning: An    historical
         perspective. In R.  K.  Sawyer   (Ed.),  Cambridge  handbook     of  the learning  sciences (pp. 409-426).
         Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Teasley, S. D., & Roschelle, J. (1993). Constructing a joint problem space: The computer as a tool for sharing
         knowledge.   In S.  P. Lajoie  &   S. D. Derry  (Eds.),  Computers    as  Cognitive Tools   (pp. 229-258).
         Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

Acknowledgments
This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant No. 1119321. Any
opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the author(s) and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation.

© ISLS                                                                                                         391
