CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                              Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

         The Effect of Formative Feedback on Vocabulary Use and
 Distribution of Vocabulary Knowledge in a Grade Two Knowledge
                                               Building Class
                       Monica Resendes, Bodong Chen, Alisa Acosta, Marlene Scardamalia,
                    OISE/University of Toronto, 252 Bloor Street West, Toronto, ON, Canada
           Email: monica.resendes@utoronto.ca, bodong.chen@utoronto.ca, alisa_acosta@yahoo.ca,
                                         marlene.scardamalia@utoronto.ca

         Abstract:   This  study   examines   the  impact  of   formative    feedback  to  enhance  students'
         productive  written  vocabulary.   Behavioral,   lexical,  and    network  structure  analyses  were
         applied to the work of two Grade 2 classes engaged in knowledge building in science. Two
         variations  of  feedback   including  vocabulary    and   contribution-based     visualizations were
         integrated into  the knowledge    building  practice   of the  experimental   class.  Behavioral and
         lexical measures    were  calculated  with  automated   tools,  and   content analysis  was used   to
         evaluate depth of understanding. Moreover, the degree of vocabulary distribution throughout
         the  communities     was  explored.   Findings   show     that formative    feedback   embedded    in
         knowledge building practices can help students grow their vocabulary, apply new words in
         productive ways in their writing, and advance community knowledge. Results also show that
         as students learn and use a more diverse range of words in the context of knowledge building,
         the  more  discursively  connected   they   become,  and  the  greater  the  knowledge    distribution
         across the community.

Introduction
Literacy and the ability to work creatively with ideas are essential competencies for students to develop to
become productive citizens in a knowledge society. Literacy as a foundational component of a 21st century
education  is emphasized   in  contemporary    educational  initiatives  such   as the "Partnership  for  21st  Century
Skills" (see http://www.p21/org). As evident in this framework, literacy crosses all domains and underlies not
only core content learning, but also the ability to innovate and collaborate, and to engage effectively with media
and technology.   In   a broad  sense,   literacy entails an  ability   to  read and   write  with understanding,     use
information productively from a range of sources, as well as use language effectively to build and communicate
ideas. From a socio-cognitive perspective, developing literacy requires integrating language learning within
authentic  pedagogical   practices  that embed    language   use   within   inquiry   and problem   solving  processes
(Applebee, 1981; Bereiter and Scardamalia, 1987). This study explores an integrated approach to language
learning that engages young students in creative knowledge work together with literacy practices. It examines
how  formative   feedback    supports designed    to boost  knowledge      building  discourse  impact   literacy skills,
particularly growth in students' productive written vocabulary. The study also examines the extent to which new
and important terms are distributed throughout shared discourse as students worked to collaboratively build
knowledge in science.

Knowledge Building for Vocabulary Learning
Knowledge     building pedagogy    (Scardamalia   &   Beretier, 2003)    is  a socio-cognitive  approach   that   can be
described as "the production and continual improvement of ideas of value to a community" (p. 1370). This
approach places advancement of community knowledge as the explicit and shared goal (Scardamalia, 2002). In
knowledge building, students work together to participate in creative work with ideas in the effort to produce
increasingly  coherent   explanations to  shared  problems   of understanding.     Knowledge    building  practices   are
enhanced by Knowledge Forum, an online environment specifically designed to support high-level knowledge
work (Scardamalia,     2004). Knowledge    building   affordances   embedded     within the   environment  include    the
ability to co-author, reference, or build-on notes; scaffolds support high-level discourse moves such as "My
theory,"  "I need to   understand,"  or  "This doesn't  explain"   to   help frame   thinking  and writing, automated
assessment tools support evaluation and exploration of discourse. Both online and offline, a knowledge building
approach fosters collaboration and creative knowledge work, with shared discourse as its driving force. As such,
it provides a rich context to engage students' in authentic literacy practices that involve individual and co-
operative reading, writing, idea development, active research, and sustained collaborative dialogue (see Sun,
Zhang, & Scardamalia, 2010).
As elaborated above, literacy is bound up with processes of productive knowledge work. A critical aspect of
literacy involves  use   and  growth  of vocabulary.   Research    has  shown    that  greater knowledge   and    use of
vocabulary is a reliable predictor of reading and writing comprehension (Stahl, 1991) as well as verbal and

© ISLS                                                                                                              391
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                           Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

listening skills (Steahr, 2009). Studies also show that learning a new word is not a singular event, but happens
over time, with increased and varied usage indicating deeper understanding (Nation, 2001). Integrated contexts
of literacy that promote productive vocabulary use and growth thus engage students in meaningful activities
related to new or difficult words, expose them to multiple and varied encounters with these words, and give
them opportunities to utilize such words in speaking, reading, writing and listening (Stahl, 1991). Authentic
literacy practices engage students in these activities not only in the interest of language acquisition, but in the
service of authentic inquiry and problem solving; such instructional environments have been shown to be more
effective for language learning than direct instruction with respect to depth of word knowledge, writing quality
and  expansion   of vocabulary    (Yonek,  2008; Stahl,  1991).  With  its focus    on  immersing   students in shared
discourse  for   solving problems   of  understanding,  knowledge    building   practices   present conditions   highly
conducive for effective vocabulary learning. Students are offered rich opportunities to introduce new vocabulary
within inquiry-based work, negotiate and infer word meanings, and use available sources to help them deepen
their knowledge of new words.
        In this study, we explore the discourse of two grade 2 classes as they each engaged in two knowledge
building units in science, with a focus on the life cycles of birds and salmon. We focus on development of
productive  written  vocabulary   as   evidenced in  students' writing on     Knowledge     Forum.  Productive  use   of
vocabulary  entails  that students  display  a diverse  range  of words    in their  writing  in  a way   that conveys
understanding. Richness in student vocabulary includes use of both domain-specific and epistemological terms
or "academic words" (Coxhead, 2000). Productive use of domain-specific vocabulary is indicative of grasping
core content and language, with frequent use of domain specific words indicative of integration into a discursive
community (Chernobilsky et al., 2004). Similarly, "academic words" (eg. source, theory, hypothesis) refers to
terms that occur at a reasonably high frequency rate in academic discourse; these words cross domains and
generally  correspond    with  higher  level knowledge   work.    Academic    words     typically appear  in   students'
discourse  at  a relatively late  age, beginning  in  adolescence  and  increasing     with post-secondary   education
(Laufer, 1994).
        So, is it plausible to expect children of primary school age to use sophisticated vocabulary in their
written work? According to research on reading progression (Chall, 1996), the spectrum of learning across
which   both   reading   comprehension     and   vocabulary  usage   take     place  is  characterized  by   important
developmental changes. According to this framework, in primary level grades students are still "learning to
read"--gaining foundational phonetic knowledge--rather than "reading to learn", which involves higher level
cognitive processes and does not begin to take place until approximately grades 4-6 (Chall, 1996). However,
this progression  is not  a rigid  series of sequential  stages, but an  overlapping     continuum   that is   based  on
approximate grade and age levels; furthermore, the developmental steps are dependent to a considerable extent
upon the learning environment itself (Chall, 1996).
          Research   shows   that exposing   students to specialized  fields  of discourse    on  a  repeated  basis  in
authentic language-learning settings can help foster the productive use of sophisticated words (Corson, 1997).
Immersing students in settings that include speaking and listening along with reading and writing is particularly
beneficial for lower-level readers (Beimiller, 1999). Similarly, research shows that even with a single exposure,
a word encountered in a richer context is more likely to be learned than is one in a less rich context (Herman,
Anderson, Pearson, & Nagy, 1987). Combining reading and writing activities with explicit vocabulary learning
has been shown to be a highly effective strategy for language learning (Stahl & Fairbanks, 1986). In addition,
the use of formative assessments to enhance learning is widely recognized (Black & William, 1998; Stiggins,
2004;  Marzano,   2006).  Formative    assessments  integrated within  computer-supported      learning  environments
have  also been   shown   to   be beneficial for learning  (Tseng  &   Tsai   2007).    Moreover,   studies  show    that
vocabulary-based feedback such as word or tag clouds provide useful overviews of knowledge that highlight
key concepts (Hearst and Rosner, 2008) and aid in semantic exploration and comprehension of data by users
(Bateman, Gutwin, and Nacenta (2008).
These findings support the notion that even students as young as the second grade can learn and use complex
vocabulary  productively    if conditions and  resources are   conducive   to such  learning. A   knowledge    building
approach has been shown to provide such conditions. For example, research has shown gains in vocabulary and
comprehension as by-products of collaborative and creative work with ideas--knowledge building contexts with
no direct focus on vocabulary learning and text comprehension (Scardamalia et al., 1992). Furthermore, children
as young as junior kindergarten have shown gains in literacy using this approach (Pelletier, Reeve, & Halewood
2006). Looking at vocabulary growth in knowledge building students across grades 3 and 4, Sun et al. (2010)
traced an increase of use of academic words of almost four percent on average, and found positive correlations
between use of sophisticated vocabulary with depth of understanding.          Where benefits in knowledge building
work for literacy are reported, this study will be the first to focus on the role of formative feedback targeted to
enhance   students'  vocabulary    knowledge.    Moreover,   examining   students'     knowledge    building   calls for
collaborative, emergent knowledge advancement in addition to individual assessments. This study will also

© ISLS                                                                                                               392
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                          Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

address learning gains at the group level by looking at the underlying network structure of rich vocabulary in the
collective discourse to determine the extent to which vocabulary use is distributed throughout the community.

Method
Participants and Classroom Context
Participants for this study include 44 Grade 2 students attending the Dr. Eric Jackman Institute for Child Study
in downtown Toronto.     Two consecutive Grade 2 classes were studied--22 students (11 boys, 11 girls) from the
2010-11 grade 2 class, and 22 students (11 boys, 11 girls) from the 2011-12 school year. Both classes were
taught by the same teacher, and engaged in the same activities for each knowledge building unit. For their
knowledge building sessions, both Grade 2 classes split up in a rotation in which half the students went to the
library and  the other   half engaged in  inquiry. The  2010-2011   class  was not subject to any  treatments    and
provides what we will call the "benchmark" class. The 2011-2012 class functions as the experimental class.
Within  this class, two   student  groups (Group   A and   Group  B)    each received a different  variation  of the
treatments, which are elaborated below.
         Both Grade 2 classes in this study participated in a four month "Bird Study" knowledge building unit
followed by a 4 month unit on "Salmon". For both units, the Grade 2 students typically had one 45-minute
session a week dedicated to knowledge building, referred to as "KB" time. During this period, students engaged
in active research or whole group "KB talks" in which they discussed questions, ideas, and so on, related to their
area of study. Typically, students were given 20 minutes to enter their ideas, questions, theories, etc., into the
Knowledge Forum community space. For both units of study, students engaged in active research and used a
variety of sources, including books, websites, and videos, to increase their knowledge on birds and salmon.
Students in both classes also examined objects such as owl pellets, feathers, and nests, as well as raised salmon
in a classroom tank as part of the "Lake Ontario Salmon Restoration Program". Thus, students in both years had
rich environments to support their knowledge building work. Although students were split into groups during
knowledge building time in both classes, all students in a single class worked in the same knowledge space.

Design
Four knowledge building principles served as important design elements for this research, informing the two
different treatments embedded in the knowledge building practices of the experimental class:
(i) Knowledge Building Discourse: This type of discourse constitutes collaborative dialogue that focuses on
continual refinement and improvement of ideas and advances through a community's continued efforts to deal
with puzzling facts. An element of knowledge building discourse includes occasional periods of reflection on
the state and direction of the community's discourse itself. "Meta-discourse" can be described as discussion
about discussion, and calls for community members to take a "meta-perspective" on their own dialogue. Meta-
discourse serves as a type of formative evaluation that can help a knowledge creating community both assess
their achievement up to the current point and decide on a future plan of action. Van Aalst (2009) identifies meta-
discourse as a key condition of an innovation ecology that can enable knowledge creation. Studies also show
that meta-discourse can help students in a range of important ways, such as recognizing shared knowledge
advances,  identifying   setbacks,  plotting out   next steps,  setting goals and  drawing   links between    them,
connecting ideas, articulating new and promising questions, and establishing deeper ties between authoritative
knowledge and newly identified problems (Zhang et al., 2009; Zhang & Messina 2010; Zhang et al., 2011). In
this study, special "KB Talks" devoted to meta-discourse were integrated within the students' inquiry time as a
pedagogical treatment geared towards enhancing students' knowledge building dialogue. Questions addressed in
these sessions   included: Are   we answering   our questions;  are we   going  deeper  with our   theories; are we
bringing in useful information that is helping us develop our ideas; are we stuck on a problem; what can we do
to get "unstuck"? While both 2011 and 2012 classes engaged in collaborative discourse both on and offline, the
experimental 2012 class was subject to a series of special "KB talks" that focused on engaging students in meta-
discourse. Both Group A and Group B participated in a total of eight meta-discourse sessions over the course of
eight months.
(ii) Concurrent, transformative and embedded assessment: This principle speaks to the effort, on behalf of the
community itself, to identify advancements or setbacks in its knowledge building endeavors on a continual
basis. To help facilitate meta-discourse sessions, students in the 2012 class were given formative feedback in the
form of simple visualizations to help them take a "bird's eye view" of their own discourse. Two forms of
feedback  were   tested: a.)  Word  Clouds--Students    in both Group    A and  Group  B were  shown   a series   of
different word clouds that visualized key concepts and vocabulary relevant to streams of inquiry that emerged in
their own discourse. The aim was to introduce and further acquaint students to new or challenging words in a
context deeply integrated with their knowledge building work. In this study, three different types of word clouds
were used (see Figure 1): those that depicted the most frequent terms the students were using in their naturally-
occurring dialogue over time ("Our Words"); those that depicted key words that experts frequently used when
talking about those same phenomena ("Expert Words"); and a third which allowed students to see the extent to

© ISLS                                                                                                           393
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                          Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

which the words characterizing their discourse mapped onto the "expert" dialogue, by means of colour-coding
("Our Shared Words"). For instance, the expert terms featured on the "Expert Words" cloud that students were
engaging in their own online discourse were coloured red on this visualization, while terms that students had not
yet used remained black. While visualized to the experimental class by means of the word clouds, the "expert"
vocabulary was available to both classes via research materials in the classroom, including books that were read
or objects that were discussed during KB talks.
      All word clouds were refined throughout the inquiry, with changes based directly on terms emerging from
students' writing on Knowledge Forum. These visualizations would help students gain a sense of the semantic
field of their discourse, and would enable the community to trace the use and longevity of new terms in a
discourse over time. For instance, growth and change of the "Our Words" cloud helped to make explicit the
attention that different terms were receiving at different points in time, displaying to the community which
terms were dominating the discourse, which potentially significant terms remained underused or unrecognized,
whether terms stayed relevant or useful to the problem at hand, and so on. Lack of common vocabulary between
students and authoritative sources, as evidenced in the "Our Shared Words" cloud, could show limits of student
understanding    while also  depicting terms  that could  help   to fruitfully expand   the dialogue.  Embedding
discussion of these visuals into meta-discourse sessions was designed to help position them as objects of public
discourse that helped to make explicit important elements of the online dialogue as it emerged and to serve as
artifacts the community could rally around during group reflection.

    Figure 1. Visualizations supported meta-discourse, including Word Clouds (left) and Meta-Discourse tool
                                                     (right)

b.) Meta-Discourse Tool--In addition to word clouds, students in Group B were exposed to the Meta-Discourse
tool (see Figure 1). This is a new tool embedded within Knowledge Forum that is specifically designed to help
students take a meta-level perspective on their own discourse, and to support meta-discourse by giving students
explicit feedback about the contribution makeup of their group dialogue at any given time. This tool allows
students to monitor the types of discursive moves--corresponding to the scaffolds in Knowledge Forum--used
by  their community    at any given  time. While   both groups   in the  experimental class participated in meta-
discourse sessions, Group B was introduced to the Meta-Discourse tool from the first treatment in order to chart
the contributions   on their own working   view,   and  used the graphs    produced  by the tool to mediate    their
reflective discussions in each of the eight sessions. Both the word cloud and the meta-discourse visualizations
were shown to the whole class.
(iii) Constructive use of authoritative sources: This principle requires that students engage with "expert" texts
and information in a way that is both critical and conducive to improving their own ideas. This practice involves
encountering unknown terms and concepts, and applying them to students' own ideas. In the experimental class,
students were encouraged to explore unknown words and find relevant sources to help them understand new or
challenging vocabulary. After meta-discourse discussions students moved onto writing in Knowledge Forum,
often forming small groups or working in pairs to find resources to help them learn more about the important
terms just discussed. Students engaged in co-operative reading, writing and discussion about these words, and
worked to acquire definitions of new words as well as integrate them into group discourse.
(iv) Symmetrical knowledge advancement: This principle implies that knowledge and expertise flows within and
between   community    members   working   on shared   problems  in  the interest of  improvement   of  ideas. The
distribution of knowledge across a community is important in the context of vocabulary learning, especially in
the early years.  Research shows that children who acquire literacy skills in the early years of schooling are
more likely to experience success at higher levels of education, with the reverse also holding true (Stanovich,
2000). Simply put, children who know more words can learn more words (Stahl, 1991). The collaborative meta-
discourse discussions, coupled with visualizations designed to give students a meta-level perspective on critical
aspects of their own discourse, were aimed at engaging all students in various literacy practices including
reading, speaking, listening as well as writing, so that productive vocabulary use was distributed throughout the
group discourse.
          It is our hypothesis  that students in the experimental    class will demonstrate   a greater  degree  of
productive written vocabulary than the benchmark class from the previous year. We also predict that the more
expansive the vocabulary, the greater the knowledge advancement of the community. Moreover, we predict that
vocabulary use in the experimental class would be used and distributed across time and groups to a greater

© ISLS                                                                                                         394
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                    Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

extent than in the benchmark class. We also hypothesize that Group B from the experimental class would
contribute more diversely than Group A or the benchmark class, and correspondingly exhibit greater knowledge
advancement.

Data Analysis
The data source for this study was student discourse as archived on two Knowledge Forum databases generated
over two consecutive years. These include: i.) Grade 2, 2011--248 notes across four views, from both the "Bird
Study" (114 notes, 3 views) and "Salmon Study" units (134 notes, 1 view); ii.) Grade 2, 2012--203 notes across
eight views from their "Bird Study" (175 notes, 7 views) and "Salmon Study" (90 notes, 1 view) units; and iii.)
video of student "KB talks" and meta-discourse sessions supplement notes and provide qualitative information
about students' ideas.
        The application of behavioural, lexical, and group-level dynamics, are summarized as follows:
(a) Behavioural Measures: The Knowledge Forum Analytic Toolkit (Burtis, 1998) was used to calculate the
number of notes authored per student and the percentage of notes read per student.
(b) Lexical Measures: Lexical profiles were calculated for each student using the Knowledge Forum Analytic
Toolkit. Researchers manually corrected spelling errors so that all words could be picked up by the automated
tools. Three attributes were used to create students' lexical profiles, and include the following: i.) academic
words; ii.) 1st, 1000 words; iii.) domain-specific words. The Academic Word List (AWL) is composed of 570
written families external to the 2000 most frequently used English words but common in academic discourse.
The 1st, 1000 words refers to a lexicon consisting of the most frequently used words in English, plus their
grammatical variations. Greater use of high frequency words is indicative of a more limited vocabulary (Nation,
2001). With respect to domain-specific words, two inquiries were conducted to generate a single word list.
Firstly, researchers consulted the Ontario Curriculum Standards document for Science and Technology and
identified key words corresponding to the "Understanding Life Systems" stream. The words selected totaled 342
individual terms that ranged across Grades 1-10. Words selected from the curriculum document were divided
into two levels according to the grade in which they appeared in the curriculum document. 84 words were
identified at or below the Grade 2 level, and 258 words above the Grade 2 level. In addition to this, the author
and classroom teacher consulted the external sources available in the classroom and identified terms critical to
particular streams of inquiry as they emerged during the course of knowledge building work. These words
appeared on the word cloud visualizations to help students expand their vocabulary repertoire. For analysis, a
total of 64 "expert" words were combined with the 342 curriculum words to create a single comprehensive list.
This cumulative list, which totaled 406 words, plus their grammatical variations, was used to measure domain-
specific vocabulary.
(c) Depth of Understanding: To examine community knowledge advancement, two researchers used content-
based analysis to select notes from the online discourse that represented "theorizing" work (see Chuy, Resendes,
Tarchi, Chen, & Scaradmalia, 2011). Such notes exhibit students' explicit attempt to produce explanations and
express original ideas, and as such comprise useful examples of students' productive writing and their ability to
convey conceptual understanding. To evaluate depth of understanding, "theorizing" notes were then subject to
further analysis according   to two coding  schemas developed  by Zhang  and colleagues    (2007) to   measure
"scientificness" and "epistemic complexity" of ideas, each possessing four levels. Scientificness implies the
degree to which an idea is scientifically accurate, while epistemic complexity represents the level of cognitive
effort and written sophistication evident in an explanation. The level of idea complexity informs the meaning for
scientificness, so scores for each note were multiplied for a single composite value (Zhang & Sun, 2008).
(d) Group Discourse Network Structure: On a group level, notes were analyzed using KBDeX (Matsuzawa,
Oshima, Oshima, Niihara, & Sakai, 2011), a tool developed for Knowledge Forum that is designed specifically
to analyze the network structure of collective discourse based on co-occurrence of words. KBDeX can reveal
the network structure of a community's discourse according to three levels. Firstly, it analyzes interconnectivity
between students via shared vocabulary on a social level; secondly, it maps discursive connections on the level
of individual notes, which shows the use and distribution of vocabulary in students' writing; lastly, it traces
connections at   the level of individual words, which reveals semantic relationships   between words   and  the
conceptual content of the discourse. For this study, we analyzed each class's discursive network on the social
and individual word levels according to Degree Centrality (DC), Betweenness Centrality (BC) and Closeness
Centrality (CC), which represent standard points of analysis in complex network science (e.g., Newman, 2010).
Degree centrality measures the "popularity" or number of connections one node has with other nodes in the
network. In this case, each network node represents a student or a word, with connections between students
created through the use of the same word, and connections between words created when one word appears in the
same written note as another word. So, the more discursive connections a student has with other students, or a
word with other words, the more "popular" or centralized that student or word is in the network. Betweenness
centrality provides a valuable measure at both a local and global level, and indicates the degree of connectivity
of a node, as well as the "load" placed on the node by all other nodes. For this research, this measure reveals the

© ISLS                                                                                                      395
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                            Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

extent to which students or words are connected within a community and the degree to which they bridge
various social clusters or discursive cliques, respectively. Closeness centrality measures the proximity of one
node to all other nodes, and is indicative of how quickly information can flow through a network. Applied to
this case, this measure reveals how closely connected students are to each other via the discourse they are
engaging in, or, in the case of words, the semantic context in which they are being used. The particular domain-
specific and academic words used by the students in each class, generated from their lexical profiles, were used
to comprise two separate word lists for group analysis in KBDeX. In this way, the discursive relationships
between students and words characterizing the collective discourse could be mapped.

Results
Did the experimental class show more productive written vocabulary than the
"benchmark" class?
To explore significant differences across groups in student performance on behavioral and lexical measures, as
well as on their demonstrated depth of understanding, a one-way ANOVA was conducted for each measure.
Results show significant differences for the following measures: total domain words, F(2, 43) = 7.77, p < .01;
unique domain words F(2, 43) = 5.62, p < .001; total words F(2, 43) = 3.44,        p < .05; use of words above Grade
2, F(2, 43)  = 7.24,   p < .001; and  depth of  understanding   F(2,  43)  = 11.5,   p <. 001. Post-hoc tests (HSD)
revealed that Group B used significantly more domain words in total (p < .001, Cohen's d = 9.72), as well as
more unique domain words (p < .01, Cohen's d = 5.91) than the other two groups. Furthermore, Group B wrote
significantly more words than Group A (p < .05, Cohen's d = -72.64), and both Group A (p < .01, Cohen's d =
2.96) and Group B (p < .05, Cohen's d = 2.35) outperformed the 2011 class with respect to use of words above
Grade 2. These results suggest that formative feedback that is embedded in knowledge building practice helps
young students to use increasingly rich and diverse vocabulary. These findings also suggest that visualizations
reflecting student contribution patterns to group discourse prompt students to write more in total.
          With respect to depth of understanding, both Group A (p < .001, Cohen's d = 2.45) and Group B (p <
.01, Cohen's d = 1.79) performed better on depth of understanding than the 2011 class. This suggests that
formative   feedback     coupled with    collaborative   reflective discussion   can   help  students construct   and
communicate ideas in writing that reflect greater scientific accuracy and more elaborate explanations. Within
the 2012 class, Group B wrote significantly more words than Group A, as noted, yet there was no significant
difference  in depth   of  understanding  between    groups  (M   =  5.13, SD   =  2.15 vs.  M  =   4.48, SD  = 1.12,
respectively). A closer look at student work reveals that within Group A, a few students stood out as having
especially high composite scores, which could help to explain group performance on this measure.

To what extent was key vocabulary distributed in the shared discourse?
The continual give and take of ideas to advance community knowledge is a foundational principle upon which
knowledge building communities operate. In order to explore group-level dynamics in the community and the
shared discourse, network structure analysis was conducted using KBDeX. As elaborated in a previous section,
typical knowledge building sessions in both Grade 2 classes involved students splitting up into rotating groups.
However, all students in both classes worked in the same knowledge space on the database and contributed their
ideas to a shared online discourse. For this reason, group-level analysis was conducted across the 2011 and the
2012 class as a whole with this tool.
          To explore   any significant   differences across  classes  with respect  to the  degree, betweenness   and
closeness   centrality of  each  student community,    a one-way    ANOVA     was   conducted  for  each  measure.   A
significant difference   was found   for both  degree  centrality   F(2, 41)  = 11.17,  p  < .0001  and   betweenness
centrality F(2, 41) = 13.46, p < .001. Post-hoc tests showed that both Groups A (p < .01, Cohen's d = .17) and B
(p < .001, Cohen's d = .19) displayed greater degree centrality than the 2011 class. Furthermore, the benchmark
class showed greater betweenness    centrality than  both Group A   (p < .001, Cohen's d =   .0091) and Group B   (p <
.001, Cohen's d = .0090). No difference was found with respect to closeness centrality. These findings indicate
that the 2012 class community had a higher number of students who had a higher number of connections with
other students,  suggesting  that  a  greater  number    of students  were   using more   shared  words   more  often.
Moreover, a higher betweenness centrality indicates that there were more social clusters in the 2011 class, as
opposed to the 2012 class in which each student was more highly connected to every other student. However,
that the 2011 class also exhibits a highly connected community, albeit to a lesser degree than the 2012 class,
indicates that knowledge     building practices are  themselves     conducive to  knowledge   distribution across the
community. In general, these results suggests that as students learn and use a more diverse range of words in the
context of knowledge building, the more discursively connected they become, and the greater the vocabulary
knowledge distribution across the community.
          The same series of tests were conducted to trace differences in the network structure of individual
words. A significant difference across groups was found for closeness centrality, F(2, 43) = 3.34, p < .05, with

© ISLS                                                                                                            396
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                              Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

the students in Group B using terms that were more semantically bound together in their discourse than in either
of the other groups. This group of students exhibited more diverse vocabulary, as their discourse contained more
terms semantically-related to those of other students. This condition is conducive to vocabulary learning as
students have access to a wider range of vocabulary in a collective knowledge pool, and this appears to foster
higher  levels  of word-associations     leading to use   of these terms in    different contexts.   In terms of  degree
centrality and betweenness centrality, no significant differences were found. This suggests that engagement in
knowledge building practices encourages active use of important vocabulary in writing and making connections
across various discursive streams in collective dialogue.

Discussion and Conclusions
This study   explored  the  impact  of   formative  feedback    visualizations embedded     within knowledge    building
practices to students' productive written vocabulary. Student work was analyzed on two levels. First, vocabulary
use was assessed by calculating behavioral and lexical attributes. Content analysis was used to evaluate depth of
understanding,   as  demonstrated     in student  online  discourse.  Second,    the  distribution   of  vocabulary use
throughout the community was explored through network structure analysis of discourse on the level of students
and words.
         Results show that formative feedback that is productively integrated into authentic inquiry practices
can facilitate vocabulary growth, use of new words in students' writing, and advances in community knowledge.
On the   whole,    students in the experimental     class used   more domain-specific       vocabulary  more  often and
exhibited  greater  scientificness and   complexity   of  ideas than students   in  the  benchmark   class.   Within the
experimental class, students who received formative feedback related to both vocabulary use as well as feedback
regarding  the  various  ways  they   were  contributing  to  group  dialogue,  used    more  sophisticated words   than
students who only received feedback regarding vocabulary, but did not show greater knowledge advancement.
This suggests that the vocabulary use for students receiving both kinds of feedback extended more widely
beyond their theorizing work and into different contribution types, such as asking questions or reporting facts. It
also suggests that engaging students in rich reflective discussion around formative feedback has a positive effect
on students' knowledge advancement. Based on these findings, one possible recommendation for primary grade
teachers  is to encourage   group  reflection   consistently  throughout a   knowledge      building study, since meta-
discourse  sessions proved   fruitful even  for  students as  young  as  Grade   2.   Another recommendation is that
teachers take advantage of group discussion periods to integrate feedback visuals for students to collaboratively
explore.
         Finally, network structure analysis of students' collective discourse showed that all students in the
experimental class were more discursively connected to one another and made more connections with other
students via their shared discourse than students in the benchmark class. That this distribution of vocabulary
knowledge is evident in Grade 2 is promising given that the disparity between students who demonstrate high
literacy skills and those who show lower level skills accelerates notably after the primary level and into the
junior  grades. Results  also  suggest    the importance     of supporting  meta-discourse,     enhanced   by formative
feedback, as a routine component of knowledge building practice with young students.
         Further   research  that  explores students'  verbal   dialogue in    addition  to the content  of their online
contributions is needed to more fully explore and assess primary aged students' literacy levels and capacities for
expanding vocabulary knowledge. Also, to better understand the impact of formative feedback on developing
students'  capacities in literacy  concurrent    with knowledge    building,   future research  will  focus  on refining
feedback designs and examining a wider range of literacy and knowledge distribution indicators.

References
Applebee, A. N. (1981). Writing in the secondary school. Urbana, IL: National Council of Teachers of English.
Bateman, S., Gutwin, C., & Nacenta, M. (2008). Seeing things in the clouds: The effect of visual features on tag
        cloud selections. Proceedings of HT '08, June 19-21, 2008. Pittsburgh, PA.
Bereiter, C., & Scardamalia, M. (1987). An attainable vision of high literacy: Approaches to teaching higher-
         order skills in reading and writing. Curriculum Inquiry, 17(1), 9­30.
Biemiller,   A. "Teaching Vocabulary: Early, Direct, and Sequential." American Educator, Spring (2001).
Black P. and D. Wiliam (1998), "Assessment and Classroom Learning", Assessment in Education: Principles,
        Policy and Practice, CARFAX, Oxfordshire, 5(1), 7-74.
Burtis, J. (1998). Analytic Toolkit report. Toronto, ON: Ontario Institute for Studies in Education of the
         University of Toronto.
Chall, J. S. (1996). Stages of reading development (2nd ed.). Fort Worth, TX: Harcourt Brace.
Chernobilsky, E., DaCosta, M. C., & Hmelo-Silver, C. E. (2004). Learning to talk the educational psychology
         talk through a problem-based course. Instructional Science, 32(4), 319­356.
Chuy, M., Resendes, M., Tarchi, C., Chen, B., & Scardamalia, M., (2011). Ways of contributing to an

© ISLS                                                                                                              397
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                      Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

       explanation-seeking   dialogue  in  science  and  history.   QWERTY    - Interdisciplinary Journal       of
       Technology, Culture, and Education.
Corson, D. J. (1997). The learning and use of academic English words. Language Learning, 47, 671­718.
Coxhead, A. (2000). A new academic word list. TESOL Quarterly, 34, 213-238.
Hearst, M. & Rosner, D. (2008). Tag clouds: Data analysis tool or social signaller? Proceedings of the 41st
     Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences. Kauai, Hawaii.
Herman, P.A., Anderson, R.C., Pearson, P.D., & Nagy, W.E. (1987). Incidental acquisition of word meaning
       from expositions with varied text features. Reading Research Quarterly, 22 (3), 263-284.
Laufer, B. (1994). Lexical profile of second language writing: Does it change over time? RELC Journal, 25, 21-
       33.
Marzano, R. J. (2006). Classroom assessments and grading that work. Alexandria, VA: Association for
       Supervision and Curriculum Development.
Matsuzawa, Y., Oshima, J., Oshima, R., Niihara, Y, & Sakai, S. (2011). KBDeX: A platform for exploring
       discourse in collaborative learning. Social and Behavioral Sciences, 26, 198-207.
Nation, I. S. P. (2001). Learning vocabulary in another language. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Newman, M. (2010). Networks: An introduction. Oxford University Press, USA.
Pelletier, J., Reeve, R. & Halewood, C. Young children's knowledge building and literacy development through
       Knowledge Forum®, Early Education & Development, 17(3), 323-346.
Scardamalia, M. (2004). CSILE/Knowledge Forum. In Education and technology: An Encyclopedia (pp.183
       192). Santa Barbara: ABC-CLIO.
Scardamalia, M. (2003). Crossing the digital divide: Literacy as by-product of knowledge building. Journal of
       Distance Education, 17(3), 78­81. Learning Technology Innovation in Canada.
Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (2003). Knowledge building. Encyclopedia of Education, (2), 1370-1373.
Scardamalia, M., &Bereiter, C., Brett, C., Burtis, P.J., Calhoun,   C., & Smith  Lea, N.  (1992). Educational
       applications of a networked communal database. Interactive Learning Environments, 2(1), 45-71.
Stahl, S.A. (1991). Beyond the instrumentalist hypothesis: Some relationships between word meanings and
       comprehension. In P. Schwanenflugel (ed.), The psychology of word meanings, pp. 157-178. Hillsdale,
       N.H.: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Stahl, S. A. & Fairbanks, M.M. (1986). The effects of vocabulary instruction: A model-based meta-analysis.
       Review of Educational Research, 56, 72-11.
Stanovich, K.E. (2000). Progress in Understanding Reading: Scientific Foundations and New Frontiers. New
       York: Guilford Press.
Steahr, Lars S. (2009). Vocabulary knowledge and advanced listening comprehension in English as a foreign
       language. December. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 31(4),    577-607.
Stiggins, R. (2004). Student-involved assessment for learning (4th ed). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall
       Inc.
Strogatz, S. (2001). Exploring complex network. Nature, 410, 445-489.
Sun, Y., Zhang, J., & Scardamalia, M. (2010). Knowledge building and vocabulary growth over two years,
       Grades 3 and 4. Instructional Science, 38(2), 147-171.
Van Aalst, J. (2009). Distinguishing between knowledge sharing, knowledge construction, and knowledge
        creation discourses. 4(3) International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 259-
        287.
Yonek, L. (2008). The effects of rich vocabulary instruction on students' expository writing, (Doctoral
        dissertation). University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.
Zhang, J., & Sun, Y. (2008) Knowledge building measures that matter. Paper presented at the Knowledge
        Building Summer Institute, University of Toronto, Canada.
Zhang, J., Scardamalia, M, Lamon, M, Messina, R, & Reeve, R. (2007). Socio-cognitive dynamics of
        knowledge building in the work of nine and ten year-olds. Educational Technology Research and
       Development, 55(2), 117­ 145.

Acknowledgments
This research was funded by a grant from the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada
titled "Ways of contributing to dialogue in elementary school science and history." We would also like to thank
the students, teachers and principals of the Dr. Eric Jackman Institute of Child Study, University of Toronto.

© ISLS                                                                                                         398
