CSCL 2013 Proceedings                   Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

 GoCivics--Tablet-Enhanced Role-Play Games: A Demonstration

       Matthew Haselton and Beth Quinn, Filament Games, 2010 Eastwood Avenue, Madison, WI 53704
                         mhaselton@filamentgames.com, bquinn@filamentgames.com

        Abstract: In this demonstration session a novel digital approach to traditional educational
        role-plays will be demonstrated. GoCivics Congress is a tablet-enhanced role-play game that
        introduces middle school social studies students to the process of negotiation in a US Senate
        committee and provides practice in listening and public speaking. The game is the prototype
        for  a  larger  project, GoGames,   a  set  of games  that   represent  a   novel use  of tablets--
        multiplayer, augmented social reality--that streamlines the process of implementing time-
        tested  pedagogical   models  such  as model   legislatures, mock   trials, and   structured debate.
        Session participants will view a video about the prototype's development and pilot testing in
        middle school classrooms. A subset of attendees then will be invited to play test GoCivics
        Congress, and will join presenters in a panel discussion of the game and its uses.

                                 Figure 1. GoCivics Mobile Congress Title Screen

The Purpose of GoCivics
        A fundamental assumption of democratic forms of government is that they require the informed and
active participation of their citizens. Self-governance  depends   on  citizens understanding     how   to effectively
assess issues, form reasoned opinions, express themselves clearly, and effectively navigate political and legal
institutions (National Task Force on Civic Learning and Democratic Engagement, 2012). Citizens who do not
understand  how  or  why  they   should participate undermine the    health of  a   democratic government.    A core
mechanism for developing informed citizens has historically been formal education. Indeed, one of the early
justifications for public education in the U.S. was the development of capable citizens (Dewey, 1954; Merriam,
1934).
        Yet  in  2010  only 22%    of U.S. eighth  graders demonstrate  "proficient"    knowledge    on the  National
Assessment of Educational Progress (NAEP) Civics exam. More problematically, over three-quarters of U.S.
middle school students fail to demonstrate even the most basic level of civic knowledge, a pattern that has been
noted for over a decade (National Center for Education Statistics, 2011). This is perhaps unsurprising given the
relative neglect of civics education in American schools in the last 40 years. Fortunately, this is changing and
civic education is "back on the agenda" in the United States (Galston, 2001: 217; Wood, 2012).
        One highly effective way to address this "civics gap" is the tried and true method of classroom role
plays such as mock trials and model legislatures (Youniss & Levine, 2009). While effective and engaging, these
methods are unfortunately time-intensive, administratively burdensome, and difficult for teachers to assess. In
the current educational environment in the US--where concepts such as data-driven and standards-aligned
reign supreme--an administratively burdensome activity that fails to clearly address either of these concepts is
unlikely to be widely adopted regardless of its pedagogical efficacy.
        We suggest, however, that if these traditional models could be made more manageable and easier to
administer, they would   be   more  commonly   employed.   To this   end, Filament    Games--a    commercial   game

© ISLS                                                                                                          396
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                  Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

development   company     that focuses exclusively  on  developing  high  quality learning games--is     developing
GoGames, a suite of tablet-enhanced role-play game. The games are structured as a kind of "augmented reality"
(AR): digital tools that enhance real world activities with digital information, identities, or actions. Unlike most
AR games which hinge on augmenting physical reality (e.g., Squire and Klopfer, 2007), GoGames are designed
to augment social reality by providing scaffolding for coordinated role and process enactment.
          GoGames products are designed to:
          1) enhance students' efficacy and experience participating in role-playing activities,
          2) significantly streamline and improve the ability of educators to plan, implement,
             and assess these activities, and
          3) provide school districts with cost-effective but powerful tools for teaching crucial
             content (e.g., civics) and skills (e.g., listening, speaking, compromise, debate).
We  have   completed  a   prototype, GoCivics   Congress,  as a  proof-of-concept (see Figure    1). This game  has
students assume the role of US Senators who are attempting to craft a new bill in a Senate Committee. Players
are challenged to balance individual values against the interests of the group, while honing skills of persuasion
and public  speaking. The   targeted   pedagogical   goals align  with Common     Core "Speaking     and  Listening"
Standards for 7th grade (Common Core State Standards Initiative, 2010), while the game's structure draws on
the Argumentation-Based Computer Supported Collaborative Learning (ABCSCL) model by "[supporting] the
sharing, constructing, and representing of arguments in multiple formats" (Noroozi et al. 2012).

Contributions of the GoGames Approach
          In each simulation, students take on different roles in the targeted process. Each role performance is
informed and structured with on-time, role-specific information, directions, and cues via an app running on his
or her individual tablet. By using elements of traditional games such as character roles, stages of advancement,
clearly defined abilities and obvious win conditions, GoGames provide an easily understandable structure for
navigating an open-ended problem space, effectively reducing the player's cognitive load and making it easier
for them to engage with the content and each other (Mayer & Moreno 2003). Instructors are provided with an
allied app providing oversight and pacing tools, grading modules, and real-time chat functions for private
communications with individual students during the simulation.
          Unlike traditional video games GoGames do not aim to fully immerse students in an alternate digital
world. They are multiplayer experiences that naturally scaffolds direct interaction among students in the real
world. Players do not control an avatar on the screen; rather, they become the characters themselves and are able
to interact face-to-face, but with their knowledge and goals augmented and supported by the unobtrusive mobile
technology. This engenders "improved activity awareness and coordination, [and] improve[d] communication
efficiency by enabling non-verbal communication such as gestures, and facilitate grounding via a shared visual
reference" (Wallace et al. 2009, p. 569). GoGames enhance learning for students by providing role-based, just-
in-time and on-demand information while focusing students on the relevant choices to be made based on their
role. For example, a student playing a witness in a mock trial is provided with material relevant to his or her
testimony while a lawyer sees the rules of evidence and suggestions for witness questions. The game's use of
multiple tablet touchscreen interfaces offers a distinct collaborative advantage over traditional single terminal
computers by naturally facilitating activity "in a collaborative and communicative way" (Mostmans et al. 2012,
p. 105). Each student controls his or her own tablet and are able to view the actions of their fellow students in
real-time on their tablet. According to Szewkis et al. (2009) this type of Single Display Groupware (SDG) is
especially useful for   developing   collaboration  between   members   of a  large group   and   leads   to greater
participation and student engagement. Thus, GoGames provide the appropriate supports for a rich, group-based
exploration of important civic functions.
          A core goal of the GoGames solution is to maximize teacher usability by removing the traditional
challenges of an in-class simulation. GoGames scaffolds the simulations, keeping all students actively engaged
throughout the activity, encourages and structures student interaction, and provides teachers with a dashboard in
which to set up, manage, and assess the activity. This frees the teacher to focus on instruction, rather than
facilitation and management. GoGames apps also provide tracking of student interactions within the simulation,
efficient and   effective grading    rubrics, peer-evaluation  components,   and  seamless  integration    of these
components in an easy-to-use (and easy-to-export) data format. By providing automatic scaffolding, keeping all
students actively engaged throughout the activity, and providing teachers with a dashboard to help set up,
manage, and assess the activity, GoGames removes obstacles to traditional simulations and lowers the barrier to
more widespread use of these best-practice teaching techniques. GoGames tools should be usable with minimal
training and administration, a crucial feature where time and money are scarce.
          Given research   on   the  effectiveness of traditional educational role  plays, epistemic    games,  and
augmented reality museum games, we hypothesize that using GoGames will lead to improvements in student
motivation and engagement, and significant gains in civic knowledge and skills (such as argumentation and
active listening). In the context of a tablet-enhanced, simulated civic activity, students can experience a specific

© ISLS                                                                                                         397
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                 Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

                       Figure 2. GoCivics Congress: Selecting values, the draft bill, and info bar

civic issue, how  civic systems function, personal       investment  in civic participation through  role-play, and
collaboration and competition  across defined     roles. That   is, GoGames   allow players  to "connect  academic
content and practices with students' physical, lived worlds" (Squire and Klopfer 2007, p. 371). In doing so,
students will construct a sophisticated understanding of how diverse civic roles interact within a dynamic civic
system.  As  students pursue goals consistent     with   their roles within that civic system   and receive timely,
accurate, and customized feedback about their performance, they will develop a deeper understanding of civics
and increase their motivation for civic engagement and reasoned debate. We hypothesize that teachers using
GoGames tools will spend less time preparing for the activity, will exhibit higher levels of confidence, and will
experience higher quality interactions with their students. By supporting or automating many administrative,
management, and assessment tasks, the simulation will free teachers to focus on providing on-demand coaching
and support for students, and on documenting formative assessment of student performance.

The Prototype: How to Play GoCivics Congress
         GoCivics Congress invites students to take on the role of a US Senator who is trying, with his or her
colleagues, to craft a new bill (see Figure 2). This draft bill is sent to committee and this is where the action
begins. Each student-senator takes on sets of contrasting values that influence their motivation for passing
particular types of amendments to the bill. They meet in caucus with those holding similar values to craft
strategy and  to  review the  proposed  amendments.        Senators   are then   assigned to  different substantive
subcommittees to hash out deals with colleagues who may hold very different values. The subcommittees may

                             Figure 3. GoCivics Congress: Presenting the Package

pass out of subcommittee only a small subset of possible amendments so each Senator must try to convince their
subcommittee colleagues to support their amendments or work a deal. Each subcommittee then attempts to
convince the larger committee to vote for their package by presenting and defending their package on the floor
of the committee (see Figure 3). Players accumulate points based on the values that are represented in the final
bill. What if no bill is passed? Everybody loses!

© ISLS                                                                                                          398
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                 Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

         Pilot tests of iterative versions of Mobile Congress were conducted with university students and with
three classes  of middle   school students. These   context usability  tests demonstrated   the feasibility of the
technology and the game design. The game effectively supported various forms of discussion and players were
actively engaged  in the simulation. This   data is being used  to inform    the design of other forms   of tablet-
enhanced role plays including a mock trial, a structured debate, and a small-scale Model United Nations.

Structure of the Demonstration Experience
         The presentation will begin with a video documentary about the creation and testing of the project,
including field-testing examples with middle school students. During our demonstration, a subset of attendees
will be invited to play through a section of Mobile Congress using iPads while a presenter narrates an overhead
projection of the gameplay and the remaining attendees observe. The session concludes with a panel discussion
among the playtest participants, and the lead designer and principal investigator of GoCivics Congress.

References
Common Core State Standards Initiative (2010). Common Core State Standards for English Language Arts &
         Literacy in History/Social Studies, Science, and Technical Subjects. Retrieved from
         http://www.corestandards.org/assets/CCSSI_ELA%20Standards.pdf.
Dewey, J. (1954). Democracy and Education. New York: Macmillian Company.
Galston, W. A. (2001). Political Knowledge, Political Engagement, and Civic Education. Annual Review of
         Political Science, 4, 217-234.
Mayer, R. E., & Moreno R. (2003). Nine Ways to Reduce Cognitive Load in Multimedia Learning, Educational
         Psychologist, 38:1, 43-52. Retrieved from http://dx.doi.org/10.1207/S15326985EP3801_6
Merriam, C.E. (1934). Civic Education in the United States. New York: Scribners.
Mostmans, L., Vleugels, C., & Bannier, S. (2012). Raise Your Hands or Hands-on ? The Role of Computer-
         Supported Collaborative Learning in Stimulating Intercreativity in Education. Educational Technology
         & Society, 15(4), 104­113.
National Task Force on Civic Learning and Democratic Engagement (2012). A Crucible Moment: College
         Learning and Democracy's Future. Washington, DC.
National Center for Education Statistics (2011). The Nation's Report Card: Civics 2010 (NCES 2011­466).
         Washington, DC.
Noroozi, O., Weinberger, A., Biemans, H. J. a., Mulder, M., & Chizari, M. (2012). Argumentation-Based
         Computer Supported Collaborative Learning (ABCSCL): A synthesis of 15 years of research.
         Educational Research Review, 7(2), 79­106.
Squire, K., & Klopfer, E. (2007). Augmented Reality: Simulations on Handheld Computers. Journal of the
         Learning Sciences, 16(3), 371­413.
Szewkis, E., Nussbaum, M., Rosen, T., Abalos, J., Denardin, F., Caballero, D., Tagle, A., et al. (2011).
         Collaboration within large groups in the classroom. International Journal of Computer-Supported
         Collaborative Learning, 6(4), 561­575. doi:10.1007/s11412-011-9123-y
Wallace, J., Scott, S., Stutz, T., Enns, T., & Inkpen, K. (2009). Investigating teamwork and task work in single
         and multi-display groupware systems. Personal and Ubiquitous Computing, 13(8), 569­581.
Wood, Peter (2012, March 14). Better Citizens: Obama's Higher-Education Agenda. Chronicle of Higher
         Education. Retrieved from http://chronicle.com/blogs/innovations/better-citizens-
         obama%E2%80%99s-higher-education-agenda-part-4a-of-8/31930.
Youniss, J., & Levine, P. (Eds.). (2009). Engaging Young People in Civic Life. Nashville, TN: Vanderbilt
         University Press.

Acknowledgements
Filament Games would like to thank our partners on this project: iCivics' Carrie Ray-Hill and Jeff Curley who
were instrumental in creating game content and honing the game design; Dr. Connie Flanagan, University of
Wisconsin,  who   served as subject  matter  expert and  helped   with prototype  testing; and  Waukesha    STEM
Academy   teachers  Beth Wartzenluft    and Lukas   Christianson, and  Edgewood    Campus   School teacher   Lynn
Koresh, who provided ongoing feedback on the game and tested the game with their students.

The   research reported  here was   supported    by the Institute  of  Education  Sciences, U.S.  Department     of
Education, through the Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) program contract ED-IES-10-C-0023 to
Filament Games. The opinions expressed are those of the authors and do not represent views of the U.S.
Department of Education.

© ISLS                                                                                                         399
