CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                          Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

   Youth Roles and Leadership in an Online Creative Community
                                   Ricarose Roque, Natalie Rusk, Amos Blanton
                                                  MIT Media Lab
                                                   75 Amherst St
                                                 Cambridge, MA
                         ria@media.mit.edu, nrusk@media.mit.edu, amos@scratch.mit.edu

         Abstract: Teens within local community organizations often serve in leadership roles, such as
         camp counselors or program assistants. As they carry out their responsibilities, they gain work
         skills and the community benefits from their contributions. With young people spending more
         time online, how might they build similar skills while contributing to the online communities
         they  engage    in? In  this paper we  examine   the   experience of  youth   who  have  taken  on
         leadership roles within Scratch, a creative online community. We identify the main challenges
         these youth encountered, the strategies they used to manage these challenges, and what they
         learned in the process. Their descriptions suggest a progression from learning to carry out
         their responsibilities in collaboration with other team members to eventually developing their
         own visions for improving the community. We have found that these roles provide pathways
         of   participation  and deeper   engagement    for youth   interested in   contributing to online
         communities.

Introduction
Scratch is a programming language that enables children to create interactive media, such as animations, games,
and stories. Scratch is also an online community, where young people share their creations and connect with
other members online (Resnick et al., 2009). Inspired by Seymour Papert's idea of a "computational samba
school"  (Papert, 1980;   Zagal  and   Bruckman,  2005),  the   Scratch online community     is  designed to  engage
members of all levels of expertise, ages, and backgrounds in learning from one another as they create and play
together. In Scratch, members explore others' projects, write comments, and download and remix each other's
projects. The Scratch website also includes a discussion forum, where members can ask questions, converse
about Scratch-related topics, and find collaborators. Since it launched in 2007, Scratch (http://scratch.mit.edu)
has grown into a dynamic community with more than a million registered members, primarily between the ages
of 8 and 16, and over 2.8 million shared projects.
         As participation in the Scratch website grew, young people contributed in ways beyond what we had
originally  anticipated. More    and  more  young  people   took  the   initiative to help others--from   answering
questions in the website discussion forums to creating interactive tutorials to share their skills. Youth also began
to look for ways to help the Scratch Team, which we are members of, including reporting issues and suggesting
ideas for  improving  the    programming    language and    the website. The   Scratch   Team   saw these  emergent
activities as opportunities   to engage   members    in helping  create  a supportive   environment  for  the entire
community. We and other team members have incorporated youth's ideas in a number of ways. In this paper,
we focus on one of our initiatives: creating explicit roles for youth to volunteer their time to help out in the
Scratch community.
         Youth within local community-based organizations often take on leadership roles, for example, serving
as camp counselors, program assistants, and peer tutors (Roth & Brooks-Gunn, 2003). As they carry out their
roles and responsibilities with support from adult staff, they learn to handle challenges and develop planning,
problem solving, communication, teamwork, and other work and life skills (Salusky et al., 2012). In addition to
youth gaining valuable experience, the community organizations also benefit from the new ideas, perspective,
and energy of youth leaders (Pittman, Irby, Tolman, Yohalem, & Ferber, 2003).
         As young people are increasingly spending time online (Lenhart, Purcell, Smith, & Zickuhr, 2011),
how might youth--and the online communities they participate in--gain similar benefits in roles online? In this
paper, we explore this question by looking at the experience of youth who have taken on leadership roles within
the Scratch online community. We first describe the roles of community moderators and collab counselors and
introduce the youth that we interviewed about their experience. We then examine the challenges these youth
leaders encountered, the strategies they used to overcome them, and what they learned in the process. Finally,
we reflect on the opportunities for learners and designers in providing leadership roles for youth in online
communities.

Community Roles for Youth
In this paper,  we  focus    on  two  key roles that youth  have   served  within   the Scratch  online community:
community moderators and collab counselors.      We also refer to youth in these roles   as "youth leaders," as they

© ISLS                                                                                                         399
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                            Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

are developing leadership skills and fulfilling authentic responsibilities in collaboration with the Scratch Team
adult facilitators.
        Community moderators assist in the management of the Scratch community's activities, particularly in
the website's active discussion forums, which receive about 1,100 posts a day. They help answer questions,
provide constructive feedback, keep discussions friendly and on-topic, and model respectful interaction in the
community. They have access to a moderators' forum, where they can discuss community-related issues with
the Scratch Team. The first group of community moderators were hand-picked by the Scratch Team in 2008.
The selection   process  was  shifted  into an election   model  in 2010.   Scratch members     who  are interested in
becoming community moderators can nominate themselves and describe their interest in the role. The Scratch
Team then selects a subset of nominees for community members to vote on. Since the community moderator
role was created, there have been 14 moderators from 6 countries.
        Collab     counselors support  the  community     in a series  of online  collaboration events   called Collab
Camps   on    the   Scratch  website. Collab   Camp    is a    community-wide    event  in   which  participants form
collaborative groups, called "collabs," to create a Scratch project. Prior to the start of each Collab Camp, we
invite community members who have demonstrated the ability to give constructive and helpful feedback to
become  collab    counselors. A   collab  counselor's primary   responsibility is to give  constructive   feedback  on
projects created by participants of the Collab Camp. Like community moderators, collab counselors have a
private discussion forum to ask questions and discuss strategies for giving constructive feedback. Since we
created this role in 2011, there have been 9 counselors from 5 countries.
        The Scratch Team, based in the MIT Media Lab, develops and manages the Scratch programming
environment and online community. We, the authors of this paper, are part of the of the Scratch Team. As adult
facilitators, we   regularly interact with  moderators    and  counselors,  answer   questions, select   or encourage
members to take on these roles, and discuss the latest trends and issues in the community.
        We discuss youth participation in Scratch from the perspective of youth development literature,          which
focuses on children and adolescents developing a broad range of skills through active participation in programs,
typically in out of school time   (Eccles & Gootman, 2002).      Some youth development studies     focus   specifically
on adolescents' development of leadership skills as they carry out responsibilities, such as leading activities for
younger children or organizing community action projects (e.g., Conner & Strobel, 2007). To date, only a few
studies have examined youth leadership in online environments, and those have focused on youth working with
each other as part of a group or team (e.g., Cassell, Huffaker, Tversky, & Ferriman, 2006; Turkaya & Tirthalia,
2010). The    current paper  focuses  on  youth carrying   out  roles  with responsibilities within  a broader   online
community, in which they help to manage online activities for people of diverse ages and backgrounds.

Studying the Experiences of Youth Leaders
To understand the experiences of the youth in these roles, we collected observations and online activity data
from the Scratch website, such as their comments, forum posts, projects, and self-reported age and gender.
These observations and online activity enable us to see how they participated in the community. To understand
more deeply    how    they  saw their experiences,  we    also conducted   semi-structured   interviews. We  posted  a
message in the moderator and counselor forums inviting them to be interviewed about their experiences in their
roles. Three moderators and one counselor responded to our message. Table 1 provides brief descriptions of
each youth leader. In these interviews, we asked them questions (e.g., "What has been challenging?", "Why do
you continue    to  take on  this responsibility?") to  surface  their challenges   and the  lessons   they learned to
overcome them.

Table 1: Brief portraits of the youth leaders

Jacob, a 15-year-old from Belgium, was one of the first community moderators to be invited by the Scratch
Team. He started using Scratch when it first came out in 2007 and began making creative and sophisticated
games that became well-known in the community.
Fayth, a 22-year old from the United States, was invited to be a moderator by the Scratch Team. Fayth is
the oldest of the moderators and counselors. She discovered Scratch in a college course and became an
active member of the community, creating many art and animation projects.
Sam, a 14-year-old from Canada, was chosen as a community moderator in the first community-wide
moderator election. Sam began using Scratch in 2008, and has shared many game projects on the website.
Jessica, a 17-year-old from the United States, was one of the first collab counselors to be invited by the
Scratch Team. She started using Scratch in 2009 and has created many simulations and interactive projects
that express her love of math.

© ISLS                                                                                                            400
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                               Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

         We   used   grounded   theory  strategies (Charmaz,       2006)   to analyze    all our data  from   interviews,
observations, and documentation. Our coding and analysis led to the identification of the key challenges and
strategies that the youth used to fulfill their responsibilities.

Learning from Challenges
The youth interviews suggested four types of challenges that youth leaders encountered: (a) learning to carry out
their role as part of a team; (b) managing their new identity within the role; (c) interacting constructively in an
online medium with limited context; (d) and facing broader challenges within the community. In this section,
we  examine   each   of these challenges,  the  strategies youth      used to manage     the challenges,  the skills they
developed in the process, and how these experiences connect with related studies in the youth development
literature.

Fulfilling Responsibilities Through Collaboration
One of the first steps in becoming a moderator or counselor is learning what one's responsibilities are and how
to fulfill them. Sam described how he needed to read several pages of guidelines on how to be a community
moderator before getting started--and then additional instructions on the steps for carrying out each of the
responsibilities.

         I found that I had several pages of moderator guidelines before me before I was able to do
         anything. After that I found that I had even more to read on how to actually do what I needed
         to do, such as close topics or respond to reports.

         All four youth we interviewed remarked at how valuable their fellow moderators and counselors as
well  as the  Scratch Team    were in  learning how   to   fulfill their  responsibilities.  Moderators   and counselors
worked together closely, using the their respective discussion forums to communicate and coordinate around
their shared responsibilities. Jacob summarized the overall workflow of moderators as a collaborative process:

         We have the moderators forum where you post a topic about this conversation.              We use it a
         lot--whenever there is something going on and we see what people have to think about it.
          It's an important source of information.    Because when you see how others do it, you can
         change yourself to match it. . . . We basically do everything together as a group.         And when
         someone     does something    wrong, it's corrected by     others.   It's a continuous  collaboration,
         moderation.

         Learning from each other was especially emphasized by moderators, who described not only learning
new forum moderation tools, but also learning how to answer questions, respond to reported issues, and to
maintain a friendly and respectful tone in the discussion forums. When new moderators come into the role, they
are encouraged    to ask  many  questions  and  observe  other     moderators.     For example,  Sam   explained   that he
learned "right away to ask for help rather than guess what to do" whenever he was unsure how to respond to an
issue or question that arose.
         Learning from each other went in both directions, as experienced moderators and the Scratch Team
learned from new moderators. Jacob described how new moderators come in with "fresh perspectives" that they
can share with the rest of the team. "They have been on that side and now they are moderators and they share
their opinions and it makes us think more like the community thinks." In moderator forum discussions, the
Scratch Team and older moderators explicitly asked new moderators to participate and share their opinions.
         Based    on the  descriptions of their experiences,      the nature  of   cooperation  in the moderator   group
resembles a community of practice. Members learn through peripheral as well as productive actions (Lave &
Wenger, 1991). For example, through participating in discussions in the moderation team, Sam learned how the
team thinks through decisions very carefully, which he says he had not realized before as a regular member of
the community. The experience of working together on a team not only help youth learn to carry out their
responsibilities, but also how to collaborate with other team members to accomplish shared goals. This ability to
collaborate effectively on a team is recognized as a fundamental skill for the development of youth leadership
(Conner & Strobel, 2007). For Scratch moderators and counselors, this experience extended to learning to work
together on a team not only with other youth but also with adults.

Managing New Identities
When youth took on a role within the Scratch community, the title (e.g., "Collab Counselor") appeared under
their name   in the  website  discussion  forums.  As they  began      to  interact  with their peers  in the rest of   the
community, moderators and counselors noticed how their peers perceived and interacted with them differently.

© ISLS                                                                                                                401
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                          Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

          Jessica described  how    Scratch  members,   especially  the newer  and     younger  ones,  saw  her  as  an
authority figure. While Jessica understands that she had a special role in the community, she wanted members to
see her as a "big kid," someone who is helpful and experienced but not an authority figure:

          I don't really want them to think I have more authority, necessarily. I like [to convey] the
          feeling, especially [to] younger Scratchers . . . of sorta being a "big kid" and helping them
          along but not necessarily being in charge. . . . I try to construct my comments as suggestions
          and not "now go do this I'm in charge" because of I'm not. [Laughs.] I don't know, I guess
          that's the main thing, especially the younger Scratchers thought I had more authority than I
          did when in fact I was just trying to help them.

She carefully wrote her comments as suggestions, making sure her comments were perceived as suggestions
from a peer, rather than an authority figure. Similarly, Jacob tried to act in the community as he would normally
act, regardless of being a moderator. He did not want to seem "distant and unreachable and important." He saw
his role as nothing more than extra tools to do what he would normally have done in the community.
          Despite the unwanted perceptions, they also recognized the value in having a formal title. Jessica found
it useful to introduce    herself as a  "collab counselor"   to  members,    especially   to members   she  had  never
interacted with before, so they could understand why she was giving them detailed and constructive feedback.
When intervening in a conflict between two Scratch members, Jacob found his title useful to explain why he
became involved.
          While youth leaders in face-to-face contexts also deal with perceptions of authority (e.g., Dean, 2010),
moderators and counselors must negotiate this perception in an online medium. For example, signals taken for
granted in person, such as facial expressions and physical appearances, are not apparent, especially in a website
where members are anonymous. To protect children's privacy on the Scratch website, we do not display their
age or gender, and discourage members from sharing personal information. Youth leaders must also learn to
manage their identity in a community where membership is ephemeral: new members are constantly joining,
and old members are leaving. To overcome these challenges, moderators and counselors actively worked to
make sure that they were seen as someone who is accessible and helpful, rather than distant and important. In
addition, they   learned  to leverage   these perceptions  to  help  them   fulfill their responsibilities effectively.
Learning to negotiate one's identity when taking on new roles is seen as a positive developmental outcome of
community-based youth programs (Polman & Miller, 2009), and the descriptions of the youth leaders in the
Scratch community suggest that they learned to manage their new identity as they interacted with their peers.

Using Empathy and Interpreting Signals
Communicating within the text-based medium of Scratch comments and discussion forums can be challenging,
as members usually have never met in person and what they say can, at times, be ambiguous. Jacob talked about
sarcasm online and the difficulty of detecting it. For example, when a member writes, "That's the best project
ever," they  may   mean   one  of  two  things: either they  are   genuinely expressing    praise  or are  sarcastically
implying that it is not a good project.
          When responding to posts like these, moderators often tried to take the perspectives of the individuals
involved. For example, Fayth encountered a situation where one Scratch member posted an Internet joke that
was funny to some, but was offensive to others. When handling a tricky situation like this, Fayth would ask
herself to think about the people she is interacting with:

          With the Scratch community, we have to deal with people of almost every age.          From what I
          heard,  the youngest    users are  around 5  years  old,  and some   of   the oldest, they're   like
          grandparents already, and then there's everyone else in between. And so, I guess it's kind of
          like, when moderating the Scratch community, you have to think about, "Well, who am I
          talking to? Am I talking to them in the right way so that they can understand me?"

Fayth tried to empathize with the people involved, to understand why they might say or do the things they've
done.  She  then  took  a step back  and  tried to  "clarify everything  to  come   to  some  sort of  solution that is
beneficial to everyone."
          For counselors who are responsible for giving feedback on projects, sometimes the lack of context
made it difficult to understand who the creators are and what they needed most from feedback. Through her
work   as a  counselor,   Jessica interacted  with diverse   types of projects and    creators. She   said her  biggest
challenge was to respond to genres of projects she was less familiar with, especially game-related projects.
Because most of her projects have been simulations and math-related projects, at first she felt that she may not
be able to contribute any valuable feedback, especially if it was an advanced game project.

© ISLS                                                                                                            402
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                          Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

          To better understand what project creators might need, Jessica looked to other cues such as what the
creators write in their projects notes and other projects they've created. As she described:

          Simply reading the project notes gives it away. Often Scratchers will include hints about what
          they're particularly proud of: "We spent hours perfecting the timing!" . . . Of course, glancing
          at some of their other projects might provide a hint too.

Jessica used these new cues to understand what project creators cared most about in their project. Rather than
writing a comment about what she would do and what she cares about, Jessica crafts her comments so that they
are most relevant to the creator and their project vision.
          The ability to give others' constructive feedback is a key skill that youth in local community-based
programs say they learn through their participation (Dworkin, Larson, & Hansen, 2003). The youth took on the
challenge of communicating effectively and constructively in this medium by striving to consider as much as
possible about the individual members in their responses, including reading their project notes to understand
their intentions and viewing other projects they had made. The ability to consider others' perspectives and
communicate with consideration for differences are considered core skills for adolescents to develop (Lerner,
2009), and their roles provided opportunities for the youth moderators and counselors to practice and refine
these skills.

Developing a Vision of Community
When young Scratch members took on these roles, they transitioned from being a creator--designing and
sharing projects on the Scratch website--to a role where they learned new responsibilities and experienced new
ways to interact with the entire community. Through these experiences, they became aware of community-wide
dynamics and challenges they had not known of before. For example, Jessica saw more clearly the challenges
newcomers encounter on Scratch and became more sympathetic to them over time.

          People want to work with [expert Scratch members] . . . so they may not give new people as
          much of a chance in their groups. I noticed a lot of [new Scratch members] never managed to
          get a group together. Probably [new Scratch members] didn't really know many people from
          the Scratch website. So that made it hard for them.

          When discussing the community, all four youth leaders described what they wished for the community
and what they wanted for their peers to experience. Fayth described how she wanted to help others in the
community have the kinds of positive experiences she had. Similarly, Sam believed that the community should
be "welcoming to everyone and really nice" and "appropriate for all ages."
          These  visions for community    translated to    how   they  wanted  to  improve   the community.    As  a
moderator, Sam found that he spent a significant amount of his time responding to reported issues and other
forum maintenance tasks, such as moving posts to relevant topics and closing threads. However, rather than
only reacting   to and cleaning  up  content, Sam  wanted    the    moderators to  also focus on  initiating positive
interactions:

          One of the things that we don't do enough is put positive things in the community.      We take
          out the negative things, but we don't put positive things as much as we should.      And I think
          that's something that should be changed.

As Sam became more experienced as moderator, he also began working with the Scratch Team to conceptualize
a "welcoming committee" in Scratch, a group of Scratch members who are interested in helping newcomers get
started. As of this writing, this committee has been implemented on the website, with newcomers being greeted
by youth volunteers. Jessica is now helping the Scratch Team to manage the growth of the committee.
          When our youth leaders first began, they operated under the expectations of their roles and worked
hard to fulfill them. However, as they began to interact with their peers and actually act on their responsibilities,
they started  to develop  a  vision for the community      that, at times, extended  beyond   the expectations   and
boundaries of their role. They became motivated to do more to support their peers in having positive and
constructive  experiences in the community.    This  process     of youth  leaders envisioning and  contributing  to
improvements fits with the ideal of youth development programs in which youth not only develop leadership
skills, but also contribute  new ideas,  perspectives, and   energy   to  address  problems  within the community
(MacNeil, 2006; Camino & Zeldin, 2002).

© ISLS                                                                                                          403
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                            Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

Discussion
In this paper, we examined how young people developed leadership skills within these roles online. In their
experiences, we see a progression in their development. When they first came into their roles, they needed to
learn their various responsibilities, looking to each other to learn how to fulfill them. Even after they learned the
ropes, they continued to learn by collaboratively working with other moderators and the Scratch Team. By
taking on a role and title, they were faced with the task of learning to negotiate their new identity within the
Scratch community, managing perceptions of being an authority figure, but using the recognition of their role
and title to carry out their responsibilities. They were also learning to interact with diverse members of the
community, which developed into new connections, but also new challenges to understand people who had
different interests and backgrounds. And, as they became more aware of the dynamics and challenges across the
community, their participation transformed. From fulfilling responsibilities outlined by the Scratch Team to
developing their own visions for themselves and for the community, these youth leaders saw new ways to create
and sustain a supportive community.
         Embedded within the youth's experiences are structures we designed to support them--structures that
we continually   redesigned     with input   from   our youth leaders.   Moderators   and  counselors  discussed  and
coordinated within separate website discussion forums, which became valuable spaces for them to learn from
one another. We developed "guidelines" which describe their responsibilities and suggest ways for them to
interact with  other community     members.     We  iterated on  these guidelines  together  with the  youth  leaders,
especially as  they  developed    new    strategies to  carry out  their  responsibilities of moderation   or  giving
constructive feedback. And as they developed new ideas to support the community, we worked together with
youth leaders to design new structures, such as the "welcoming committee" to greet newcomers.
         The youth's contributions through these roles have benefited the entire community. While the Scratch
Team accepts     overall responsibility  for the  website, we   depend  on  discussions with  youth moderators    and
counselors  as a  way    to collectively think  through  choices  related to the community    and  the design  of the
website. These interactions between the Scratch Team adult facilitators and the youth have developed into
partnerships,  where  we    work  together   to achieve  shared goals. The   youth  leaders  have provided   valuable
insights into the community--insights they have gained from their authentic participation. These insights have
influenced  our  views   of  the community      and have   helped us better  maintain  the  community.  Finally,  the
community not only benefits from the contributions of their role (e.g. keeping forum discussions friendly and
giving constructive feedback), but these youth illustrated to other members how these roles can be pathways of
participation.
         The experiences of these youth highlight the opportunities that youth leadership roles in online settings
can provide for the youth, their adult partners, and the communities they participate in. While many youth in the
community already help out independent of these roles, these roles created explicit and visible pathways of
participation. Such visibility can be valuable for youth who may be interested in contributing, but may not
stumble into these kinds of activities on their own. This visibility is especially important in open and large
online communities, where most actions--while public and persistent online--may be buried in the rapidly
changing and increasing activity of the community. From these roles, we saw how youth expanded their vision
and crafted new ideas for what was possible in the community. These youth envision a community where they
and other young people can create and share their projects in a supportive and safe environment. Designers of
online communities can create these opportunities for their members and for their community through these
youth leadership roles. Such participation can foster an environment where members are actively taking
ownership of the community and giving back in multiple ways. As Jessica, the collab counselor, so aptly stated,
"When everyone helps a little bit, we all benefit."

References
Camino, L. & Zeldin, S. (2002). From periphery to center: Pathways for youth civic engagement in the day-to-
         day life of communities. Applied Developmental Science, 6(4), 213­220.
Cassell, J., Huffaker, D., Tversky, D., & Ferriman, K. (2006). The language of online leadership: Gender and
         youth engagement on the Internet. Developmental Psychology, 42, 436-449.
Charmaz, K. (2006). Constructing grounded theory: A practical guide through qualitative analysis. London,
         UK: Sage Publications.
Conner, J.O. & Strobel, K. (2007). Leadership development: An examination of individual and programmatic
         growth. Journal of Adolescent Research, 22, 275-297.
Dean, C. (2010). The ecology of peer tutoring: Perspectives of student staff in one high school writing center
         (Doctoral dissertation). Retrieved from http://digitalcommons.library.umaine.edu/etd/488/
Dworkin,   J.B., Larson,    R., &  Hansen,   D.  (2003).  Adolescents'   accounts  of growth   experiences in  youth
         activities. Journal of Youth and Adolescence, 32, 17­26.
Eccles, J. S., & Gootman, J. A. (Eds.). (2002). Community programs to promote youth development.
         Washington, DC: National Academy Press.

© ISLS                                                                                                            404
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                       Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation (1st ed.). Cambridge
         University Press.
Lenhart, A., Purcell, K., Smith, A., & Zickuhr, K. (2010). Social media & mobile Internet use among teens and
         young    adults.    Pew    Internet    &     American     Life    Project.   Retrieved    from    http://
         pewinternet.org/Reports/2010/Social-Media-and-Young-Adults.aspx.
Lerner,  R. M. (2009).   The positive  youth development     perspective: Theoretical and    empirical bases of a
         strengths-based approach to adolescent development. In S. J. Lopez & C. R. Snyder (Eds.), Oxford
         handbook of positive psychology. (2nd ed., pp. 149­163). New York: Oxford University Press.
MacNeil,  C.  A., (2006).  Bridging    generations: Applying  "adult"   leadership  theories to youth   leadership
         development. New Directions for Youth Development, 109, 27-43.
Papert, S. (1980). Mindstorms: Children, computers, and powerful ideas. New York: Basic Books, Inc.
Pittman, K.,  Irby, M.,   Tolman,  J., Yohalem,   N.,  &  Ferber, T.  (2003). Preventing     problems,  promoting
         development, encouraging engagement: Competing priorities or inseparable goals? Washington, DC:
         The Forum for Youth Investment.
Polman, J. L., & Miller, D. (2010). Changing stories: Trajectories of identification among African American
         youth in a science outreach apprenticeship. American Educational Research Journal, 47, 879­918.
Resnick, M., Maloney, J., Monroy-Hernandez, A., Rusk, N., Eastmond, E., Brennan, K., et al. (2009). Scratch:
         Programming for all. Communications of the ACM, 52, 60-67.
Roth, J. L., & Brooks-Gunn, J. (2003). What is a youth development program? Identification and defining
         principles. In. F. Jacobs, D. Wertlieb, & R. M. Lerner (Vol. Eds.), Enhancing the life chances of youth
         and  families: Public service  systems and   public policy perspectives:   Vol. 2.  Handbook  of applied
         developmental   science:  Promoting    positive child, adolescent,  and    family  development   through
         research, policies, and programs (pp. 197-223). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Salusky, I., Larson, R. W., Wu, J., Griffith, A., Raffaelli, M., Sugimara, N. & Guzman, M. (2012). How youth
         develop  responsibility: What   can  be    learned  from youth   programs.   Manuscript   submitted  for
         publication.
Tversky, D., & Tirthali, D. (2010). Youth leadership development in virtual worlds: A case study. Procedia
         Social and Behavioral Sciences, 2, 3175­3179.
Zagal, J. P., & Bruckman, A. S. (2005). From samba schools to computer clubhouses: Cultural institutions as
         learning environments. Convergence: The International Journal of Research into New Media
         Technologies, 11(1), 88­105.

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank the Scratch community members who participated in this research and the Scratch Team
for their helpful feedback. The writing of this paper was supported by a grant from the National Science
Foundation (NSF-CDI-1027736). The views expressed are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent
the views of the Foundation or MIT.

© ISLS                                                                                                       405
