CSCL 2013 Proceedings                 Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

  iSocial Demo: A 3D Collaborative Virtual Learning Environment
James M. Laffey, Janine Stichter, Ryan Babiuch, Joe Griffin, Krista Galyen, University of Missouri, Columbia
    LaffeyJ@missouri.edu, SticherJ@missouri.edu, Babiuchr@missouri.edu, jggmr2@mail.missouri.edu,
                                              galyenk@gmail.com

        Abstract:   iSocial is an innovative      3D Collaborative Virtual  Learning   Environment   (3D
        CVLE) to provide access to educational programming for special needs students who live in
        small and rural school districts. The demonstration will show an implementation of iSocial to
        develop   social competency   for   students who  have   been  identified with Autism  Spectrum
        Disorders (ASD).    The  demonstration     will focus on aspects of iSocial  designed to support
        social interaction, encourage pro-social behavior, and foster social learning.

iSocial Demonstration
Our demonstration has 4 objectives:

   1.   Show the iSocial 3D CVLE learning environment so that the audience participants can envision the
        learning experience of students in iSocial. We will do so by setting up a session with partners back in
        Columbia so that the audience can see the live environment. This live part of the demo will walk
        through several of the learning contexts designed to support collaborative learning, such as in the hull
        of the pirate ship where students need to work collaboratively to identify items to take to the island.
   2.   Highlight and show key innovations for supporting the social and collaborative experience in iSocial.
        This  will  include orthotics   for  student  social  behavior such   as  pods  and learning  spaces    and
        mechanisms for the teacher to observe and manage behavior such as Live Images and a Token System.
   3.   Show through video clips students participating in a few key lesson sequences.
   4.   Discuss the demonstration so as to answer questions and engage issues brought up by the audience and
        to learn from the audience about their perspective and thoughts for development, implementation and
        research.

Website: iSocial.missouri.edu

Purpose of iSocial
Small and rural schools are often limited in the range of educational programming they can offer and in the
expertise of their teachers to  deliver specialized   educational  programming.    Distance Education  (DE)     is a
growing   phenomenon  in  these schools   as a    means for  meeting  student needs  for courses such  as foreign
languages and advanced placement. A 2005 survey (Hannum et al., 2009) conducted by the National Research
Center on Rural Education Support showed that 85% of surveyed districts had used DE and identified DE
technology as a key strategy (nearly 10 million students attend rural schools) to provide a full range of courses
and to overcome difficulties in attracting and maintaining qualified and experienced teachers. Unfortunately
typical DE is limited in how it provides support for affective and social learning which is often critical to
addressing students with special needs.
        3D   Collaborative  Virtual Learning      Environments  (3D   CVLE),   as  implemented   in iSocial, have
potential for addressing the needs of small and rural districts for DE programming that brings students together
for peer interaction, experiential learning through collaborative effort, and guidance by an expert teacher. The
iSocial implementation to be demonstrated is a translation of a curriculum (Social-Competence Intervention for
Adolescents, SCI-A) with demonstrated efficacy for developing social competence for the target population of
youth between 11 and 14 years of age with a diagnosis of ASD and an IQ of 75 and greater (Stichter, et al.,
2012). Our team has translated the program that is typically delivered in face-to-face, small group (4 to 6 youth)
sessions into a form that can be delivered over the Internet so as to enable participation by youth who do not
have ready access to such interventions in their local schools and communities. In the process of undertaking
this translation our team has designed solutions (1) for assuring fidelity between the 3D CVLE experience and
the cognitive and behavioral processes and objectives of the face-to-face curriculum, and (2) for encouraging,
supporting and sustaining appropriate social behavior and interaction in the virtual world, especially considering
that our target students have social limitations.

iSocial Implementation
The iSocial VLE for developing social competence delivers the SCI-A curriculum via 34 lessons of 45 minutes
each with lessons scheduled for 2 to 3 times per week which is consistent with delivery of the face-to-face
version. The lessons are packaged in 5 curriculum units: facial expression, sharing ideas, turn taking, feelings

© ISLS                                                                                                          404
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                   Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

and emotions, and problem solving and delivered in a series of 3D virtual worlds. Figure 1 shows a top view of
the 5 worlds.

                             Figure 1. iSocial worlds across the five curricular units

          Students are represented in the world as an avatar that communicates primarily through audio but also
with text and  gesture. Through   these  communication    mechanisms    iSocial attempts to provide  the essential
opportunities for synchronous learning with the teacher and peers to match what can be experienced in the face-
to-face classroom. The   learning  experiences are  delivered   through a structured   sequence that moves  from
teacher-directed introductions, to modeling, to structured practice, to naturalistic practice and then review. In
addition, the VLE   provides   multiple  additional real  time  experiences  and affordances  with   materials not
available in  standard face-to-face learning. To provide   a sense of   what the learning  experience is like, the
following scenario briefly depicts the experience of a youth participating in a lesson activity. We have selected
the "Lost at Sea" activity from the third lesson of unit two which has a goal of teaching the students to identify
and apply the role of speaker and listener in order to better share ideas. By the time the youth gets to this
activity, the youth is well oriented to his group of three to five peers and his teacher, who we call the online
guide (OG), as well as to the general methods and tools of iSocial. We start with the OG providing positive
feedback to the group on completing the prior activity and asking them to move to the area where they will
decide which roles they will take on for the upcoming "Lost at Sea" task (see Figure 2).

Figure 2: On the left is the ship where students undertake the lesson. On the right, students and the Online Guide
gather in an area on the ship to discuss their roles for the upcoming activity. Students get guidance for carrying
                                  out their role by standing on the colored pod.

          After having spent several lessons on the ship, students are told that the ship is sinking. Their mission
during this lesson is to decide on roles for each member, collectively decide on which eight (out of 15) items to
take with them, escape to the rescue boat while negotiating which part of the island is best for their survival, and
arrive on the chosen part of the island. The lesson is designed to require discussion and negotiation among the
students  through activities that the  OG  facilitates to build students' social  competence  accessing  targeted
curricular-based skills. The OG facilitates the students' choosing their roles such as "items task manager" and
"location manager for the campsite." The students negotiate who will do what, and why they think they should
have a certain role of their choosing.

© ISLS                                                                                                         405
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

        After the role selections are completed, the OG leads students into the cargo hold where they choose
items to take with them to the island. Each student must express what they think would be good to take and
why. Disputes over what would be most important to take with them to the island lead to the negotiation of
agreed-upon items and their worth on a deserted island. The timekeeper warns the team to get to the rescue boat
because the ship is sinking. As they decide upon items, the items disappear from the environment and appear in
their inventory. The team hurries to negotiate quickly and make final decisions, after which they escape to the
rescue boat. The next activity begins with the students discussing the pros and cons of locations on the desert
island while continuing to practice the roles of speaker and listener.

Unique Approach and Attributes of iSocial
Over the past 10 years a number of projects have been developed in the 3D CVLE genre with some of the most
significant being River City, Quest Atlantis and EcoMUVE. River City is a multi-user 3D VLE developed for
middle-school students to learn skills of hypothesis formation and experimental design as well as content related
to national standards and assessments in biology (Clarke et al., 2006). Quest Atlantis is a set of multi-user 3D
VLE for knowledge quests and interactive tasks for learning through transformational play (Barab, Gresalfi &
Ingram-Goble, 2009). EcoMUVE (Metcalf, Clarke & Dede, 2009) is a multi-user 3D VLE implemented as a
two-week module focused on teaching students complex causality in ecosystem environments. Each of these
systems demonstrates  that 3D  VLE   is engaging and  shows some        promise for impacting student outcomes.
However, they differ strikingly from the implementation of iSocial (Schmidt, Laffey & Stichter, 2011; Laffey et
al, 2009a). These systems emphasize individuals performing certain tasks in a world and reporting back to peers
or an instructor using text chats or written submissions. Interactions are typically multiple choice and with non-
player characters or objects  in the world. Typically these systems       are implemented  in classrooms  while
supporting and encouraging interaction and collaboration with classmates and teachers outside the virtual world.
In contrast iSocial is designed so all the learning activity and social interaction take place in the virtual world
and the teacher is a character in that world rather than a presence in the physical classroom. This configuration
is part of our design because our delivery model envisions youth across a number of rural school districts
coming together in an iSocial course, where the only contact point is through the virtual medium.
   In order to implement a virtual world that facilitates audio communication and supports co-presence of
members we built iSocial using Open Wonderland, a Java-based open source toolkit, for creating virtual worlds.
Using an iterative design research approach we have explored, tested and eventually settled on designs for a
number of mechanisms that support being social and being on task for the students and behavioral management
for the OG (see figure 3 for a sample screen for the OG showing numerous mechanisms for managing the
course and student behavior).

Figure 3: The OG interface includes the text chat, gestures, live images, dock, lesson timer, token and behavior
  system, and users window. The OG dock has access to items that the student does not. The student view has
                              dock, visual tokens and strikes, gestures, and chat.

© ISLS                                                                                                     406
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                     Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

    We worked systematically through five units with each unit representing our best ideas and capabilities at
the time, and then through a usage test of the unit to teach us how to improve both our ideas and capabilities. At
the conclusion of the five units of development each unit was upgraded as appropriate. Our team created many
new innovations and customized the features of Open Wonderland to optimize our curriculum translation. See
http://bit.ly/isocial-functions   for a  description   of many   of  the  key technology     innovations. Some   notable
examples of innovations from this outline include:
 1.    The Media Board is a white-board for displaying and interacting with multiple forms of media in the
       virtual world and includes allowing students to take pictures of themselves with a webcam, such as when
       displaying a facial expression, for sharing with the online guide (OG) and peers. The student, OG and
       peers can then discuss the images and arrange them on a continuum so as to give feedback to the student.
 2.    Pods, Spaces and Barriers have been developed as behavior management devices (we call them social
       orthotics) (Laffey et al, 2009b; Laffey, Stichter & Schmidt, 2010) to aid the OG in managing individual
       and group behavior during lesson activities. These devices act like furniture to invite students to move to
       appropriate places    and  orientations  and    also  can be secured   to prevent unwanted   distractions  during
       lessons.
 3.    Live Images is a device for helping the OG manage and facilitate behavior. Before Live Images the OG
       could see avatar movements and listen to the student talk, but did not have any visual cues about the
       physical presence. Live Images gives the OG a snapshot of each student every 20 seconds as well as on-
       demand so as to monitor physical behavior. Full video streaming would be too great a drain on network
       resources but   every  20   seconds   seems   to   be a good   compromise    between   technology   concerns and
       behavioral concerns.

        While    there   is still much    to  learn  and  numerous      challenges to  address the  iSocial  design and
implementation   identifies   a   new    form  of   computer   support   for  learning  that  depends on    high quality
collaboration between students and teachers and among students. This form of CSCL seems highly relevant for
addressing special needs populations that not only need high quality learning opportunities, but teachers with
specialized knowledge and training to overcome barriers to students engagement and performance in learning
situations.

References

Barab,  S.A., Gresalfi,  M.S.,    &   Ingram-Goble,    A.   (2010). Transformational    play: Using games    to  position
        person, content, and context.  Educational Researcher, 39(7), 525-536.
Clarke, J., Dede,  C.,   Ketelhut,    D. J., &  Nelson,   B.  (2006).   A Design-based   research  strategy  to  promote
        scalability for educational innovations. Educational Technology, 46(3), 27-36.
Hannum, W. H., Irvin, M. J., Banks, J. B., & Farmer, T. W. (2009). Distance education use in rural schools.
        Journal of Research in Rural Education, 24(3). Retrieved from http://jrre.psu.edu/articles/24-3.pdf
Laffey, J., Stichter, J. &   Schmidt,    M.  (2010   - April).   Social Orthotics  for Youth  with ASD    to Learn  in a
        Collaborative 3D VLE. In Seok, S., Dacosta, B., & Meyen, E. L. (Eds.), Handbook of research on
        human cognition and assistive technology: Design, accessibility and transdisciplinary perspectives (pp.
        76-95). New York: Idea Group.
Laffey, J., Schmidt, M., Stichter, J., Schmidt, C., Oprean, D., Herzog, M. & Babiuch, R. (2009b). Designing for
        social interaction and social competence in a 3D-VLE. In D. Russell (Ed.), Cases on Collaboration in
        Virtual Learning Environments: Processes and Interactions (pp. 154-169). Hershey, PA: Information
        Science Reference.
Laffey, J., Schmidt, M., Stichter, J., Schmidt, C. & Goggins, S. (2009a). iSocial: A 3D VLE for Youth with
        Autism. Proceedings of CSCL 2009, Rhodes, Greece.
Metcalf, S .J., Clarke, J., & Dede, C. (2009). Virtual worlds for education: River cityand EcoMUVE. Paper
        presented at the Media in Transition International Conference, MIT, April 24-26, Cambridge, MA.
Schmidt, M., Laffey, J. & Stichter, J. (2011). Virtual Social Competence Instruction for Individuals with Autism
        Spectrum Disorders: Beyond the Single-User Experience. Proceedings of CSCL 2011, Hong Kong,
        China.
Stichter, J. P., O'Connor, K. V., Herzog, M. J., Lierheimer, K., & McGhee, S. D. (2012). Social competence
        intervention for elementary students with aspergers syndrome and high functioning autism. Journal of
        Autism and Developmental Disorders, 42(3), 354-366. doi:10.1007/s10803-011-1249-2

Acknowledgments:
The research reported here was supported by the Institute of Education Sciences, U.S. Department of Education,
through Grant R324A090197 to the University of Missouri. The opinions expressed are those of the authors and
do not represent views of the Institute or the U.S. Department of Education.

© ISLS                                                                                                              407
