CSCL 2013 Proceedings                    Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

DynaLogue: Teacher Candidates Collaborating to Learn and Teach
                                     Proportional Reasoning

               Jody Siker, Susan J. Courey, San Francisco State University, 1600 Holloway Avenue,
                        San Francisco, CA 94132, jrsiker@berkeley.edu, scourey@sfsu.edu
        Janet Bowers, San Diego State University, 5500 Campanile Drive, San Diego, CA 92182-7720,
                                              jbowers@mail.sdsu.edu
          Jeremy Roschelle, SRI International, 333 Ravenswood Ave, BN-376, Menlo Park CA 94025,
                                              jeremy.roschelle@sri.com

          Abstract: DynaLab is an interactive, Web-based resource for teacher educators to use with
          beginning teachers, helping them learn to teach mathematical reasoning.       This demonstration
          focuses on one aspect of this hands-on curriculum, DynaLogue.       Participants will collaborate
          to compose    simulated   dialogues between   a hypothetical  student   and teacher, including  a
          whiteboard to draw and write visual representations.     They will discuss and share their ideas
          for how to understand student thinking around a proportional reasoning problem, thus building
          a  repertoire of explanations   and  broadening  their  knowledge    of   how to  teach  complex
          mathematical ideas.

Purpose
DynaLab is an interactive, Web-based curriculum for teacher learning. Teacher candidates use this hands-on
curriculum when taking courses needed to complete their training as teachers.           (Hereafter, we use the term
"candidates"   for university  students  who  are preparing to   be certified as  a K-12   teacher). The purpose  of
DynaLab     is to  help candidates  learn more    about how  to   develop  students'  mathematical    reasoning, and
particularly, their proportional reasoning. In service of this purpose, the DynaLab exploits capabilities that are
unique to the digital medium.
          Instead of the traditional chapter structure of a textbook, the DynaLab is organized in a five by three
matrix (see Figure 1) covering three proportional reasoning domains (ratio, geometric similarity, and linear
functions), and offering three opportunities for engaging with each domain (interactive lessons with dynamic
representations,   video  cases  of students  reasoning   through   problems,  and    context-rich   problems to  try
themselves).   This feature enables university instructors to customize the use of  DynaLab.
          Within each category, DynaLab includes dynamic learning tools to engage candidates in collaborative
learning.   One tool focuses on candidates' learning of mathematics content.      An individual candidate often has
difficulty thinking of more than one way to solve a mathematics problem.       However, a classroom of candidates
often comes up with many strategies.      The multiple modes of responses and "shared work" tool allows each
candidate to use multiple representations to share their solutions: text, drawings, uploaded photos, recorded
audio, and their demonstrations with interactive tools.    These varying solutions can then be compared by the
instructor in a shared workspace, which can lead to very good discussions among future teachers ­ how can
teachers avoid the misconception that there is only "one right way" to solve a math problem and instead make
sense of varying strategies?
          Another tool, called DynaLogue, enables candidates to write simple dialogues in which they envision
how a teacher and a student would interact so that the student's mathematics reasoning becomes stronger (see
Figure 2).     The   dialogues are  synchronized  with  a  whiteboard   between   the virtual  participants,  because
mathematical    reasoning  often   involves drawing    and gestures   linked  with   talk.  Collaboratively   writing
DynaLogues     is  a powerful   activity in which     candidates can share their    mathematical   thinking,  practice
pedagogical ideas, and engage in constructive criticism.
          Overall, the tools within DynaLab are designed to help candidates make judgments about students'
proportional reasoning and how to work with students to improve this reasoning.       This requires building teacher
candidates'    pedagogical content   knowledge    (Shulman,  1987)   in proportional    reasoning,   increasing  their
confidence about how to teach these concepts, growing their appreciation for mathematical reasoning, leading
them to use precise language when explaining concepts to students, and helping them to build on what students
do.

Theoretical Frame
The DynaLab project helps teacher candidates make judgments about student's ideas of proportional reasoning
and how to work with students to clarify and correct them.       The DynaLogue tool was designed under the two
theoretical  frameworks    of Universal  Design   for Learning   (UDL; Rose   &   Meyer,   2006)  and Technological
Pedagogical and Content Knowledge (TPACK; Mishra & Koehler, 2006).                  UDL is a set of principles that
consider alternative ways for students to engage with curriculum, to learn through multiple representations, and

© ISLS                                                                                                           408
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                    Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

to demonstrate what they know.      DynaLab explicitly teaches the principles of UDL and also incorporates them
into the design. For example, DynaLab uses multi-modal response spaces where candidates can type, use digital
interactive manipulatives, draw, record, or upload a response.     One such manipulative is a ratio bar visualizer.
Candidates can represent a ratio in red parts to blue parts and then split the display to see if another ratio is
equivalent.
          Shulman (1987) defined pedagogical content knowledge as the professional understanding of teaching,
or "how particular topics, problems, or issues are organized, represented, and adapted to the diverse interests
and abilities of learners, and presented for instruction" (p. 8).    TPACK is an extension of Shulman's (1987)
conceptualization  of   pedagogical   content  knowledge,     combining  technological   advances  with  knowledge
required to teach specific content  (see Mishra &  Koehler, 2006).   Candidates build a deep   understanding of how
to teach proportional reasoning by incorporating technology into building their own knowledge.           They create
digital  representations and    model  pedagogy   by    creating DynaLogues    to  teach challenging    content to a
hypothetical student who harbors deep misconceptions.

Contribution
A globally important transition from print to electronic textbooks is occurring. This demonstration contributes
by showing one way to re-imagine the role of the textbook in a particular context ­ the teacher education context.
We will demonstrate a resource that started with the concept of an "electronic textbook" for teacher education
courses but became an interactive environment where teachers collaborate to increase their math knowledge, to
develop their strategies for working with students, and to become familiar with constructivist technology for
learning mathematics.
          Further, this demonstration closely aligns with the theme of the conference, learning across space, time,
and scale. DynaLab and its many components, including DynaLogue, create opportunities through innovative
technology to spark dialogical learning across three levels: (a) teacher educators, (b) teacher candidates, and (c)
their students.

Empirical Support
DynaLab development involved collaboration among researchers at SRI International, UDL designers at CAST,
special education teacher educators at San Francisco State University, mathematical teacher educators at San
Diego    State University,   and project  evaluators  at  Inverness.  They    used  a design   research approach   to
collaborate and develop progressively more interactive, collaborative iterations of this resource.

Design Research
Schoenfeld (2006) presented several definitions for design research.     He acknowledged that design experiments
manipulate   multiple  dependent    variables "in the messy   situations that characterize real life learning"  with
flexible design revisions (p. 200).  During this project, data collection has been ongoing during the three years of
developing DynaLabs.     For example, at San Francisco State University, researchers have been designing lessons
using DynaLabs during a student teaching seminar offered every semester.       They presented  DynaLab versions to
one   or two   classes each  semester  and    collected  data from   surveys, assessments  of  pedagogical   content
knowledge, video observations, and lesson plans written by teachers after DynaLab lessons.         At the end of its
development, data will be reevaluated systematically in a retrospective analysis and serve to build a set of
claims into a coherent theory. Through the design process, DynaLab was changed from a text-heavy, linear
website  to an  interactive, content-rich resource   that includes   collaborative discussions of different ways   of
thinking about proportional reasoning.

Findings
Findings from two pilots at San Francisco State University and San Diego State University will be discussed
next.

Study 1
DynaLabs    was  presented   to  17 special education   teacher  candidates during  two, three-hour  lessons at  San
Francisco State University.     Participants in these lessons significantly improved their scores on a measure of
pedagogical content knowledge, t(16) = 2.72, p < .05, with a moderate effect size (Cohen's d = .44).      However,
overall scores at pretest were 10.65 (SD = 6.21) or 34% correct and posttest (M = 13.12, SD = 4.95), or 42%.
          Surveys indicated that the class activities were engaging (particularly creating teaching scripts, small
group discussions, and problem solving). Candidates reported that they learned some or a lot about ratio (65%),
UDL (55%), using technology for teaching (55%), student thinking (50%), and their own understanding (55%).
Class observations suggested that videos of student thinking were particularly motivating and anchoring. By the

© ISLS                                                                                                          409
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                 Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

final class, candidates were observed to engage in extended discussions about mathematical reasoning. These
analyses revealed that
        DynaLab's usefulness in preservice education relies on the ease of expressing mathematical thinking
        and reflections in DynaLab. DynaLab uses short videos and tutorial scripts to dramatize the practices
        of mathematical thinking in ways that are directly relevant to how middle school teachers interact with
        middle school students and provides dynamic representations to exemplify how technology can support
        deeper mathematical thinking.
        Although these dramatizations can be somewhat idealized, it is critical that preservice candidates can
        suspend belief and treat the expression of mathematical thinking in DynaLab as exactly what they
        might  with  real students because    this both  generates a  high level   of engagement    and creates  the
        potential for usable mathematical knowledge for teaching.

Study 2
At San  Diego  State University,  various  tools  within the  DynaLabs  including     the DynaLogue   activity  were
enacted with two sets of preservice teacher candidates who wanted to specialize in middle school mathematics.
Analyses of the resulting DynaLogue videos focused on documenting the degree to which this could be used as
a tool to reveal prospective teachers' understandings of the (then new) Common Core State Standards and the
eight associated Mathematical Practices. These analyses revealed, among other findings, that
        Pre-service teachers were most comfortable identifying and creating scenarios that demonstrate Math
        practice 1: (Make sense of problems).    They were less comfortable with practices 4&5 (Modeling and
        Tool use). This indicates a critical deficit that we are planning to address in the next iteration of
        DynaLab tools.
        Use of DynaLogues made Preservice teachers' beliefs about teaching more explicit objects of study. As
        the students engaged in a create-share-refine cycle, they become more comfortable observing others'
        videos and offering supportive feedback.     In this way, they became better skilled at identifying and
        enacting the various mathematical practices.    Reflections on the activity revealed that these teacher
        candidates felt more prepared to support and predict their future students' discoveries, engage their
        future students in productive mathematical ways of thinking, and see teaching as an ongoing, multi-
        faceted process open to peer review rather than a private series of unrelated "single shot" lessons that
        are presented without connections.

Structure of Demonstration
In this demonstration, we will invite attendees to take the role of a candidate who is attending a university
course in order to learn how to become a better mathematics teacher.

Simulated Teacher Education Experience
Attendees will experience  a   simulation  of the  university courses we   have conduct    with DynaLab,  and    will
participate using their own laptop. First, they will work in teams to express creative strategies to solving a ratio
problem and will be encouraged to describe their solution with multiple representations. They will post these
responses to a shared workspace that anonymously showcases each team's contribution.            These solutions will
spark a discussion  with  all participants imagining  and  describing  the thinking   behind  each  response.   This
discussion emphasizes multiple solution pathways and the importance of understanding proportional reasoning
conceptually and not relying on a memorized algorithm.     After this discussion, participants will watch a video
describing levels in proportional reasoning understanding, (a) illogical, (b) additive, (c) transitional, (d) ratio
(Khoury, 2002). Then, attendees  will watch a short video of a student incorrectly solving   this same problem   and
discuss the student's thinking and stage of understanding proportional reasoning.      They will write a script that
addresses that student's misconceptions using DynaLogue.       Participants will watch each other's DynaLogues
and discuss the effectiveness of the hypothetical teacher's approach to working with the student in the video. At
the end of these experiences, we will have a general conversation about the potential implications of DynaLab
and similar resources to transform teacher training.

Participant Outcomes and Implications
By actively participating  in  a dynamic    learning  environment,    participants are    expected to more    deeply
understand mathematical content and students' thinking.   Discussions act as a model for how to organize lessons
around mathematical practice standards found in the Common Core State Standards in Mathematics (2010).            It
is our hope that participants will begin to value understanding and discussion over just helping students arrive at
the correct answer.

© ISLS                                                                                                          410
CSCL 2013 Proceedings            Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

References
Common Core State Standards for Mathematics. (2010). Washington, DC: National Governors Association and
       Council of Chief State School Officers.
Khoury, H. (2002). Classroom challenge. In B. Litwiller & G. Bright (Eds.), Making sense of fractions, ratios,
       and proportions: 2002 yearbook. (pp. 100-102). Reston, VA: National Council of Teachers of
       Mathematics.
Mishra, P. & Koehler, M. J. (2006). Technological pedagogical content knowledge: A framework for teacher
       knowledge. Teachers College Record, 108, 1017-1054.
Rose, D. H., & Meyer, A. (2006). A practical reader in universal design for learning. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
       Education Press.
Schoenfeld, A. H. (2006). Design experiments. In J. L. Green, G. Camilli, & P. B. Elmore (Eds.), Handbook of
       complementary methods in education research (pp. 193-205). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Shulman, L. S. (1987). Knowledge and teaching: Foundations of the new reform. Harvard Educational Review,
       57(1), 1-22.

© ISLS                                                                                               411
CSCL 2013 Proceedings           Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

Appendix

              Figure 1. A screenshot of the five by three matrix on the DynaLab home page.

                            Figure 2. Screenshot of a sample DynaLogue.

© ISLS                                                                                              412
