CSCL 2013 Proceedings                 Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

  CyberSTEM: Making Discovery Visible Through Digital Games
                     Kurt Squire, Rich Halverson, Craig Kasemodel, R. Benjamin Shapiro,
                     Matthew Gaydos, V. Elizabeth Owen, Mike Beall, Dennis Paiz-Ramirez
                 University of Wisconsin-Madison, 1401 University Ave., Madison, WI., 53715
                       Email: squire@education.wisc.edu, halverson@education.wisc.edu

         Abstract: The purpose of this demonstration is to present how video games can communicate
         cutting-edge science research topics to a new generation of players. Researchers in the Games,
         Learning, and Society Center (GLS) at the University of Wisconsin-Madison collaborated
         with partners at the Wisconsin Institutes of Discovery (WIDs) to develop and refine a suite of
         educational video games to explore topics such as limnology, virology, regenerative medicine,
         and  ecological  science  rarely studied in   the realm   of educational  spaces.  Several games
         develop collaborative participatory science skills while expanding games based learning into
         adult informal   learning. The   presentation   will begin   with brief  history  of  CyberSTEM
         implementation, followed with a hands-on demonstration of the iterations in the most current
         form, and will close with a audience discussion of the direction of CyberSTEM and its social
         network.

The Project
CyberSTEM: Making Discovery Visible Through Digital Games is a NSF-funded project designed to build
science based educational video games, a social network, and learning community that will transform STEM
learning experiences     and enhance  player   abilities and  interests in STEM    fields.  It contains three  main
components:   1)  a suite of  video games   designed   to  improve  player understanding    of cutting-edge science
research; 2) an assessment model designed to use collaborative game play as evidence for learning; and 3) a
social network   and  distribution  environment   designed    to engage   many players   in collaborative play and
problem-solving.
         CyberSTEM games have been designed and developed with researchers from the Games, Learning,
and Society (GLS) research center in the Wisconsin Institutes of Discovery (WIDs). The GLS strategy is to
work with science research teams to identify the key ideas and techniques in the research domains that would
enhance  the  public understanding   of   the science.   GLS  design  teams  include   game   programmers,  graphic
designers, content area experts, and Learning Scientists who determine which aspects of the key ideas lend
themselves to interaction in which kinds of game genres. The games are iterately designed and tested, with both
content experts, educators, players, and learning scientists, to measure both playability and fidelity of the play
model to the content model.

Theoretical Background
The GLS approach to design for learning is anchored in four key concepts: situated learning and cognition,
intrinsic motivation, transformational play, and objectives and assessment (Van Eck, 2009; Barab, Greslfi, &
Arici, 2009).
         Situated learning theory states that knowledge and transferability is strongly tied to context, domain,
authentic activity, and culture. Learning is effective when it is presented in a meaningful context. Games embed
knowledge,   give   feedback  and  guidance,  and present   instructional  events within  the  context of the game
narrative. Intrinsic motivation derives from internal events, such as personal goals and rewards. Learning is
maximized when students are intrinsically motivated without external rewards and punishments. GLS designs
align and extend the game content (role-playing, fantasy, narrative, and context) to content that is outside of the
game (Van Eck, 2009). In transformational play, the player is a protagonist who must use the curricular content
knowledge, skills, and concepts to understand a fictional situation and make choices to transform that situation.
Transformational    play leads to a greater   engagement   with  immersive  activities and  simulations as  students
experience accountability and consequentiality (Barab, et al., 2009).
         Gee (2005) supports how gaming contributes to situated learning, intrinsic motivation, transformational
play, and assessment. He states that educators need to make learning in the classroom and outside of school,
more game-like by using these learning principles, incorporated in games, both reflectively and strategically in
our practice with or without using games in the classroom. Effective GLS instruction builds opportunities for
collaborative application of what is learned with feedback to help the learners monitor their own learning.
Indirect and direct communication of objectives are common in the establishment of objectives in games.
         The epistemologies of GBL lay a foundation for new forms of assessment, i.e. extending the game play
to additional instructional activities and how they are organized by problem and challenge, and comparing them
to relevant real scenarios (Schaffer & Gee, 2009).

© ISLS                                                                                                         413
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                    Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

         Gee (2008) argues that gaming can impact learning and assessment. Gaming is one set of collaborative
digital tools in the 21st Century Skills toolbox (that includes situated learning and communities of practice). As
learning becomes more online, GBL can change the culture and ethic of education to be organized around
collaborative learning communities of practice rather than a form of organized top-down social control of
students (Squire, 2005).

The Design Challenges
Games for Participatory Science (GPS), developed at WIDs is an approach developed to make inquiry and
discovery visible in games. This is accomplished through collaboration with domain scientists, modeling of
physical and social scientific systems, position players as goal focused members, constructing of knowledge,
and creation of opportunities for participation in authentic science practices (Shapiro & Squire, in press).
         The   GPS  approach    seeks    to build   upon    traditional inquiry-based     learning with   an emphasis   on
aesthetics and flow in immersive scenarios to foster understanding of science, increase learner involvement and
participation in science practice. "Basic research on learning through games (and in learning sciences more
generally)  emphasizes    that  much     knowledge    production,     integration,  and   reflection (often  described   as
metacognition) arises through social interaction" (Shapiro & Squire, in press). By seeking to connect learning
through interaction and science practice, CyberSTEM games are not only designed for schools, but also for
engaging players in informal learning situations and work settings.
         To  increase player    social interactions,  CyberSTEM         is building a  social gaming   network   to create
opportunities for players to participate in a gaming community. This will allow for new models of engagement
and interaction within and across the CyberSTEM games.
         CyberSTEM       using  the GPS     approach  is fostering    engagement,   problem   solving,  and  deep   critical
thinking skills with domain content interest dilemmas, experiences, and user interactions. By concentrating on
domain   content  through   the collaboration    with  the    content experts,  CyberSTEM     designing   and   developing
games   for play  across  spaces    and  for   systems  that   can scale,   attempting  to  understand    learners activity
temporally and spatially (B. Shapiro, personal communication, November 8, 2012).

The Games
The CyberSTEM project is developing five games that introduce students and adults to different cutting edge
science content and concepts. Video introductions to the games may be found at http://bit.ly/VEanJB.
         Citizen Science is an adventure game that teaches limnology (the study of the life and phenomena of
fresh water) and scientific literacy. Players travel back through time to uncover and solve pollution problems
faced  by   Lake  Mendota.   Learning     from   the  past    and working    together,  players address   the   continuing
eutrophication  threats  and attempt     to restore  Lake   Mendota     to conditions  suitable for  human    use. Citizen
Science is designed to develop an understanding current ecological conditions and issues. Players learn to use
science  inquiry and  working   together    to  enact change    in the  legislative  process. CyberSTEM      supports   the
iterative development and collaboration in adapting the game for classroom use. Preliminary investigations were
conducted   of how teachers    used  the  game   in   their classrooms     with different respective  pedagogies   ("ERIA
Interactive - Citizen Science," n.d.).
         Progenitor X is a narrative-driven, turn-based, puzzle game in which players assume the role of a
regenerative   biologist to prevent    a zombie   apocalypse.     The   game    was developed   in   partnership   with the
Wisconsin Institutes for Discovery Regenerative Medicine research team to present core ideas of cutting edge
stem cell science in context of a game. Progenitor X players are challenged to cultivate and differentiate stem
cells, assemble tissues, and replace organs that have been contaminated with a zombie virus. Game play requires
players to solve cell, tissue, and organ puzzle cycles while learning about their relationships and the scientific
principles of stem cell research and concepts ("ERIA Interactive - Progenitor X," n.d.).
         Trails Forward is a multi-player, turn-based, strategy simulation game that invites players to make
ecological and economic decisions about land use in rural Wisconsin. Trails Forward simulates the emergent
economic    and environmental    effects    of users' decisions    on a    robust multi-agent model    of land  and  forest
economy    and  ecology,  coupled   with    human   and  animal    population   dynamics.  Trails  Forward   is iteratively
designed and developed with extensive input from stakeholders including UW Madison faculty in forest and
wildlife ecology  and    agricultural    economics,   the   Wisconsin      Department   of Natural   Resources,    and  the
Menominee tribe.
         Trails Forward allows players to take on roles in buying land and determining land use. Each role
emphasizes certain kinds of land use, and is designed to collaborate and conflict in specific ways with other
roles. Currently, players   may  choose     the roles of    a housing   development    company,    a timber  company,    or
conservation nonprofit. Players learn that each role have competing land management interests, philosophies,
and goals. Players develop an understanding of the environmental costs and benefits of their decisions and
actions. With each turn, players learn that these roles can hinder or help one another. Game play allows players
understand how to make decisions about maximizing scarce resources in contested environments. Game play

© ISLS                                                                                                                  414
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                  Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

allows  researchers  the  opportunity  to observe   collaboration   and   competition  ("ERIA  Interactive   -  Trails
Forward," n.d.).
          FairPlay  is  a game  designed   to  give players   the opportunity   to experience  some    of   the biases
encountered   by   individuals from  underrepresented    groups   in academic    science, technology,    engineering,
mathematics, and medicine. The game invites players to assume the role of a young researcher trying to achieve
academic success. As they progress through the game, they encounter examples of bias from peers, superiors,
and even strangers, and can reflect on their experiences and try to decrease their own biased behaviors. To
complete the journey to renowned professorship, players must successfully operate a university research lab and
maintain a diverse collaborative academic social network ("ERIA Interactive - Fair Play," n.d.).
          Virulent is a strategy action game designed and developed to teach the principles of virology. Be the
Virus! In Virulent, players take on the role of a virus attempting to break into a cell and to take over cell
reproductive   structures to manufacture  more    viruses.  Players  strategize on the  proper course    of action in
infecting, manipulating, and escaping from host cells and their cellular immune responses.
          Virulent was designed in collaboration with the Systems Biology research group and faculty from the
Medical Microbiology and Immunology department at the University of Wisconsin - Madison. Current research
indicates that  the engaging   game  play of   Virulent  as  supplemental  curricular material increases    the social
interaction  of students  and  the  temporal  relationships  in the viral replication process  ("ERIA    Interactive -
Virulent," n.d.).

CSCL Interactive Event
The interactive event we are planning for the conference has several main goals.
          We will showcase the CyberSTEM games, allowing the participants to experience cutting edge science
          based educational video games in a hands on environment.
          Through video footage and session presenters, you will receive firsthand accounts of the CyberSTEM
          implementation and the research based iterative process.
          Participants will receive a demonstration of the social network and will provide usability feedback.
          Event participants will be part of a research project and will be able to provide feedback on each of the
          models.
In the proposed demonstration, we will first describe and facilitate a discussion on the CyberSTEM approach by
presenting on the science and game design. Alexander, Eaton, & Egan (2010) suggest that there are three
general strategies  for educational  gaming    practices with   formal and  informal  learning situations.  The   first
approach focuses on the skills and abilities that players acquire by playing the games, i.e. analysis, deduction
and discrimination. The second approach to game based learning is using games to teach curricular content. The
third approach is the transfer of learning. The aim is to structure the content and design of the game to make
them engaging for the player in new meaningful ways. Players are engaged and motivated through features such
as narrative structure, heroic human qualities, emotion, role-playing, conflicts, and the extreme and the exotic.
Participants  will  discover   the  intrinsic motivation   and  behavioral  self  monitoring   of the    collaborative
transformative play.
          Our   demonstration  will allow participants   the opportunity   for  hands-on  interaction to explore   our
collaborative educational video games. We will feature all five games described above: Citizen Science, Trails
Forward, Virulent, Progenitor X, and Fair Play. We will focus on Trails Forward and Fair Play, unique game
based simulation models with interdisciplinary content, as examples of expanding GBL into the adult workplace
and community decision making/learning space.

References
Alexander, G., Eaton, I., & Egan, K. (2010). Cracking the Code of Electronic Games: Some Lessons for
          Educators. Teachers College Record, 112(7), 1830­1850.
Baker, E. L., Chung, G., & Delacruz, G. C. (2008). Design and validation of technology-based performance
          assessments. Handbook of research on educational communications and technology, 595­604.
Barab, S. A., Greslfi, M., Arici, A. (2009). Why Educators Should Care about Games. Educational Leadership.
          76-80.
Big Thinkers:    James Paul Gee on   Grading with Games. (2008).Edutopia. Retrieved November 5, 2010, from
          http://www.edutopia.org/james-gee-games-learning-video.
Blogs     |     Games      Learning     Society.     (n.d.).      Retrieved     November       1,     2012,      from
          http://www.gameslearningsociety.org/.
Breuer, J. S., & Bente, G. (2010). Why so serious? On the relation of serious games and learning. Eludamos.
                   Journal for Computer Game Culture, 4(1), 7­24.
Committee on Science Learning: Computer Games, S., & National Research Council. (2011). Learning Science
          Through   Computer   Games   and     Simulations.  (M.  A.   Honey   &   M. Hilton,  Eds.).  The   National
          Academies Press. Retrieved from http://www.nap.edu/openbook.php?record_id=13078.

© ISLS                                                                                                            415
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                   Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

ERIA      Interactive    -     Citizen     Science.    (n.d.).     Retrieved    November      1,    2012,      from
         http://www.eriainteractive.com/project_CitizenScience.php.
ERIA      Interactive      -     Fair     Play.     (n.d.).      Retrieved    November      1,     2012,       from
         http://www.eriainteractive.com/project_Pathfinder.php.
ERIA Interactive - Home. (n.d.). Retrieved November 1, 2012, from http://www.eriainteractive.com/index.php.
ERIA      Interactive    -      Progenitor      X.   (n.d.).      Retrieved    November       1,   2012,       from
         http://www.eriainteractive.com/project_ProgenitorX.php.
ERIA      Interactive    -      Trails   Forward.     (n.d.).      Retrieved   November       1,    2012,      from
         http://www.eriainteractive.com/project_TrailsForward.php.
ERIA      Interactive        -    Virulent.      (n.d.).     Retrieved       November      1,      2012,       from
         http://www.eriainteractive.com/project_Virulent.php.
Gee, J. P. (2005). Good video games and good learning. Phi Kappa Phi Forum, 85(2), 33-37. Retrieved from
         http://search.proquest.com.ezproxy.library.wisc.edu/docview/235184729?accountid=465.
Halverson, R., Owen, V.B., & Wills, N. (in press). Game-Based Assessment: A integrated model for capturing
         evidence of learning in play.
Learning  Theories    Knowledgebase      (2010,    October).   Situated  Learning   Theory  (Lave)    at  Learning-
         Theories.com.  Retrieved  from October 10th, 2010       http://www.learning-theories.com/situated-learning-
         theory-lave.html.
Projects    |   Learning       Games      Network.       (n.d.).   Retrieved    November      1,    2012,      from
         http://www.learninggamesnetwork.org/projects/#.
Sawyer, B. (2002). Serious Games: Improving Public Policy Through Game-based Learning and Simulation.
         Foresight and Governance Project, Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars Publication, 1.
         Retrieved       from         http://www.wilsoncenter.org/publication/executive-summary-serious-games-
         improving-public-policy-through-game-based-learning-and.
Shaffer, D.W. & Gee, J. P. (2012). The Right Kind of GATE: Computer games and the future of assessment. In
         M.   Mayrath, D.    Robinson,   &  J. Clarke-Midura     (Eds.), Technology-Based  Assessments     for 21st
         Century Skills:   Theoretical  and Practical    Implications from   Modern   Research:  Information   Age
         Publications.
Shapiro, R.B. & Hatfield, D. (in press). Toward a Model of Participatory Science Networks.
Shapiro, R.B.  &   Squire,   K.D. (in  press). Games  for   Participatory  Science: A Par adigm   for Game-Based
         Learning for Promoting Science Literacy.
Squire, K.D. (2005). Changing the game: What happens when videogames enter the classroom?. Innovate 1(6).
Van Eck, R. (2009). A guide to integrating COTS games in your classroom. In R. Ferdig (Ed.), Handbook of
         research on effective electronic gaming in education (1st ed., pp 179-199). Hershey, Pa.: Information
         Science Reference.

Acknowledgments
This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant No. 1119383. Any
opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation.

© ISLS                                                                                                         416
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                 Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

Appendix
CyberSTEM is a three-pronged strategy for designing and developing collaborative educational video games
and a social learning network. Our demonstration will allow participants the opportunity for hands-on
interaction to explore and discover our collaborative educational video games. We will have five featured games
that will include Citizen Science, Trails Forward, Virulent, Progenitor X, and Fair Play.
       We will be able to supply the computers to facilitate the demonstration. Special requirements will
include a room with the capacity and space to handle up to 30 or more computers. We will need a projector and
possibly additional power strips.

© ISLS                                                                                                    417
