CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                             Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

 `CO-ALIENATION' MEDIATED BY COMMON REPRESENTATIONS
                           IN SYNCHRONOUS E-DISCUSSIONS
                         Baruch B. Schwarz, Yifat Ben-David Kolikant, Maria Mishenkina,
  The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Mt Scopus, Jerusalem 91905, Israel, baruch.schwarz@mail.huji.ac.il

          Abstract. Synchronous e-discussions have become common social practices in and out of
          educational institutions. Socio-cultural psychologists have suggested that intersubjectivity is
          central for maintenance of face-to-face communication. We study here how communication is
          maintained  in   synchronous     discussions   and  whether    intersubjectivity   is   reached.   Four
          university students used a CMC tool to discuss an educational issue. One week later, each
          student was    interviewed   on   his/her  views   on  the   issue. Then,    the   technique    of cued
          retrospective reporting was used to uncover how each student interpreted each move of the
          synchronous discussion. The cross analysis of the interviews and the reporting showed that
          actions were not co-ordinated. Agreements and disagreements were not shared, and order of
          actions was quite whimsical. We conclude that intersubjectivity was not established. However,
          communication     was maintained   through    a  process of  co-alienation     ­ the  juxtaposition    of
          incompatible   alignments    of  representations   through   a   common      external   representation.
          Although   co-alienation  is problematic,    we  show   that discussants     could learn   from    the e-
          discussion.

Four Senses of Intersubjectivity to Account for Maintenance of
Communication
The notion of intersubjectivity was elaborated to account for maintenance of communication in practices that
lead to development and learning. The social practices of synchronous (electronic) discussions are newcomers
that seem strange to educators or psychologists: People seat alone by their computers and interact with others
they don't see and often don't know. The interactions are often lopsided, interrupted and rudimentary. How can
learning occur? Is it possible to discern any kind of intersubjectivity in synchronous discussions? We approach
these questions   in  this paper.  A  necessary step    in this  enterprise is to  come    back   to  the different   senses
intersubjectivity has received to account for maintenance of communication.
          The historical origins of intersubjectivity are philosophical: From Husserl, to Heidegger, Levinas or
Gadamer, philosophers have asked the transcendental conditions of the possibility of dialogue, of the existence
of the other. These philosophical steps led to consider intersubjectivity as an idea that explains how empathy
develops between people or how people reach new meanings together. Socio-cultural psychologists adopted this
togetherness  view    of intersubjectivity  to become      a central  idea  in   their theory   of  human    development.
Intersubjectivity was primarily meant to express a general idea of overlapping of subjectivities or prolepses
(Rommetveit, 1979; 1985) ­ communicative moves speakers take for granted things that have not been (yet)
discussed. Even   before   language   is mastered,   a  baby  is born  anticipating    a sympathetic,   interactive   social
environment. Another sense of intersubjectivity refers to the construction of a shared meaning by people to
interpret social  and cultural  life, or a  specific situation.  This  sense  is very    frequent  in adults'    guidance of
children's explorations. It has also been adopted to describe some situations of collaboration among peers, for
example, when jointly solving problems. A different sense given to intersubjectivity ­ shared divergences of
meanings, is necessary to understand how practices such as lying, disputes and jokes "work". Lying is genuinely
inter-subjective as it operates between two subjective definitions of reality. Disputes, for example, are fueled by
the common recognition of divergent views on a situation. So far, the senses of intersubjectivity we reviewed
have in common the sharing of subjective states by two or more individuals, and stress that shared cognition and
consensus is essential in the shaping of our ideas and relations.
          But intersubjectivity may occur without any sharing. To make clear this new sense of intersubjectivity,
Matusov (1996) observed a succession of discussions on play craft among elementary school children mediated
by a teacher. Matusov showed that in the disagreements some students raised no idea or no opposition to any
idea. Rather, although a fierce disagreement arose among children, the disagreement for some turned around
ownership of the play crafted while the other students thought it was motivated by a better play craft. Matusov
concluded that a new sense of intersubjectivity should be elaborated, a process of coordination of participants'
contributions in  joint  activity. In  such cases,   an  observer  can  extract  from    the social   activity   a thread of
compatibility of actions, that is, an interpretation encompassing the goals of each participant, and which is
coherent.  Matusov    considered   other  situations  in   which meaningful      communication     can    be maintained    ­
situations in which teachers or students care for others and help them understand, develop, or own what they
already master. Communication in this case is maintained but calls for another sense of intersubjectivity, that of

© ISLS                                                                                                                 414
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                                   Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

agency     to features  concerns    by teachers  (or  students)     that are   shared  by  the  ones   about   which  they   care
(Matusov, 2001).
           The  studies   mentioned     above    on  the   different     types  of  intersubjectivity    involved   face-to-face
communication.     The    diversity of  communication       practices  grows    extremely     rapidly, as  various  forms  of e-
discussions gain popularity. We show that the sense of intersubjectivity as sharing of subjective states among
several    individuals,   cannot   be  retained  for  certain   synchronous       discussions.   The    question  is  then   how
communication is maintained? And is it possible for discussants to learn from such discussions? Those are harsh
questions that we will approach in this paper in the case of synchronous e-discussions with a particular tool for
facilitating collective argumentation in synchronous discussions (Schwarz & Glassner, 2007). This particular
tool is representative of a quite large set of tools for facilitating e-discussions that displays a representation of
the on-going discussion, including its whole history. We will claim that this gradually produced representation
(called here an argumentative map) which is shared by the discussants while participating in their discussion,
enables maintenance of meaningful communication among them, although possibly no idea is shared and no
coordination of actions is attained during the discussion. In an example, we will show that the argumentative
map    produced    by   the discussants  will   serve   as  an  artifact  for   projecting    personal   interpretations  of the
synchronous discussion so far, which would have probably led to ruptures if communication would have been
face-to-face. We will point at the cohabitation of incompatible prolepses, or what we call co-alienation along
with new kind of communication. We will show that the discussants can learn from such discussions. We will
discuss whether in this case, a new sense should be conferred to intersubjectivity. But, before we delve into the
analysis   of  the synchronous      discussion,  we   first review     what    is known    in  communication      studies  about
synchronous e-discussions. As we will see, this review appears to be highly relevant to the issue of maintenance
of communication.
           A priori, e-discussions seem detrimental to maintenance of communication, hence, by definition, to
intersubjectivity: In spoken discussions, joint attention is very often maintained. Turn-taking is determined by
facial expression, pause of the other, intonation, or simply interruption. Overlaps can occur but they generally
occur    through   gestures,    or  facial  expressions.    In      contrast,  descriptive    studies   of   computer-mediated
communication (CMC) suggest that maintenance of communication may often turn to problematic: time lag
between when a message is sent and when it is responded to, disrupted turn adjacency, overlaps with unrelated
messages      from other    participants   between   an    initiating    message   and    its response     (Murray,  1989)   are
characteristic   problems    in e-discussions    According    to    Herring    (2001), these   problems    are  responsible   for
incoherence, and for topic decay ­ the fact that discussants rapidly discuss less and less the topic at stake during
e-discussions. On the other hand, e-discussions are attractive: CMC communication is based on the availability
of   a persistent  textual  record  of  the interaction.   Persistent    conversation   appears    to  aid the user's cognitive
processing. The predilection towards meta-humor and meta-play in CMC may be attributed in part to the fact
that CMC persists as text on a screen and is subject to conscious reflection in ways that spoken language is not,
thereby    facilitating a heightened   meta-linguistic   awareness       (Cazden,   1995).    This short   review suggests   that
studying maintenance of CMC communication is worthwhile.

Studying Maintenance of                Communication in Synchronous Discussions
The context of the present study is educational. Discussions took place in a University course on The Role of the
Teacher in Classroom Learning. One of the themes of the course was to focus on the role of the teacher in
structuring interactions in group work. In addition to theoretical lectures, the teacher provided a CMC graphical
tool   for facilitating   group  e-argumentation,    and    for     reflecting on  ways    teachers    could   intervene  during
discussions (Schwarz & de Groot, 2007). This tool named Digalo enables the management of discussions and
the representation of their argumentative processes and components among participants. Using Digalo consists
of co-creating maps built of written notes inside different shapes that represent the permissible argumentative
moves    for  the  discussion   (or what   is called the    ontology   chosen     for the discussion),     and different  arrows
representing    different  connections   between    the shapes.     The  ontology     chosen  in   the course  included   Claim,
Argument, Explanation, Comment, and Question. There are three kinds of arrows: support, opposition, and link.
The    support  and   opposition    arrows    help  challenging,     refuting,  elaborating,   or  agreeing.   In  each   of  the
contributions, participants add one shape or more and arrows/links to shapes built by others to articulate own
claims, arguments, etc, and then write their contribution inside of the shape(s) they chose. Figure 1 shows the
Digalo map on which we will focus in this paper.
           11 graduate students participated in a university course. This article focuses on one of the discussions
in the course. Judith is a 26 years old graduate student in Educational Psychology. Fatima and Rim are students
in Education in their twenties. Ahmad is a 47 years old teacher. In a first session, students were introduced to
Digalo and conducted two "warm-up" discussions during which they learned technicalities. They were then
arranged   in  groups   of  3-4  and   asked  to   resolve  a moral      dilemma.   The   presentation    of the  ontology   was
accompanied by a suggestion to follow a series of ground rules of conversation developed to instill dialogic and
                                                                  

  

© ISLS                                                                                                                       415
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                    Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

dialectical talk (e.g., "you should provide reasons to support your viewpoint", "You should challenge any idea",
"you should answer to challenges or questions with respect").

                                           Figure 1. A Digalo Map
At the end of the first session, the students were given two articles to be read before the next lesson. Both
articles related to the issue of guidance in discussions. Both articles suggest that the total absence of guidance
during discussions is rarely productive but that moderation, a kind of guidance which is caring but not intrusive,
may be one way to help students in their discussions. One moderator was designated for each group, and was
asked to insure that discussants follow the ground rules we presented. One week after, all students sat by their
own computer at distance from each other. The issue to be discussed was "Is it indispensable for research on
classroom learning to account for the teacher's activity?" The discussions lasted around 30 minutes. Two weeks
after the discussions, we meet with each of the discussants. The first part of the meeting was an interview in
which the students were asked on the role of discussions in learning and on the role of the teacher in discussions.
In the second part of the meeting, each student underwent a cued retrospective reporting (Van Gog, et al., 2009)
in which he was presented the progressive reconstitution of his argumentative map by using the replay option of
the Digalo software: whenever the interviewer clicked, the map grew by one argumentative move. Students
were asked to explain their moves, thereby give their interpretation of each argumentative move, such as peers'
or moderator's interventions, own reactions to these interventions, and to figure out the goals and expectations.
Each of the meetings lasted around two hours.

Three Incompatible but Cohabitating Stories by Three Discussants
How was the discussion perceived by the participants in each of its moves? To answer this difficult question, we
had at disposal the Digalo map they gradually produced, and the cued retrospective of Judith, Fatima, and
Ahmad with the replay of the map (Rim, did not agree to participate in the retrospective). The preliminary
interview of the discussants provided an indispensable background to interpret the e-discussion. We will insert
some insights from the interviews to complete the discussants' interpretations of the discussion in their cued
retrospectives. As we will see, interpretations were quite divergent: they did not convey shared understandings,
or even coordinated actions. Since the nature of communication was so precarious, the division of the discussion
in episodes was a difficult enterprise: some moments could represent boundaries for some discussants, while
they could be apprehended as in the middle of a move by others. Our approach was to propose a division into
episodes according to clear changes in patterns of interaction. The discussion includes 49 contributions. The first
episode ­ Turns 2-20 is characterized by the non-intervention of the moderator, and the quite equal participation
of   the three discussants. The second  episode ­ Turns   21-37, is characterized by the participation of all
discussants, including the moderator, who sends messages to all discussants. The pattern of interaction is quite
centralized. In the third episode ­ Turns 38-49, the moderator continues to send messages to all discussants but
only one discussant is responsive.
1st episode: Starting the discussion without moderator ­ accumulating similar contributions
The beginning of the discussion is characterized by short contributions in which no challenge is raised. Rather,
the map seems to grow with contributions that express the same point: at Turn 8 and 13, Fatima writes In my
opinion research should refer to the position of the teacher, no one can overlook him! and I agree with you
(what is written in the e-discussion is in underlined italics to differentiate it from what is said in the interview);

                                                       

  

© ISLS                                                                                                  416
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                                  Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

at   Turn 11,    Rim writes   In  my   opinion,  any   research    on  learning   and   instruction should     refer to  all the
directions,   students,  teachers,   parents,   school. Judith     writes at  Turn  12   We  all agree.   Is it  possible?   and
ostensibly links this recognition of agreement to all previous interventions with arrows of support. Ahmad did
not   make  any    contribution   in the  first episode because     he  faced  technical  problems.   However,       as he later
reported,  he    watched  the    map,  and thought   how   to act   in  this  situation. We   will  see   that  all participants
interpreted this situation differently and that their interpretations relied on their beliefs regarding the role of
discussions in learning, and the role of the moderator and of the discussants in e-discussions.
Ahmad: Discussants do not really refer to each other; they agree instead of thinking in depth. When Ahmad
observed this discussion in his cued retrospective, he reacted: the participants began by throwing out ideas...
and then everybody agrees, agrees, agrees, and in fact, I don't know about what.                  In his view, what happens
here is disagreement which is called an `agreement'. When Ahmad read Judith's contribution at Turn 12 (We all
agree. Is it possible?), he felt that this means that we are afraid of ourselves. Is it possible that we agreed? On
what did we agree? We agreed on one sentence [...], the fact that the teacher should be at the center of research
and    should look   at  the    students. But   we  didn't formulate      this properly.   He    recalled the    importance   of
collaborative learning to contrast it from the `railroad parallel tracks' (sic) that characterized the beginning of
the talk. Ahmad thought that discussants should slow down their pace and begin to read others' contributions to
uncover their real meaning. Ahmad raises an additional idea, the importance of formulating own opinion or of
creating own position. He criticized the Arab society to which he belongs, that does not enable young people to
think autonomously: the Arab society is clearly patriarchal. The father decides on everything, and everybody
has... sometimes, this is not the father, this is the grandfather [...] and everybody must tell him `yes' and
nobody argues with him, nobody argues with him about things that are important in their lives. The society was
built in a way that only when you get old, you can think, you are allowed to think. Before you are old, you must
listen, you must accumulate wisdom. It seems that Ahmad sees the problems of his society through the lenses of
Rim and Fatima's contributions.
Judith: It is impossible to learn from this discussion. As she read the contributions of the other discussants in
her auto-confrontation, Judith reminded that she had no interlocutor for a real discussion. For example, her
reaction to Rim's contribution at Turn 7 (I agree with your opinion Ahmad that the teacher should be a partner)
is: It seemed to me that it's not enough articulated [...] it means to say `yes' to the main issue, but this is not
enough    [...]. I felt  that I  don't have   any  interlocutor    with whom     to argue.   She  compares     her  pace in  her
contributions to theirs to say: see how much I write [laughing]...I felt that they don't move. Judith was interested
in changing this situation: I tried again and again, as much as I could, to move things. She commented on her
contribution at Turn 12 (We all agree. Is it possible?), that she linked with arrows of support to all previous
contributions) as `a bit cynical'.        For her, the  contributions     of the others  are like building   bricks,   and each
discussant should bring personal contributions of high quality, original, and warranted: When you express only
your opinion, without going      deep  into it, without explanations, without bringing       citations, warrants    to what  you
say [...], it's superficial, it's to remain in `I think that'. It is then understandable that she is disappointed by the
beginning of the discussion. In spite of her disappointment, Judith continued reacting to her interlocutors and
expressed her opinion with the hope that it would develop as a more interesting discussion in which she will
have opportunities to explain her position. Differently from Ahmad, she put the responsibility for the learning in
the individual rather than in the group. However, she thought that the discussion quickly became purposeless.
Fatima: The discussion is successful because people express themselves and the moderator is not intrusive.
As Fatima read Judith and Rim's contributions, she thought that the discussion was excellent, not only good at
that stage: each of the discussants expresses what she has. For her, this situation is surprising and does not
necessitate any moderator. Fatima asserts that the discussion is successful because it does not stop after the first
contribution: They [the discussants] forgot that there is no moderator and continue talking onward. When
reading Judith's Turn 12, she understands that Judith wants to serve as the moderator. She does not identify any
cynicism in Judith's intervention (as meant by Judith). Rather, she interprets this turn as a sincere request to
figure out the intentions of the discussants: She [Judith] wanted to take the role of the moderator who tries to
understand whether we all are on the same wavelength, whether we agree on the same things or not.                        In her
opinion, this role is not necessary: the discussants are interested in this topic ... We want to go on although we
have no moderator.       Fatima's satisfaction is consistent with the opinions she uttered in her interview: for her,
discussions contribute to learning by the simple expression of diverse opinions. She expresses her surprise that
the discussion goes on without any guidance, since, according to her experience, students do not speak and the
role   of the    teacher is   to cause    them  to speak.  Understandably,       since   students  speak,    the moderator    is
unnecessary.

                                                                 

  

© ISLS                                                                                                                       417
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                          Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

Second episode: Ahmad tries to change the flow and the quality of the discussion
The    discussion  which  began  with ungrounded   agreements    between   the discussants, developed  into a harsh
dispute: Fatima and Rim argued that the student is at the center (Turns 14, 16, 19), against Judith who argued
that opposed this view and added that it is impossible to take into consideration all the variables that are relevant
to the educational field (Turn 18). Initial agreement quickly turned to a harsh polemic. At this point, Ahmad
succeeded to enter the discussion. At Turn 21, he writes: Let's make some order here, we should know on what
there is an agreement. At Turn 27, he intrudes into the gist of the discussion by asking the question: What do
you think about the saying according to which the student is at the center and the teacher only disturbs in his
learning? However, the discussants do not change the way they discuss the issue. The map fills up with short
interventions popping out at a dizzying pace. Ahmad, who tries to stop this trend by writing (in Turn 30) Please
stop throwing out things without seriously referring to what is written immediately receives Rim's reaction We
don't simply throw out (Turn 31). In Turn 33, he links Turn 31 to her contribution in Turn 11 where she
previously wrote In my opinion, any research on learning and teaching should take into consideration all the
directions  ­   students, teachers, parents, school, to ask   (in Turn   33)  U1  what  about  opening the  idea  in
contribution 11. This subtle move seems to point at Rim's incoherence, but she is not sensitive to it.
Ahmad: Efforts to organize the discussion, and to foster collaborative learning. In his auto-confrontation with
this episode, Ahmad complains that the lack of reference to others' ideas originates from the fast pace of the
discussion: Too much, too fast, things they threw up. I had the feeling that it's raining. Ahmad tried to lead
discussants to scrutinize the ideas of each other and to refer to previous contributions expand them, or, in his
own terms, to open them. In his opinion, the presence of different discussants facilitates the consideration of
multiple perspectives and naturally leads to the necessity to explain. Consequently, Ahmad tries to slow down
the pace of contributions. His comment of his contribution at Turn 30 (Please stop throwing out things without
seriously referring to what is written) is: So, I explained that you should be more focused, more ordered [...],
that you should stop, that you should think. Because there was such a deluge of contributions. This comment
conveys a quite high emotional state against the behavior of the discussants.We already saw that Ahmad entered
in the middle of the discussion (e.g., in Turn 27: What do you think about the saying according to which the
student is at the center and the teacher only disturbs in his learning?). Viewing Turn 27 he explained: I came to
tell those who agreed: listen... there are other viewpoints...From the beginning, I didn't know on what they
agree and on what they disagree. I try to position a conflicting viewpoint, an antithesis...to arouse the issue.
Reaction to Ahmad in Ahmad's eyes: The discussants do not agree with his description of the situation. In his
cue retrospective with the reaction to his injections, Ahmad assessed that the discussants adopted a negative
position: When in Turn 31, Rim writes: We don't simply throw out, Ahmad comments: This means that Rim
thinks that what she says is important and is not superfluous. This means that she doesn't agree with what I said
[at Turn 30]. Ahmad considers Rim's contribution as a disagreement on the definition of the situation in which
the discussants are evolving. To handle this disagreement, he attempts to model his viewpoint in Turn 33 by
writing U1 what about opening the idea in contribution 11 with a link to Rim's opposition at Turn 30. Ahmad
comments: I linked this [Turn 33] to 31 to say that if people don't refer to that, this means that they write for no
reason [...] because she said that this is not without any purpose. And Ahmad continues: her contribution
[Rim's contribution] at Turn 11 in which she says `In my opinion, any research on learning and teaching should
take into consideration all directions, students, teachers, parents, school' is good, there is a lot of content here,
but one should develop it, I mean that we should elaborate upon it, explain and warrant it. It was written and no
one referred to it. It's a pity that it passes by without mention [...]. This was my intention, that if one does not
develop these ideas, he writes without any purpose. (Rim did not react to this intervention). Ahmad's comments
show    how    he used  the Digalo  map to convey  suggestions    to the discussants to improve  the quality  of the
discussion by referring to previous contributions. When Ahmad affirms I linked this to 31 to say that it was
written and no one referred to it so it has no sense, he makes clear that the growing map is a central artifact for
constructing a shared meaning. The way Ahmad reacts to Rim's disagreement totally fits his positive approach
to   criticism and  his demarcation  from  blind agreement.   In  the rest of the discussion, Ahmad   acted  to  lead
discussants to refer to what their peers write by requesting them to refer to specific contributions, by presenting
them an idea that opposed what they wrote to one discussant.
Judith: The moderator was not noticeable. Judith attempts to justify the fact that she and her peers did not react
to Ahmad's contributions by pointing at technical mistakes that Ahmad did, despite his good intentions. For
example, in her comment on Turn 30 (Please stop throwing out things without seriously referring to what is
written), she admits that this intervention can help the group in organizing and promoting the discussion: The
moderator belongs to the group. And he represents the goal which is common to all members of the group [...]
to take a decision, or to reach a conclusion. And this is the role he has ­ to help in this goal. Judith comments
that in his interventions Ahmad complies with his roles of moderator. However, Judith estimates that he failed
because he did not benefit from the visual aspect of Digalo: He says important things, but does not locate
                                                           

  

© ISLS                                                                                                           418
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                                 Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

himself properly ... he does not think about that. Do people listen to him, don't listen to him, see him or don't
see him?    And indeed, it seems as if Judith did not notice Ahmad contributions at all and she assumes that the
same happened to the rest of the discussants. In her comment on his contribution in Turn 30, she explains: I
didn't  see him   at  all; in my  opinion,    it's very important,     and  if nobody   notices you, you  can't organize  a
discussion. She suggests that Ahmad could have created a personal reference at the right place in the middle of
the map and he could link it to everybody's last contributions with arrows; not to put himself like that, on the
side, in the corner. For Judith, the growing map is a central artifact for constructing shared meaning. Judith does
not put all responsibility for this failure on Ahmad but mentions that the map is in disorder, and contributions
hide one another, something which makes it difficult to organize a discussion.
           Besides this critique, Judith praises Ahmad for his efforts to improve the quality of the discussion.
While she notices that his contribution in Turn 30 (Please don't throw out things without seriously referring to
what is written) is a bit harmful, she asserts that the idea is good: the discussants really do not devote enough
thought on their contributions. Although she claimed that she didn't notice Ahmad, it seems that Judith reacted
once to Ahmad's effort to promote the quality of the discussion, and when he wrote that one should take
advantage of what the authors of the papers wrote to see what pros and the cons are to write in Turn 36: We saw
in Howe's research that interventions by the computer are equivalent to interventions by the teacher. But I
claim that still, a teacher was necessary to organize this computer event. So it's impossible not to refer to the
teacher.   We   have  here    one of  the   rare   moments   in     which a reaction  is made    on  the basis of  a  shared
understanding. Also, as Judith attends Rim's disagreement and Ahmad's reaction, her interpretation is: The
moderator tries a new way, as he didn't succeed in explaining himself [...] He shows her what he means, what
is my problem with what you said. This interpretation fits Ahmad's explanation of his act. But Judith was
surprised to see Ahmad trying another way to lead discussants to act more effectively, rather than simply doing
it instead of Rim. The difference between Ahmad's and Judith's reactions corresponds to their perception of the
role of moderator. Judith lacks the vision of a moderator as a manager that Ahmad has. In her cued retrospective
Judith appreciated how Ahmad tried to promote the quality of the discussion. However, she sees in his failure a
lack of clarity.

Fatima:    The   intrusion  of  the  moderator     turns   the discussion   to  uninteresting.   In her  cued  retrospective,
Fatima   is quite resolute    about   her feelings   towards   what    she  sees as  the intrusion  of  the  moderator.  She
considers Turns 30 and 33 as examples of bad guidance. Turn 30 (Please stop throwing out things without
seriously   referring to   what   is written) is   totally unacceptable:    This  is not OK...he    was  not with  us at the
beginning, and he can't tell us such things. She justifies Rim's reaction in Turn 31 (We don't simply throw out).
Such an intervention from the part of the moderator does not encourage the continuation of the discussion. She
interprets Ahmad's link to Rim's contribution in Turn 31 in his contribution (Turn 33: U1 what about opening
the idea in contribution 11) as a way to ask questions on claims that were far away and he wants us to return to
Turn 11, what's the link? And Fatima goes on explaining: He has to know that many things happened since
then. So, his reaction here [in Turn 30] is not interesting at all and is connected to nothing [Fatima does a
gesture of `going away' with her hand]. Fatima feels that the rest of the activity of the moderator is even worse
as he does not show any interest in her and Rim's reaction. Her feeling is based on the pace of his contributions
in Turns 30, 32, and 33: He didn't wait for our reactions. Rim reacted but it doesn't seem that he waits that
somebody else reacts, or asks a question anymore. This kind of behavior leads Fatima to stop contributing, yet
she kept reading the discussion, which she found to be "not very interesting": I only read. In the discussion, I
read   all  the  contributions    and  this was    not  very   interesting.    Fatima's  feeling is  mediated   by the   fast
development of the map (done by the other participants) which conveys for her a lack of consideration from the
part of the moderator. Fatima's interpretation is consistent with her feeling of satisfaction in the first episode,
when Ahmad did not intervene. It also fits what she said in her interview about the detrimental role of the
teacher in discussions between students. In accordance with this view, Fatima opts not to react to Turn 30 that
she considers as harmful. Rather, she reacts to Turn 27 (What do you think about the saying according to which
the student is at the center and the teacher only disturbs in his learning?). She explains this choice by asserting:
In that way, he doesn't say that all what we said before doesn't matter or is nothing...in some way, he took what
we already said and the main issue and assembled them together. He gave us a second question, a question
more or less connected to the main question and to what we said before.

The end of the discussion: a common summary or the moderator's aggressive coercion?
We can't enter into derails in the end of the discussion. Its dynamics changed in comparison to what happened
so far: The moderator referred to Judith's contributions, and she reacted to them. Ahmad gave to Judith ideas
that complete or challenge the ideas she brought forward. Judith identified this new style as that of a challenging
moderator. Judith responded by adding more ideas or more details to ideas already expressed.                   She felt that
there is a learning layer in the discussion, and also learns from the inventive strategies he adopts to go deeper in

                                                                  

  

© ISLS                                                                                                                  419
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                                Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

the discussion and to improve its quality. In contrast, the two other discussants vanished from the scene and did
not contribute even when Ahmad turned to the whole group to refer to the discussion in a reflective way.
Ahmad's attempt to instigate a common conclusion encountered Judith's strong opposition, who was happy that
she could finally develop her own ideas and who thought that the opinions brought forward by Rim and Fatima
are not academic enough. Judith saw in their desertion from the discussion an additional proof of their weakness
and of their lack of motivation, whereas Fatima and Rim' e-silence is for them all but a lack of attendance; it is
loaded, full of anger, inscribed there on a map that shows their presence.

Conclusion: Co-Alienation Mediated by a Common Representation as a New
Manifestation of Maintenance of Communication
          The idea of intersubjectivity has been developed to explain how people maintain communication in
various social practices. Matusov has discerned several kinds of intersubjectivity that can be classified as (a)
overlapping    of   subjectivities, (b) sharing  of  (divergences    of)  meaning,     (c) coordination   of participant's
contribution in joint activity and (d) human agency. By definition, all kinds of intersubjectivity describe diverse
forms   of states   of subjectivity  shared  among   several     individuals. These   instances of  intersubjectivity were
recognized    as  being   of  the   highest importance  for  learning    and     for development    of productive   guided
participation (Rogoff, 1990). The particular setting of this research has uncovered what we consider as not being
classifiable to any of these categories: the interview uncovered very different beliefs on learning, on the role of
discussions for fostering learning, on the role of moderators, and on whether Digalo helps discussants and the
moderator. We anticipated that these beliefs would come to the surface in the discussion. We expected that
disagreement would arise and would be fueled by the common recognition of divergences. The confrontation of
the discussants with their previous e-discussion in the cued retrospective showed a different picture. Ahmad,
Judith, and Fatima had divergent interpretations of their synchronous discussions, but this divergence was not
shared: what was meant to facilitate construction of knowledge from the part of Ahmad was interpreted as brutal
interference by Fatima; What was meant to be an exchange of ideas (by Fatima and probably by Rim) was seen
as a shallow discussion that does not lead to learning by Judith and Ahmad. There is even not any clear cut
between the presence and the absence of discussants: Ahmad's absence in the first episode for technical reasons
was interpreted as a welcome `presence', a tacit agreement to give students the opportunity to talk about the
issue at stake without interfering. Clearly, actions are not co-ordinated.
          How, with all those unshared divergences and the absence of coordination of actions, communication
could be maintained? One may argue that the question is not a real one, since during the first and the third
episodes there is no real communication among all discussants. However, `not-reacting-to-a-request' or `not-
participating-actively-for-a-while' are two behaviors that are inherent to synchronous discussions. Moreover,
these behaviors are communicative in the sense that they are posted on a shared object, the argumentative map,
and each of the participants intends to convey a message. Even in the third episode during which Fatima and
Rim remained silent, they are not really out: in her auto-confrontation, Fatima makes clear that she wanted her
silence to be posted on Ahmad's face! Fatima is `in', attentive to Ahmad's moves and eager to convey her
anger. So, what kept the group together in this weird communication?
          We saw that the nature of tools for synchronous discussion enables to communicate differently from in
f2f communication. The discussion map shows all previous moves, their authors, as well as the interlocutors to
which they were directed. Discussants use the map to reason, as well as to communicate. For example, Ahmad
selected two contributions by Rim, one recent and one remote, to point at some inconsistency. And this map is
always   present,   even  for participants  who  are silent. The    growing    map    mediates  the interpretations of  the
discussants in a way which is radically different from f2f settings. In f2f interaction, interpretations are updated
at any moment and adjacent interventions influence more interlocutors than non-adjacent ones (Felton & Kuhn,
2001). In contrast, at the time an actor intervenes in synchronous discussions, he and his interlocutors can see
the traces of a whole history. Their interpretations at any time of the discussion are sometimes mediated by
previous   misunderstandings      inscribed  in the  map,    and   the   discussants   cannot   instantaneously   dissipate
misunderstandings as easily as in face-to-face interactions through facial expressions or intonation. The big
discrepancies    in emotional   states  ­ satisfaction against    anger, disappointment     or  boredom   against interest,
suggest that the map hosted unshared cohabitating misunderstandings. Each participant seemed isolated, the
presence   of  the  other being   transient. This observation     adds   up   to the  analysis of  the cued  retrospective
reporting   to   affirm   that  the   e-discussion   developed      without      the  establishment    of  any    state  of
intersubjectivity in a sense of coordination of contributions. In the absence of state of intersubjectivity, we
considered different traditions that explain the propensity people have in participating in dialogues. According
to a cognitive psychology perspective, dialogues demand a lot from discussants. However, people manage to
participate in dialogues. Garrod and Pickering (2004) have proposed the idea of interactive alignment to explain
this propensity: This is a process by which people align their representations at different linguistic levels at the
same time. They do this by making use of each others' choices of words, sounds (in f2f communication),
                                                               

  

© ISLS                                                                                                                 420
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                           Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

grammatical   forms,   and meanings.     Interactive alignment     ensures that  interlocutors operate on    common
representations. So in speaking, each partner generates his utterance on the basis of what he has just heard from
the other and can leave out redundant information without the risk of misunderstanding. Similarly in listening,
aligned representations at the levels of the situation model, semantic interpretation, and syntactic form enable
the listener to fill in the gaps at these levels. Is the idea of interactive alignment applicable to synchronous e-
discussions in general? Not exactly, but it is useful! But it provides some inspiration about for an alternative
idea: Instead of aligning representations at different linguistic levels at the same time on the basis of what has
just been heard, discussants interact with a growing map. This map has two contradictory characteristics. On the
one hand, it changes instantly; messages arrive often at a hectic pace, sometimes simultaneously from different
interlocutors. On the other hand, the map is stable; it mostly remains unchanged, with an accumulating history.
The first characteristic seems to invite discussants to align their representations. However, discussants are not
obliged to react to these messages. The second one leads discussants to rely on past persistent interpretations
perpetuated by the map. Anyway, the high pace of communication gives the illusion to each discussant that
he/she and his/her peers posted their beliefs about teaching, learning and moderating and interacted with them,
and makes clear his/her (dis)agreements. However, what happened was a co-alienation ­ the juxtaposition of
incompatible alignments of representations through a common external representation.
          At that stage, it is premature to discuss the educational relevance of co-alienation and to decide whether
its emergence is a priori welcome or should be avoided.       But the question whether co-alienation is utterly bad or
whether it can lead to learning, seems to us a wrong question. The right question is how people can learn from
such communication. And indeed we can ask whether the discussion between Ahmad, Judith, Fatima and Rim
lead to any kind of learning. On the one hand, the discussion in itself seemed quite shallow, scattered with
persistent misunderstandings.  However,     Ahmad    and  Judith   earned  invaluable insights  during this  lopsided
discussion. True, this is their cued retrospective that demonstrated clear gains but it is impossible to know
whether this reflective activity revealed or promoted those gains. Anyway, synchronous discussions should be
considered in their larger educational contexts. They rarely happen as isolated activities but rather belong to a
series of activities. The cued retrospective was arranged in the present study for experimental purposes, but it
resembles common educational settings in which synchronous discussions are reflected on. The precariousness
of   communication  in synchronous   discussions,    the state  of co-alienation we   described, can   be dangerous.
However, it can serve, with appropriate activities, to improve interactions in discussions among learners.

References
Cazden,   C.  B., (1995).    Play with   language    and meta-linguistic   awareness:  one  dimension   of   language
      experience. In J. S. Bruner (Ed.), Play--Its Role in Development and Evolution (pp. 603-608). Penguin,
      New York.
Garrod, S., & Pickering, M. J. (2004). Why conversation is so easy. Trends in Cognitive Science, 8(1), 8­11.
Herring, S. (2001). Computer-mediated discourse. In D. Schiffrin, D. Tannen, and H. Hamilton (Eds), The
      Handbook of Discourse Analysis (pp. 612-634). Oxford: Blackwell Publishers.
Matusov, E. (1996). Intersubjectivity without agreement. Mind, Culture, and Activity, 3, 25-45.
Matusov,   E. (2001).  Intersubjectivity as a way    of  informing   teaching design  for a community     of learners
      classroom. Teacher and Teaching Education, 17, 383-402.
Matusov, E. (2011). Irreconcilable differences in Vygotsky's and Bakhtin's approaches to the social and the
      individual: An educational perspective. Culture & Psychology 17(1) 99-119.
Murray, D. E. (1989). When the Medium Determines Turns: Turn-taking in Computer Conversation. In H.
      Coleman (Ed.), Working with Language (pp. 251-266). Mouton de Gruyter, New York.
Rommetveit, R. (1979). On the architecture of intersubjectivity. In R. Rommetveit & R. M. Blaker (Eds.),
      Studies of language, thought, and verbal communication. New York: Academic Press.
Rommetveit, R. (1985). Language acquisition as increasing linguistic structuring of experience and symbolic
      behavior control. In J. V. Wertsch (Ed.), Culture, communication, and cognition: Vygotskian perspectives.
      Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Schwarz, B. B. & Asterhan, C. S. C. (2011). E-moderation of synchronous discussions in educational settings:
      A nascent practice. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 20(3), 395-442.
Schwarz,   B. B.  & De  Groot, R.  (2007).  Argumentation      in  a changing world.  The  International  Journal of
      Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 2(2-3), 297-313.
Van Gog, T., Kester, L., Nievelstein, F., Giesbers, B., & Paas, F. (2009). Uncovering cognitive processes:
      Different techniques that can contribute to cognitive load research and instruction. Computers in Human
      Behavior, 25, 325-331.

                                                            

  

© ISLS                                                                                                          421
