CSCL 2013 Proceedings                  Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

Demo of Collaborative Dynamic Mathematics in Virtual Math Teams
                Gerry Stahl, The Math Forum at Drexel University, Gerry@MathForum.org
              Anthony Mantoan, The Math Forum at Drexel University, Tony@MathForum.org
              Stephen Weimar, The Math Forum at Drexel University, Steve@MathForum.org

         Abstract: Dynamic    mathematics   software     like GeoGebra   provides new   opportunities  for
         mathematics education. With proper technological and pedagogical support for collaborative
         dynamic mathematics, it is possible to create a CSCL approach to foster significant math
         discourse. The demo of the Virtual Math Teams (VMT) online environment will focus on the
         recent development of a multi-user version of GeoGebra within VMT. To support effective
         use of VMT, a coherent set of dynamic-geometry activities has been developed; this will be
         discussed as well as a professional-development course for in-service math teachers, preparing
         and supporting  them  for   introducing   collaborative dynamic   mathematics  in  their schools.
         Tools built into the VMT software for detailed interaction analysis will be demoed and sample
         case studies referenced.

Virtual Math Teams: Contribution to CSCL
The Virtual Math Teams (VMT) Project is an on-going design-based CSCL research effort, funded by NSF
from 2003-2016  (see  Acknowledgements).        It has already produced  a significant impact   within the field of
CSCL, with an edited volume in the Springer CSCL series (Stahl, 2009) and many papers published at CSCL
conferences and elsewhere. It is in many ways a prototypical CSCL project, including the development of
software to support collaboration, a school content focus (mathematics), a design-based approach with cycles of
trials/analysis/redesign, an analytic method (a form of interaction analysis, with special tools) and an emergent
theory (group cognition (Stahl, 2006)). Previously, VMT has not been demoed at a CSCL conference, only at
practitioner conferences like NCTM and ICME or regional and international GeoGebra conferences.
         While the importance of collaborative learning for online education is obvious to CSCL researchers
and its possible advantages have been well documented in cooperative-learning and CSCL research for decades,
support for collaboration is still not always designed into new educational platforms. For instance, the latest hot
approach to university instruction--massive open online courses or MOOCs--are generally based on the lecture
paradigm, where students passively watch talking-head videos of famous professors and are not given any
sanctioned opportunities for  interaction. Similarly,    the  acclaimed Khan    Academy  offers   YouTube   videos
explaining thousands of detailed topics in school mathematics, but students have no support for exploring the
topics themselves or discussing them with peers. These technological opportunities are generally not designed to
incorporate constructivist learning principles.
         With the  development    of dynamic-geometry     and  dynamic-mathematics     software environments   like
Geometer's   Sketchpad, Cabri, Cinderella   and     GeoGebra,  there has   been a resurgence  of  interest in basic
geometry around the world. The free availability of open-source GeoGebra (http://geogebra.org) has resulted in
a burgeoning user community, primarily of math teachers. Although dynamic mathematics encourages active
learning and  student   construction  of meaning,      these  technologies have   not  been designed    to  support
collaboration. In working with the GeoGebra software development community, the VMT Project team has

     Figure 1. A view of a VMT chat room while three students are exploring a challenging geometry task.

© ISLS                                                                                                         418
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                    Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

created  the first effective multi-user    version of a  dynamic-math    environment. This allows  small groups  of
students to collaborate on a shared construction and to engage in text chat about it at the same time (see   Figure
1). This opens up the exciting new mathematical tool of dynamic math for the first time to true, convenient,
supported collaborative learning. All the collaborative activity in this environment is persistent and readily
available for review and reflection both during the collaboration session and at any time thereafter.
         The VMT CSCL technology is unusual in that it is neither a general-purpose platform nor a single-
application specialized tool. It provides a suite of components to support individual, small-group and classroom-
wide  collaborative   learning,  but it is  oriented  to school  mathematics,  especially basic geometry.  We   are
exploring many aspects of how to use this technology to shift geometry education from the classical approach
dating back to Euclid to a contemporary approach based on the principles of CSCL (Stahl, 2013b).
         Another uncommon aspect is the level of pedagogical support developed within the VMT research
project.  This  is    an  outgrowth     of  the  fact  that   VMT    has  been  developed   at  the  Math    Forum
(http://mathforum.org), one of the first and most prominent online sites/organizations for supporting the learning
of mathematics. The Math Forum has considerable expertise and experience in professional development and
mentoring of math teachers. Consequently, the VMT Project provides masters-level courses and mentoring for
teachers interested in introducing computer-supported collaborative learning of dynamic mathematics in their
schools (http://vmt.mathforum.org/vmt/courses.html). We have also developed a hundred-page curriculum with
tutorials for the use of VMT with GeoGebra in online small groups of students (Stahl, 2012).
         Finally, the VMT software system includes tools for analysis of the interaction that took place within a
VMT   mathematics     chat session.  This  supports   reflection by students on their own  group's  interaction and
collaborative learning, as well as reflection on that of other groups. It enables teachers to review the work of
student groups at whatever level of detail they require. Also, it gives researchers access to all group interaction
that took place,   in a  variety of  convenient    electronic formats. A researcher can review  in  complete detail
everything that the students themselves experienced of the group interaction--either in a view identical to that
of the students (see Figure 2) or in logs formatted for inclusion in papers. The analytic issues for research
introduced by video capture and speech transcription are thereby avoided.
         Case studies of interactions in the VMT environment have shed considerable light on the nature of
collaborative learning in this kind of CSCL environment. They have guided the design, on-going re-design,
debugging and tweaking of the VMT software, pedagogy, curricular materials, analytic tools and theory. Case
studies of VMT interactions appeared in the latest issues of ijCSCL (Zemel & Koschmann, 2013) and JLS
(Medina & Suthers, 2013). Other studies will be reported in a workshop, two papers and a poster at the CSCL
2013 conference (Magee, Mascaro & Stahl, 2013; Stahl, 2013a; Stahl et al., 2013; Stahl & Öner, 2013).

        Figure 2. The VMT Replayer. Middle school students explore the elements of dynamic geometry.

© ISLS                                                                                                          419
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                 Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

Virtual Math Teams: Software, Curriculum, Pedagogy, Analysis
These are the aspects of the VMT Project support for collaborative dynamic mathematics to be presented in this
demo:    software, curriculum, pedagogy    and  analysis. The  amount   of   time   spent  on  each aspect  will be
determined based on audience prior knowledge and interests.
          VMT software environment. The VMT environment is multi-faceted. There is a lobby that users
enter upon login (http://vmt.mathforum.org). There they can browse a list of existing chat rooms under different
math topics. Teachers can also create new rooms, review student work in existing rooms or register a class of
students for VMT access. A chat room can have multiple tabs with different media; the demo will focus on the
affordances of GeoGebra tabs. In particular, it will discuss the features that had to be adapted or supplemented
in GeoGebra to make it truly and effectively multi-user.
          VMT curriculum for dynamic geometry. A hundred-page booklet featuring 18 hour-long activities
was developed for small groups of students using VMT with GeoGebra to learn basic geometry and to develop
facility with GeoGebra.   This   includes paced tours of  the software  and    activities for individual exploration
followed by collaborative construction. Each activity includes prompts for significant mathematical discourse.
The curriculum is developmental, designed to gradually increase the ability of the students to engage in open-
ended exploration, reflection and un-scaffolded use of GeoGebra. The emphasis is on understanding the role of
dependency    in dynamic  geometry   through  construction--to  counteract   a  tendency    in GeoGebra   pedagogy
toward pre-constructed apps that students or teachers simply drag around.
          VMT pedagogy for teacher professional development and student collaboration. A course for in-
service math teachers will be described briefly (http://vmt.mathforum.org/vmt/courses.html). This is an online
CSCL-style course given at the Schools of Education at Drexel University and Rutgers University, with support
from the   Math    Forum. It emphasizes    collaborative  learning through   a focus  on   mathematical   discourse,
accountable talk, making thinking visible, and articulating noticing/wondering.
          VMT    analysis tools. Any user--whether    student, teacher  or   researcher--can    download  chat logs
(optionally including GeoGebra actions, etc.) in a variety of spreadsheet formats. They can also download data
files for the VMT Replayer. These facilitate rigorous interaction analysis (e.g., by researchers), as well as less
formal review for reflection (e.g., by students) or assessment (e.g., by teachers).

Virtual Math Teams: Demonstration
There will be a live demo (see Figure 3) of the VMT environment, with several members of the audience
collaborating on simple tasks in a shared GeoGebra workspace on their own laptops.
          The presenters will first give a tour of the VMT software, including the Lobby, chat room, teacher
interface, social networking components, log generation, associated wiki pages and Replayer tool. Copies of
curricular materials and publications will be available. Many publications on VMT and CSCL are available at:
http://GerryStahl.net/pub. The analytic tools and case-study approach of VMT research will be discussed.

  Figure 3. A demo of two students constructing, dragging and chatting about a shared geometric figure. The
     student on the right currently has control for using the GeoGebra tools. The other student also sees any
                                          changes made by the first student.

© ISLS                                                                                                         420
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                  Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

Acknowledgments
The VMT Project has been supported by the following grants from the US National Science Foundation and the
Office of Naval Research:
   ·     2003-06, "Collaboration Services for the Math Forum Digital Library." DUE 0333493.
   ·     2003-09, "Catalyzing & Nurturing Virtual Learning Communities." IERI 0325447.
   ·     2005-08, "Engaged Learning in Online Communities." SBE-0518477.
   ·     2007-09, "Exploring Adaptive Support for Virtual Math Teams." DRL0723580.
   ·     2009-13, "Dynamic Support for Virtual Math Teams." DRL-0835383.
   ·     2009-12, "Theories and Models of Group Cognition." ONR CKI.
   ·     2011-16, "Computer-Supported Math Discourse Among Teachers and Students." DRL-1118773.

References
Magee, R. M., Mascaro, C. M., & Stahl, G. (2013). Designing for group math discourse. Paper to be presented
         at the International   Conference   of    Computer-Supported    Collaborative  Learning    (CSCL    2013).
         Madison, WI. Web: http://GerryStahl.net/pub/cscl2013designing.pdf.
Medina, R., & Suthers, D. D. (2013). Inscriptions becoming representations in representational practices. The
         Journal of the Learning Sciences. 22(1), 33-69.
Stahl, G. (2006). Group cognition: Computer support for building collaborative knowledge. Cambridge, MA:
         MIT Press. Web: http://GerryStahl.net/mit/.
Stahl, G. (2009). Studying virtual math teams. New York, NY: Springer. Web: http://GerryStahl.net/vmt/book.
Stahl,  G.    (2012).  Dynamic-geometry      activities   with  GeoGebra       for  virtual    math  teams.  Web:
         http://GerryStahl.net/vmt/activities.pdf.
Stahl, G. (2013a). Poster: Discovering dependencies: A case study of collaborative dynamic mathematics. To be
         presented  at the  International Conference    of Computer-Supported      Collaborative  Learning  (CSCL
         2013), Madison, WI. Web: http://GerryStahl.net/pub/cscl2013dependencies.pdf.
Stahl, G.   (2013b).   Translating Euclid:   Creating   a  human-centered   mathematics:     Morgan   &   Claypool
         Publishers. Web: http://GerryStahl.net/pub/translating.pdf.
Stahl, G.,  Jeong, H., Ludvigsen,  S., Sawyer,   R. K.,  &  Suthers,  D. D. (2013).   Workshop:   Across   levels of
         learning: A workshop on resources connecting levels of analysis. To be presented at the International
         Conference    of Computer-Supported     Collaborative   Learning   (CSCL    2013),    Madison,  WI. Web:
         http://GerryStahl.net/pub/cscl2013workshop.pdf.
Stahl, G.,  & Öner,   D.  (2013).  Resources for   connecting  levels of learning.  Paper   to be presented  at   the
         International Conference of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning (CSCL 2013). Madison, WI.
         Web: http://GerryStahl.net/pub/cscl2013resources.pdf.
Zemel,  A., &   Koschmann,   T.   (2013). Online   math  problem  solving   as a   process  of discovery in  CSCL.
         International    Journal    of    Computer-Supported         Collaborative    Learning.     8(1).   Web:
         http://ijcscl.org/?go=contents&article=177#article17.

© ISLS                                                                                                          421
