CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                               Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

                     Resources for Connecting Levels of Learning
                     Gerry Stahl, Drexel University, Philadelphia, USA, Gerry@GerryStahl.net
                     Diler Öner, Boaziçi University, Istanbul, Turkey, Diler.Oner@boun.edu.tr

          Abstract: CSCL research typically investigates processes at the individual, small-group and
          community units of analysis. However, CSCL analyses generally focus on only one of these
          units, even in multi-method approaches. Moreover, there is little data-based analysis of how
          the  three levels are connected.   This   paper   proposes  that the   levels of  individual   learning,
          group   cognition    and  community     knowledge     building    are  connected     by    interactional
          resources, which can mediate between the levels. A theory of the connection of the levels is
          sketched. Then examples of such connections by interactional resources are presented from
          logs of  several   CSCL     experiments.  Finally,  a  curriculum    for  gradually   providing    math
          teachers   and  math students    with a complex    of resources   relevant  to dynamic     geometry     is
          described as an example of how to support the connection of small-group interaction with
          individual  understanding    and   with cultural   practices  in a CSCL     adaptation     of geometry
          education.

The Problem of Connecting Levels
Learning, knowledge building and cognition can be analyzed at multiple units of analysis. For instance, analyses
of CSCL are often conducted on one of three levels: individual learning, small-group cognition or community
knowledge     building.  This  tri-partite distinction is   grounded    in the   nature  of CSCL.       With  its  focus   on
collaborative  learning,   CSCL    naturally emphasizes     providing  support   for dyads  and   small    groups    working
together. In   practice,   CSCL   small-group    activities are often   orchestrated    within  a classroom       context  by
providing  some    initial time   for individual  activities (such   as background      reading   or homework        practice)
followed by the small-group work and then culminating in whole-class sharing of group findings. Thus, the
typical classroom practices tend to create three distinguishable levels of activity. Often, the teacher sees the
group work as a warm-up or stimulation and preparation for the whole-class discussion, facilitated directly by
the teacher. Conversely, the importance of testing individual performance and valuing individual learning posits
the group work as a training ground for the individual participants, who are then assessed on their own, outside
of the collaborative context. In both of these ways, group cognition is treated as secondary to either individual
or community goals. By contrast, the role of intersubjective learning is foundational in Vygotsky (1930/1978),
the seminal theoretical source for CSCL. Regardless of which is taken as primary, the three levels are actualized
in CSCL practice, and the matter of their relative roles and connections becomes subsequently problematic
(Dillenbourg et al., 1996; Rogoff, 1995; Stahl, 2006).
          While these different units, levels, dimensions or planes are intimately intertwined, research efforts
generally focus on only one of them, and current analytic methodologies are designed for only one (Stahl,
2013b; Suthers    et al.,  2013).  Furthermore--and    most   importantly    for this paper--there      is little theoretical
understanding of how the different levels are connected. To the extent that researchers discuss the connections
among levels, they rely upon commonsensical notions of socialization and enculturation, popularizations of
traditional social science. There are no explicit empirical analyses of the connections, and it is even hard to
imagine where one would find data that would lend itself to conducting such analyses (Stahl et al., 2012).
          The individual unit of analysis is the traditional default. It is supported by widespread training of
researchers in the methods of psychology and education. In the era of cognitive science, analysis made heavy
usage of mental models and representations (Gardner, 1985). With the "turn to practice" (Lave & Wenger,
1991; Schatzki, Knorr Cetina & Savigny, 2001), the focus shifted to communities-of-practice. Group cognition
lies in the less-well-charted middle ground (Stahl, 2006). It involves the semantics, syntactics and pragmatics of
natural language, gestures, inscriptions, etc. These meaning-making processes involve inputs from individuals,
based on their interpretation of the on-going context (Stahl, 2006, esp. Ch. 16). They also take into account the
larger social/historical/cultural/linguistic context, which they can reproduce and modify (Stahl, 2013b).
          This paper will argue that the connections between the individual, group and community planes take
place through the mediation of interactional resources (section on the theory)1. To provide specificity and to
ground the    presentation  in empirical   data,  the paper   then considers    the  resources  that  appear   in    recorded
examples   of  mathematical    work    (section  on the   analysis).  Applying   this   problematic     to the    learning of
mathematics, the paper adopts a discourse-centered view of mathematical understanding as the ability to engage

1 While the problem of connecting levels has recently been raised within the CSCL community--e.g., in the
workshop at ICLS 2012 (Stahl et al., 2012) and in editorials in ijCSCL (Stahl, 2012b; 2013a)--this paper goes
beyond those efforts to propose a central role for interactional resources and to review supporting analysis of
empirical CSCL data. For further exploration since this paper was written, see (Stahl, 2013c).

© ISLS                                                                                                                  454
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                             Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

in significant   mathematical   discussion   (Sfard,  2008;  Stahl,  2008).     Here,  "discourse"   includes    gesture,
inscription,  representation and symbol,   as  well  as  speech  and text; these  multiple    modes    are often closely
interwoven in effective interaction (Çakir & Stahl, 2013; Çakir, Zemel & Stahl, 2009).
           Computer technologies play a central role in mediating the multi-level, intertwined problem-solving,
learning   and  knowledge-building    processes  that take  place in  CSCL      settings. From   a CSCL     perspective,
emergent    technologies should  be   designed   to support this mediation.     This involves  considering    within the
design  process  of  collaboration environments     how  to prepare  groups,    individuals and  communities     to  take
advantage of the designed functionality and to promote mathematical thinking at all levels. This paper reports
on  the design   of a curriculum   in  dynamic   geometry    to support  group    cognition,  individual   learning  and
community practices in a coordinated way, based on how interactional resources are visibly used in analyzed
excerpts   of pilot case studies   of the use  of   dynamic-geometry    software     (section on   the pedagogy).    The
curriculum addresses both communication issues--such as effective collaboration practices--and mathematical
issues--such as focusing on dependencies among math objects--as well as technological issues of software
usage.

The Theory of Connecting Levels
The idea of viewing interactional resources as central to mathematical discourse around dynamic geometry was
proposed by Öner (2013). This paper cited a number of distinctions drawn in the CSCL literature for contrasting
social/collaborative/relational resources with content-related resources:
·   Text chat versus shared-whiteboard graphics (Çakir, Zemel & Stahl, 2009);
·   Building a joint problem space (JPS) versus solving a problem (Roschelle & Teasley, 1995);
·   A relational space versus a content space (Barron, 2000);
·   Diachronic content versus temporal dimensions of the JPS (Sarmiento & Stahl, 2008);
·   Project discourse versus mathematical discourse (Evans et al., 2011);
·   Spatio-graphical observation (SG) versus technical reflection (T) (Laborde, 2004).
           Öner then generated some data to explore the interaction of the contrasting dimensions by having two
people work together face-to-face in front of a shared computer on a particular dynamic-geometry problem
whose solution required a mix of spatio-graphical observation and technical reflection involving mathematical
theory--a mix of SG and T resources, to use the distinction she adopted from Laborde.
           Inspired by Öner's experiment, Stahl (2013c) presented the same dynamic-geometry problem to two
groups of people collaborating online in a CSCL system. We will review the sorts of resources that occur in the
data generated in these two experiments after first considering the theoretical notion of resources as connections
between levels.
           Consider highway ramps or bridges used as resources for connecting road levels or landmasses. While
we are more interested in linguistic interactional resources in this paper, it may be helpful to first consider the
more intuitive physical case. A ramp or bridge often creates a possibility that did not otherwise exist for going
from one level to another at a given point. To go from a local road to a limited-access superhighway, one must
first find an available on-ramp. To cross a river from one side to the other, one may need a bridge. This is the
individual driver's view. From a different vantage point--the perspective of the resource itself--the creation of
a ramp or the building of a bridge "affords" connecting the levels (Dohn, 2009).
           By "affords," we  do  not  simply  mean    that the  connecting   is a happy    characteristic  or accidental
attribute of the bridge, but that the bridge, by its very nature and design, "opens up" a connection, which
connects the banks of the river it spans. In his early work, Heidegger (1927/1996) analyzed how the meaning of
a tool was determined by the utility of the tool to the human user, within the network of meaning associated
with that person's life and world. In his later writings, Heidegger (1935/2003) shifted perspective to focus on
things like bridges, paintings, sculptures, pitchers and temples in terms of how they themselves opened up new
worlds, in which people could then dwell--opening new opportunities or possibilities for living. In considering
the intersubjective world in which collaboration takes place on multiple connected levels, we might say that the
work of resources like bridges is to contribute the spanning of shores within the way that the world through
which we travel together is opened up as a shared landscape of resources for discourse and action.
           This transformation of perspective away from a human-centered or individual-mind-centered approach
became characteristic for innovative theories in the second half of the 20th Century. It is a shift away from the
individualistic, psychological view to a concern with how language, tools and other resources of our social life
work.   It is a post-cognitive  move   since  it rejects the central  role   of mental    models,  representations   and
computations.   The   things themselves   have   effective  affordances;  it is  not  just  a matter   of  how   humans
manipulate models in which the things are re-presented to the mind. In phenomenology, Husserl (1929/1960)
called for a return to "the things themselves" (die Sache selbst) and Heidegger (1950/1967) analyzed "the thing"
(das Ding) separate from our representation of it. In ethnomethodology, Garfinkel and Sacks (1970) followed
Wittgenstein's (1953) linguistic turn to focus on the language games of words and the use of conversational
resources   (Koschmann,   Stahl  &    Zemel,   2004).   In  distributed cognition,    Hutchins   (1996)    analyzed  the

© ISLS                                                                                                               455
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                             Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

encapsulation of historical cognition in cultural artifacts. In actor-network theory, Latour (2007) uncovered the
agency of various kinds of objects in how they move across levels in enacting social transformations. Our use of
the term "resources" in the 21st Century is intended to carry forward these groundbreaking approaches into the
study of how   the various  planes   of human     interaction are  connected.  Vygotsky    (1930/1978)   used the   term
"artifact" to refer to both tools and language as mediators of human cognition; we prefer to use the broader term
"resource" as it is frequently used in sociocultural analysis (Furberg, Kluge & Ludvigsen, 2013; Linell, 2001)
for references brought into discourse. Like artifacts, resources are identifiable units of the physical or linguistic
world that are involved in meaning-making practices--spanning the classical mind/body divide.
         A central research issue for CSCL is how collaborative knowledge building takes place. The main
problem seems to be to understand the role of individual cognition and of societal institutions in the small-group
meaning-making processes. At ICLS 2000, Stahl (2000) presented a diagram that was intended more to raise
this question than to answer it. In this diagram, "cultural artifact" served to connect the three planes of meaning-
making processes. The diagram was based on an eclectic combination of major theories influential in CSCL. It
is now time to conduct empirical investigations of the connections suggested by these theories.
         In recent years, the Virtual Math Teams (VMT) Project (Stahl, 2009; Stahl, Mantoan & Weimar, 2013)
has conducted case studies of small-group interaction. In doing so, it has tried to focus exclusively on the small-
group unit of analysis. It has done so based upon three observations:
1.      That most CSCL studies have focused either on the individual (cognitive) plane or on the community
        (practices) plane. For instance, they code utterances of individuals (Strijbos & Stahl, 2007) and reduce
        interaction to contributions of individuals or else they view interaction as participation in community
        processes and institutions.
2.      That the small-group unit is fundamental to learning; as Vygotsky (1930/1978) said, one learns most
        human skills in social interaction first, only then being able to do so individually.
3.      That the  multiple levels   are so complexly      intertwined  that it is hard to  imagine   studying them   all
        together without first understanding much of what takes place at each level, temporarily taken on its
        own.
A number of studies have recently analyzed the problem-solving activities of virtual math teams (Stahl, 2009).
In these studies,  the interaction  of  students  is analyzed  at  the small-group    unit of  analysis as a sequential
progression. The collaborative knowledge-building activity that takes place there is mediated by a variety of
interactional resources.
         The theory sketched in this paper is not meant to reify different levels or processes, but to suggest some
of the constraints between different phenomena and possible flows of influence. The distinctions between levels
and the identification of typical processes at each level are intended to operationalize an infinitely complex and
subtle matter for purposes of concrete analytic work by CSCL researchers. We propose the term "resource" to
name the entities that are involved in mediating these connections.
         In the work of small groups typical in CSCL, the sequential interaction brings in resources from the
individual, small-group and community planes and involves them in procedures of shared meaning making.
This interaction requires co-attention to the resources and thereby shares them among the participants. The
process results in generating new or modified resources, which are then retained at the various planes. The
resources that are brought in and those that are modified or generated often take the form of designed physical
artifacts and sedimented elements of language. In other words, "small groups are the engines of knowledge
building. The knowing that groups build up in manifold forms is what becomes internalized by their members as
individual learning and externalized in their communities as certifiable knowledge" (Stahl, 2006, p. 16).
         Each of the sentences of the preceding paragraph could be taken as a research question: a hypothesis
about how levels are connected and an agenda for exploration. The following sections begin that undertaking.
They present examples of interactional resources in small-group discussions of dynamic-mathematics problem
solving  and then  describe  some    illustrative resources   that are  being  prepared    to help students  engage  in
collaborative dynamic-mathematics problem solving.

The Analysis of Connecting Levels
An early attempt within CSCL to present an extended argument for the centrality of the small-group unit of
analysis appeared in (Stahl, 2006), with a preliminary draft in (Stahl, 2004). These lengthy discussions were
grounded  in a half-minute   interaction   among     four students working     with a  computer  simulation   of model
rockets. The excerpt involved the students coming to understand how to interpret a textual resource: a table of
rocket components arranged to facilitate comparisons among differently configured rockets. At first, none of the
students could see the designed affordance of the table, but after the half-minute, they could all see the shared
artifact as a resource for their scientific discourse. The interaction analysis of this excerpt showed how aspects
of the table artifact were brought in as resources for the group discourse; as were shared and repeated words like
"same" and "different." The words of the dominant student, Chuck, were brought into the interaction by others
in order to  re-orient Chuck  to   a new,  shared    understanding  of  the  co-attended-to   table. The   resource that

© ISLS                                                                                                              456
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                            Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

emerged for the group's subsequent practice was a sophisticated understanding of the organization of the table
(Stahl, 2006,  Ch.    12 &  13).  This locally  achieved    understanding was    congruent  to a  standard  scientific
understanding, which the instructor had assumed in designing the table and offering it as a resource for the
group task. Here we can see the use of interactional resources connecting ideas from novice individual and
scientific community planes in the small-group discourse, which led to a significant advance in the group's
meaning-making ability.
          In the experiment reported by Öner (2013), two graduate students work on a dynamic-geometry task,
using a shared computer running Geometer's Sketchpad software. The task was specifically selected because it
tends to make visible a combination of exploring a figure to discover its dependencies and then duplicating the
figure  using those   dependencies. Thus,   it involved   a combination  of  spatio-graphical  (SG) observation   and
theoretical (T) mathematical construction. The task was to duplicate a given figure, consisting of an equilateral
triangle inscribed within another equilateral triangle.
          At the start of the group's work on this task, one of the students, Ayla, says, "Are these equal, these
distances?" The group then points to and measures the short segments along the outer triangle up to the interior
triangle, which look about the same length. They confirm that these line segments (EC, AD and FB) are always
of equal length, even when the figure is dragged and the lengths change. The similar appearance of the three
segments in the graphical view provides a perceptual resource, which Ayla brings into the discourse and points
to both with her statement and with her finger on the computer screen, establishing co-attention to this resource.
          Later, at the crucial point in the construction at which a second vertex of the inner triangle is to be
specified, the earlier finding about the original figure is recalled as a resource for duplicating it. As Mete goes to
position the second vertex on segment AB, Ayla points to segment EF and wonders quietly as if to herself,
"Hmm, the distance does not have to be always equal." Then she says aloud, "Does it? Look, EC and AD and
FB are always equal in length," while pointing at the three segments on the screen. Mete immediately responds,
"Ha. Then we'll do the thing; we'll measure that gap," and begins to do the corresponding construction. This is
an instance of group memory (Sarmiento & Stahl, 2007), in which the group references a previous finding and
re-situates it in the current interactional context, providing it as a shared resource for the current work. The
subsequent  30  speech   turns of the  dyad    are concerned  with  figuring  out how   to use the software  tools  to
construct their equivalents of EC, AD and FB to be equal lengths. Geometer's Sketchpad provides a tool to do
this simply in a couple of ways. However, the resourcefulness of the tool has to be reconstructed by the group
interaction to be   a usable and  effective resource   for  the group effort. The  reconstruction  effort itself takes
advantage of various interactional resources, such as the letters labeling the triangle vertices, which the group
discusses in order to simplify the work of relating corresponding points between their duplicated figure and the
original.
          Examples of resources from the (Öner, 2013) analysis include those classified as theoretical (T)--such
as the  geometry   problem,  the  software  tools  or the  relevant concepts, definitions,  axioms  and  theorems  of
geometry. There are also spatial-graphical (SG) resources--including various visual properties of the figure like
segment lengths and point labels.
          The experiment with reproducing the inscribed equilateral triangles was replicated within the VMT
Project (Stahl, 2013c). Two teams (A and B) of three adults each spent about a half an hour in the online VMT
collaboration  environment   including  multi-user    GeoGebra.  The  software   supported  text chat with  graphical
referencing   and  dynamic-geometry    construction,  providing   a contrast  to the face-to-face  speech and    finger
pointing in the Öner scenario. The task was identical to Öner's, implying that many of the resources for group
work   were identical:   concepts and  theorems    of geometry   (to the extent   that the participants had working
knowledge of them) and the visual properties of the figure (as it was dragged in the dynamic-geometry software
display).
          Although Team A in the VMT experiment focused on observing the spatio-graphical behavior of the
points under dynamic dragging, it took them a long time to make Ayla's key observation. Finally, Jan said, "So I
think F is CD units away from B on BC. Its not constructed as an equilateral triangle, it happens to be an
equilaterl triangle because of the construction." Here, the SG observation leads immediately to a T statement
about the construction of the internal triangle, namely that it is not constructed by making its sides or angles
equal, but rather their equality is a consequence of imposing a different dependency involving distances of the
vertices of the interior triangle from those of the exterior triangle. Visual resources are turned into resources for
construction and reflection.
          Team B took even longer to arrive at the key observation for constructing the inscribed triangles. They
pursued multiple strategies, such as using geometric theorems about centers of triangles and correspondences of
similar triangles. Finally Lauren said, "I abandoned the center, and worked with the lengths of the sides." Then
she "used the compass tool to measure the distance from D to C" and constructed the circles around the two
other vertices of the exterior triangle, each with radius equal to CD to locate the vertices for constructing the
interior triangle.

© ISLS                                                                                                            457
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                            Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

         The use of social conventions and other relationship-building resources in addition to the content-
oriented phases of chats seem to play an important role in problem-solving interactions. As Mercer and Sams
(2006, p. 517) put it, "while working in classroom groups, children use talk to do much more than engage in
curriculum tasks: they form relationships, develop social identities, and pursue `off-task' activities which may
be more important to them than the tasks in which they officially engaged--and as Wegerif (2005) has argued,
may be essential to the process of establishing good relationships so that effective `on-task' activities result."
The use of social-discourse resources to build group cohesion may be even more pronounced, salient and varied
in online interactions, which lack some of the social resources provided by physical presence.
         Groups in CSCL contexts can be seen to be making considerable use of resources to accomplish their
interactional work. Often, they bring in resources from their individual backgrounds or from a community plane
(the classroom, the history of mathematics, the subculture of social texting, the practices common in society, the
conventions   of  ordinary   language). Frequently,   they build  local  resources  within  the  group,   available for
repeated  use  and    for "internalization"  into  resources  for  the   individuals   or for  "externalization"    into
disseminated resources for the larger community.
         The resources must be shared--attended to by the group and similarly understood--for them to be
effectively used.   This  may be  achieved   through  pointing,   questioning,  explaining, drawing   and   illustrating
(Stahl et al., 2011). In a problem-solving session, one of the first resources co-constructed by the group might be
a  formulation of   the  question that  they will pursue,  based  perhaps   on  an  assigned  task, which   they must
understand    and articulate  collaboratively    (Zemel  &  Koschmann,      2013).   The  use   of  resources can   be
accumulated   in  the sequentiality  of interaction  to produce   larger group-cognitive   accomplishments    such   as
mathematical problem solving (Stahl, 2011). Across a somewhat larger time scale, resources can build on one
another, much    as Euclid's  proofs  built  upon previous  proofs.  Groups    can  use their earlier formulations   of
interactional  resources  to  construct higher-level    resources and   to refine  previous   understandings,  just  as
scientific knowledge advances by accumulation and revision (Kuhn, 1972). In each case, the group must enact
the resource, coming to a shared understanding of it and situating it in the group-discourse context for it to
function as a resource for them. In this sense, resources are emergent from the group interaction.
         CSCL research can connect the levels in its research data by identifying the resources that are being
enacted in collaborative interactions and by tracking how they are constituted, understood and applied in the
meaning-making process. CSCL studies can contribute to our understanding of collaborative meaning-making
processes   by   providing   detailed  analyses   of the   ways   in which     group   discourses   involve  resources
interactionally and how the resources are shared, interpreted, refined and preserved.

The Pedagogy of Connecting Levels
If resources play such an important role in collaborative learning, then how can CSCL designers support the use
of resources? Clearly, it would be useful to make sure that students have access to relevant resources and that
they understand how to use them. In situations where teachers play a central role in guiding the collaborative
learning, it would similarly be important to ensure that the teachers have access to relevant resources and that
they understand how to facilitate student use of them. Early attempts to support CSCL resources for teachers
and students were proposed in (Stahl, Sumner & Owen, 1995) and (Stahl, Sumner & Repenning, 1995).
         In the Virtual Math Teams (VMT) Project, we have learned through pilot trials of the VMT-with-
GeoGebra    environment    that this  relatively complex   system    requires  careful  preparation   and training  for
teachers, students, online groups and classes to use effectively without encountering frustration. In response to
this, we have drafted a set of dynamic-geometry curricular activities, interspersed with tutorial tours of the
technology  features  (Stahl, 2012a).   These  materials  are designed   for   use both by  teachers  in  professional-
development contexts and by student teams in online-classroom or after-school settings.
         The VMT curriculum activities have been designed to promote collaborative learning, particularly as it
occurs in significant mathematical discourse about geometry. We do this by providing a carefully structured set
of resources for use by teachers and students. These include the following:
1.  Resources for engaging in significant mathematical discourse; to collaborate on and discuss mathematical
    activities in supportive small online groups. This includes suggested uses of linguistic and interactional
    resources for coordinating collaboration, as well as tutorials in using the communication tools of the VMT
    software.
2.  Resources to collaboratively explore mathematical phenomena and dependencies; to make mathematical
    phenomena     visual  in multiple   representations; and  to  vary   their parameters.  This   includes scaffolded
    exercises in noticing visual characteristics of dynamic-geometric figures being dragged and in wondering in
    chat postings about their dependencies.
3.  Resources     for   constructing   mathematical   diagrams--understanding       and   exploring   their  structural
    dependencies. This consists primarily of a semester-long sequence of construction activities, initially with
    step-by-step instructions and tutorials about GeoGebra tools.

© ISLS                                                                                                              458
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                              Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

4.  Resources  to    notice,  wonder   about  and  form   conjectures about     mathematical   relationships; to  justify,
    explain  and    prove  mathematical    findings. This   involves discussion    prompts   and  situated examples   of
    explanations or proofs.
5.  Resources  to    understand  core  concepts,   relationships, theorems  and    constructions  of basic  high-school
    geometry. The included materials and activities cover central conceptual and procedural resources from
    Euclid's first book of propositions and from the Common Core standards for beginning geometry.
        The presentation of resources is organized developmentally, so that understanding of the resources
presented first can be used to build understanding of resources presented subsequently. Concomitant with this is
a progressive shift from scaffolded explanation of basic resources (like software tools) to open-ended inquiry of
more complex resources (like mathematically interesting micro-worlds).
        There   is   a   theoretical  basis for   gradually   increasing  skill levels  in  terms  of  both   geometric
understanding and deductive proof. The van Hiele theory (see deVilliers, 2003, p. 11) specifies several levels in
the development of students' understanding of geometry resources. The implication of van Hiele's theory is that
students who are at a given level cannot properly grasp ideas presented at a higher level until they work up to
that higher level. That means that unprepared groups will fail to enact available resources in a meaningful way.
Thus, a developmental series of activities pegged to the increasing sequence of levels is necessary to effectively
present the various resources of geometry, such as, eventually, the formal structure of deductive proof. Failure
to lead students through this developmental process is likely to reinforce student feelings of inadequacy and
consequent negative attitudes toward geometry.
        A particularly important resource for understanding and working in dynamic geometry is the concept
of dependency.      GeoGebra    allows  one   to  construct   systems  of  inter-dependent     geometric   objects. The
dependencies built into dynamic-geometry constructions are intimately related to proofs illustrated by those
constructions. Often, to understand a dependency and to be able to implement it in a construction is tantamount
to being able to articulate a proof and to explore its validity dynamically (Stahl, 2013c). Students have to learn
how  to think  in   terms  of these   dependencies.  They   can learn through    use of resources    like visualizations,
manipulations,  constructions   and    verbal articulations.  These   can all   be modeled     by examples,   and   these
resources can be provided gradually.
        The VMT Project is now drafting and piloting versions of curricular activities designed to develop
significant mathematical      discourse  focused     on  dependencies    among     geometric   objects (Stahl,    2012a).
Concomitantly, it is implementing software support for teachers and students to explore the dependencies and
assembling   materials   for  professional  development    to prepare teachers   to  enact  this  curriculum  with  their
students (Stahl & Powell, 2012). The set of activities is designed to provide the most important basic geometry
resources to math teachers and students, taking them from a possibly novice level to a more skilled level, at
which they   will   have a sufficient  portfolio  of resources  for engaging    in significant mathematical    discourse
without continuing scaffolding. The resources of classical Euclidean geometry were decisive in the historical
development of rational thinking by literate individuals and of scientific culture in the modern world (Netz,
1999; Stahl, 2013c). We hope to adapt these resources to the CSCL context, where they may enter into small-
group collaborative    online  interactions  and  thereby  influence  both  individual  understanding     and classroom
practices.
        In on-going experiments within the VMT Project and elsewhere, our colleagues and we will be logging
the use of the resources by teachers and students in order to analyze how resources connect levels of learning in
a  CSCL    setting. We   will track   individual and group    performance  in   significant mathematical   discourse  as
resources and practices from community levels are taken up in sequential small-group interaction. Perhaps we
will witness the formation of local practices and group interactional resources, which can influence individual
and community levels over time. In these ways, we will study resources for connecting levels of learning in
CSCL. More generally, through analysis of the nature and work of resources in case studies of a broad variety of
CSCL interactions, the CSCL research community can expect to reach a better understanding of the nature of
different levels of analysis in CSCL research and how the levels may be connected in terms of their mediation
by diverse resources. Gradually, we will discover how resources are enacted, understood, shared, designed,
adapted and preserved--and how they mediate connections among levels of learning through social interaction.

References
Barron, B. (2000). Achieving coordination in collaborative problem-solving groups. Journal of The Learning
        Sciences. 9(4), 403-436.
Çakir, M. P., & Stahl, G. (2013). The integration of mathematics discourse, graphical reasoning and symbolic
        expression     by  a  virtual math  team.    In D.  Martinovic,  V. Freiman     &   Z. Karadag    (Eds.), Visual
        mathematics           and       cyberlearning.         New        York,        NY:         Springer.        Web:
        http://GerryStahl.net/pub/visualmath.pdf.

© ISLS                                                                                                              459
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                           Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

Çakir, M. P., Zemel, A., & Stahl, G. (2009). The joint organization of interaction within a multimodal CSCL
         medium. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning. 4(2), 115-149. Web:
         http://GerryStahl.net/pub/ijCSCL_4_2_1.pdf.
deVilliers, M. (2003). Rethinking proof with the Geometer's Sketchpad. Emeryville, CA: Key Curriculum Press.
Dillenbourg,  P., Baker,   M., Blaye, A., &   O'Malley,  C.   (1996). The   evolution  of research  on collaborative
         learning. In   P. Reimann    &   H. Spada    (Eds.), Learning   in humans     and machines:   Towards    an
         interdisciplinary learning science. (pp. 189-211). Oxford, UK: Elsevier.
Dohn,   N. B. (2009).   Affordances   revisited: Articulating   a Merleau-Pontian  view.   International  Journal of
         Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning. 4(2), 151-170.
Evans, M. A., Feenstra, E., Ryon, E., & McNeill, D. (2011). A multimodal approach to coding discourse:
         Collaboration,  distributed  cognition,  and geometric    reasoning. International   Journal  of Computer-
         Supported Collaborative Learning. 6(2), 253-278.
Furberg,  A., Kluge,  A.,  &   Ludvigsen,  S. (2013).  Students'   conceptual   sense-making   with and   of science
         diagrams    in  computer-based    inquiry    settings.   International  Journal   of  Computer-Supported
         Collaborative Learning. 8(1)
Gardner, H. (1985). The mind's new science: A history of the cognitive revolution. New York, NY: Basic Books.
Garfinkel, H., & Sacks, H. (1970). On formal structures of practical actions. In J. Mckinney & E. Tiryakian
         (Eds.),  Theoretical  sociology:  Perspectives  and      developments.  (pp.  337-366).  New     York, NY:
         Appleton-Century-Crofts.
Heidegger, M. (1927/1996). Being and time: A translation of Sein und Zeit (J. Stambaugh, Trans.). Albany, NY:
         SUNY Press.
Heidegger, M. (1935/2003). Der ursprung des kunstwerkes. In M. Heidegger (Ed.), Holzwege. Frankfurt a. M.,
         Germany: Klostermann.
Heidegger, M. (1950/1967). Das ding. In Vorträge und aufsätze ii. (pp. 37-60). Pfullingen, Germany: Neske.
Husserl, E. (1929/1960). Cartesian meditations: An introduction to phenomenology (D. Cairns, Trans.). The
         Hague, Netherlands: Martinus Nijhoff.
Hutchins, E. (1996). Cognition in the wild. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Koschmann, T., Stahl, G., & Zemel, A. (2004). The video analyst's manifesto (or the implications of Garfinkel's
         policies for the development of a program of video analytic research within the learning sciences).
         Paper presented at the International Conference of the Learning Sciences (ICLS 2004). Los Angeles,
         CA. Proceedings pp. 278-285. Web: http://GerryStahl.net/pub/manifesto2004.pdf.
Kuhn, T. (1972). The structure of scientific revolutions (2nd ed.). Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Laborde, C. (2004). The hidden role of diagrams in pupils' construction of meaning in geometry. In C. H. J.
         Kilpatrick, &   O.  Skovsmose    (Ed.),  Meaning     in  mathematics   education.  (pp.  1-21).  Dordrecht,
         Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Latour,  B.  (2007).  Reassembling    the social:  An  introduction   to actor-network-theory.     Cambridge,   UK:
         Cambridge University Press.
Lave, J.,  &  Wenger,   E.  (1991).  Situated learning:  Legitimate    peripheral  participation.  Cambridge,   UK:
         Cambridge University Press.
Linell, P. (2001). Approaching dialogue: Talk, interaction and contexts in dialogical perspectives. New York,
         NY: Benjamins.
Mercer, N., & Sams, C. (2006). Teaching children how to use language to solve maths problems. Language and
         Education. 20(6), 507-528.
Netz, R. (1999). The shaping of deduction in Greek mathematics: A study in cognitive history. Cambridge, UK:
         Cambridge University Press.
Öner, D.   (2013). Analyzing   group  coordination    when solving    geometry  problems   with  dynamic   geometry
         software. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning. 8(1)
Rogoff, B. (1995). Sociocultural activity on three planes. In B. Rogoff, J. Wertsch, P. del Rio & A. Alvarez
         (Eds.), Sociocultural studies of mind. (pp. 139-164). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press
Roschelle, J., & Teasley, S. (1995). The construction of shared knowledge in collaborative problem solving. In
         C.  O'Malley   (Ed.),  Computer-supported     collaborative  learning.   (pp. 69-197).   Berlin,  Germany:
         Springer Verlag.
Sarmiento, J., & Stahl, G. (2007). Bridging and    persistence in sustained, collaborative problem solving online.
         Paper presented at the Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS 2007). Hawaii,
         HI. Web: http://GerryStahl.net/pub/hicss07.
Sarmiento, J., & Stahl, G. (2008). Extending the joint problem space: Time and sequence as essential features of
         knowledge building. Paper presented at the International Conference of the Learning Sciences (ICLS
         2008). Utrecht, Netherlands. Web: http://GerryStahl.net/pub/icls2008johann.pdf.
Schatzki, T. R., Knorr Cetina, K., & Savigny, E. v. (Eds.). (2001). The practice turn in contemporary theory.
         New York, NY: Routledge.

© ISLS                                                                                                          460
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                              Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

Sfard,  A.  (2008).  Thinking     as  communicating:   Human       development,      the  growth   of   discourses   and
         mathematizing. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Stahl, G.  (2000). A model   of collaborative  knowledge-building.      Paper   presented  at  the Fourth  International
         Conference of the Learning Sciences (ICLS '00). Ann Arbor, MI. Proceedings pp. 70-77. Lawrence
         Erlbaum Associates. Web: http://GerryStahl.net/pub/icls2000.pdf.
Stahl, G. (2004). Building collaborative knowing: Elements of a social theory of CSCL. In J.-W. Strijbos, P.
         Kirschner & R. Martens (Eds.), What we know about CSCL: And implementing it in higher education.
         (pp.       53-86).        Boston,       MA:          Kluwer         Academic            Publishers.       Web:
         http://GerryStahl.net/cscl/papers/ch16.pdf.
Stahl, G. (2006). Group cognition: Computer support for building collaborative knowledge. Cambridge, MA:
         MIT Press. Web: http://GerryStahl.net/mit/.
Stahl,  G.  (2008).  Thinking     as  communicating:   Human       development,      the  growth   of   discourses   and
         mathematizing. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning. 3(3), 361-368.
         Web: http://GerryStahl.net/pub/Sfardreview.pdf.
Stahl, G. (2009). Studying virtual math teams. New York, NY: Springer. Web: http://GerryStahl.net/vmt/book.
Stahl, G. (2011). How a virtual math team structured its problem solving. Paper presented at the Connecting
         computer-supported collaborative learning to policy and practice: CSCL 2011 conference proceedings.
         Lulu: ISLS. Proceedings pp. 256-263. Web: http://GerryStahl.net/pub/cscl2011stahl.pdf.
Stahl,  G.    (2012a).   Dynamic-geometry      activities    with  GeoGebra        for   virtual  math    teams.   Web:
         http://GerryStahl.net/vmt/activities.pdf.
Stahl, G. (2012b). Traversing planes of learning. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative
         Learning. 7(4), 467-473.
Stahl, G.   (2013a).   Learning   across levels. International     Journal  of     Computer-Supported     Collaborative
         Learning. 8(1), 1-12.
Stahl, G.  (2013b).  Theories  of  collaborative cognition:   Foundations    for   CSCL   and    CSCW   together.  In S.
         Goggins & I. Jahnke (Eds.), CSCL@work. (Vol. #13 Springer CSCL Book Series). New York, NY:
         Springer. Web: http://GerryStahl.net/pub/collabcognition.pdf.
Stahl, G.   (2013c).   Translating   Euclid: Creating     a  human-centered     mathematics:     Morgan    &  Claypool
         Publishers. Web: http://GerryStahl.net/pub/translating.pdf.
Stahl, G., Jeong, H., Sawyer, R. K., & Suthers, D. D. (2012). Workshop: Analyzing collaborative learning at
         multiple  levels. Presented  at the  International  Conference     of  the  Learning    Sciences (ICLS   2012),
         Sydney, Australia. Web: http://GerryStahl.net/pub/icls2012workshop.pdf.
Stahl, G., Mantoan, A., & Weimar, S. (2013). Demo: Collaborative dynamic mathematics in virtual math teams.
         Presented   at the International  Conference     of Computer-Supported        Collaborative   Learning  (CSCL
         2013), Madison, WI. Web: http://GerryStahl.net/pub/cscl2013demo.pdf.
Stahl, G.,  & Powell,   A.  B.  (2012).  Multi-user GeoGebra       for  virtual math   teams.    Paper presented  at  the
         GeoGebra ICME Pre-conference. Seoul, Korea. Web: http://GerryStahl.net/pub/ggbkorea.pdf.
Stahl, G., Sumner, T., & Owen, R. (1995). Share globally, adapt locally: Software to create and distribute
         student-centered curriculum. Computers and Education. Special Issue on Education and the Internet.
         24(3), 237-246. Web: http://GerryStahl.net/cscl/papers/ch05.pdf.
Stahl, G., Sumner, T., & Repenning, A. (1995). Internet repositories for collaborative learning: Supporting
         both students and teachers. Paper presented at the International Conference on Computer Support for
         Collaborative   Learning  (CSCL   '95). Bloomington,      Indiana. Proceedings    pp.   321-328.  ACM    Press.
         Web: http://GerryStahl.net/cscl/papers/ch06.pdf.
Stahl, G., Zhou, N., Cakir, M. P., & Sarmiento-Klapper, J. W. (2011). Seeing what we mean: Co-experiencing a
         shared virtual world. In Connecting computer-supported collaborative learning to policy and practice:
         CSCL      2011     conference    proceedings.       (Vol.   I,   pp.      534-541).     Lulu:    ISLS.    Web:
         http://GerryStahl.net/pub/cscl2011.pdf.
Strijbos, J. W., & Stahl, G. (2007). Methodological issues in developing a multi-dimensional coding procedure
         for small group chat communication. Learning & Instruction. Special issue on measurement challenges
         in collaborative learning research. 17(4), 394-404. Web: http://GerryStahl.net/vmtwiki/jw.pdf.
Suthers, D., Lund, K., Rosé, C. P., & Law, N. (2013). Productive multivocality. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Vygotsky, L. (1930/1978). Mind in society. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Wegerif, R. (2005). Reason and creativity in classroom dialogues. Language and Education. 19(3), 223-237.
Wittgenstein, L. (1953). Philosophical investigations. New York, NY: Macmillan.
Zemel,  A., &  Koschmann,      T. (2013).  Online  math   problem    solving    as a   process of  discovery  in CSCL.
         International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning. 8(1)

© ISLS                                                                                                               461
