CSCL 2013 Proceedings                       Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

          A Study of Private Messaging Within an Asynchronous
                                        Discussion Environment
 Jim Hewitt, Clare Brett, Kim MacKinnon, OISE University of Toronto, 252 Bloor Street West, Toronto ON,
          Email: jim.hewitt@utoronto.ca, clare.brett@utoronto.ca, kimberley.mackinnon@utoronto.ca

          Abstract: The study focused on students' use of private messaging as an adjunct form of
          communication in online courses. Interviews revealed that learners used private messaging to
          coordinate activity   on   group  projects,  request   help from  each  other, and   seek   reassurance
          when uncertain about their performance in the course. Public computer conferences, on the
          other hand, were used for more formal types of academic discourse. Quantitative comparisons
          of public  and    private  texts  revealed   that  learners wrote    longer, more   sophisticated     and
          academically   rich   messages    when    contributing  to  the public,  class-wide    conferences.   In
          comparison, private messages between individuals contained simpler sentences, were easier to
          read, and were more likely to use jargon. The two forms of communication appeared to serve
          different purposes. It is proposed that private messaging may help foster a sense of mutual
          trust among students, which may, in turn, be a necessary precursor to community-building.

Objectives
Distance  education    research   posits the   existence    of a positive   relationship between      collaborative   student
engagement and coursework performance (Graff, 2006).             In the context of many online courses, the majority of
interaction  takes place    in threaded  computer      conferences,   where  students  can   share    ideas, discuss  course
material, exchange   resources,     generate   questions, and    collaboratively build   new  knowledge.      However,    the
psychology of such environments is complex. As pointed out by Peters and Hewitt (2010), some students can be
nervous about writing to an audience of their peers. While most students appreciate the value of collaborative
engagement, they are also concerned about how they are perceived by their instructor and fellow classmates.
They want good grades, and thus they are understandably cautious about publicly posing questions that may
reveal a lack of understanding, or suggesting ideas that may be vulnerable to critique, or even ridicule. So while
the shared nature of a threaded computer conference provides critical affordances for class-wide knowledge
building, it can also be inhibiting for some (Peters & Hewitt, 2010).
          As  an extension     of this body   of   research, we  have  developed    an  interest   in the role  that  private
messaging might play in online courses.        To explore this issue in greater depth, the current study examined an
online environment called "Pepper" that contained facilities for two types of interaction: i) a threaded discussion
forum in which messages were visible to the entire class and ii) a private messaging system in which students
could  communicate     with    each  other  privately.    How    did  students use  these   two    tools?    What were    the
differences  between    the writing    that occurred   in the  class-wide   computer   conference     and  the  writing that
occurred in private spaces?

Theoretical Framework
This research is grounded in social-constructivist notions that learning can be fostered in online courses by
exposing  students   to the    ideas of  their peers,  through   sustained  collaborative   discourse     about key   course
concepts. It is through the articulation of one's own ideas, and through efforts to understand the perspectives of
others, that learners develop deeper insights (Wise, Chang, Duffy, & Del Valle, 2004). Given the educational
importance   of  these  processes    (Stahl  &   Hesse,   2009),  the goal  of  the online    instructor  becomes     one of
promoting    sustained,  educationally      productive    discourse   in  a shared     electronic  space     (Bullen, 1998;
Gunawardena,     1995;  Gunawardena      &   Zittle,   1997;   McDonald   &    Gibson,  1998;   Ross,   1996;   Vrasidas  &
McIsaac, 1999). Discursive interaction is thus viewed as paramount to the success of online learning (Picciano,
2002).
          Given this perspective, many instructors attempt to establish a sense of community in their online
courses. An effective community is one in which individuals trust each other and are willing to ask difficult
questions, constructively critique each other's ideas, and work together collaboratively to build new knowledge.
Such communities are thought to have high levels of "social presence", which Garrison (2009) defines as,
"participants identifying   with   the  community,     communicating      purposefully   in a trusting    environment,  and
developing   interpersonal  relationships"     (p. 7). Research   suggests  that  higher    levels of  social  presence   are
associated with people placing greater value on the perspectives of their peers (Swan & Shih, 2005), and a
richer exchange of information between learners (Fung, 2004; Henning, 2004; Stacey, 1999).
          Social presence can be difficult to nurture in online courses. Text-based communication lacks many of
the visual and aural cues that people naturally use when communicating, such as smiling, making eye contact,
gestures, and so forth (Gunawardena & Zittle, 1997). Additionally, as Peters and Hewitt (2010) point out, the

© ISLS                                                                                                                    46
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                   Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

high visibility of student writing in computer conferences may inhibit social presence. When people submit
messages to class conferences, they are typically made available to all students and the instructor. Fear of
criticism   can prevent   people from   asking  questions,  responding   honestly  to controversial   topic, or sharing
nascent ideas with each other. This can limit the effectiveness of online interactions.          In an effort to better
understand this phenomenon, the current study examined a set of distance education courses in which learners
could exchange ideas with one another using several forms of online communications, some public (i.e., visible
to  the  entire  class)  and   some   private (i.e.,  between  individuals).  How     were  these  different  forms  of
communication used, and in what ways, if any, did they differ?

Methods
The study   involved  an  analysis  of two  types of  data.  First, we   interviewed  10 students  from three   distance
education courses about their online experiences, with a particular focus on their use of private messaging.       The
purpose of the interviews was to better understand the situations in which they chose to interact privately with
their peers.  To encourage candid responses, a graduate researcher conducted the interviews and participants
were assured that their identities would not be revealed.
          The second half of the study was quantitative in nature, involving the analysis of students' private and
public contributions in 19 distance education graduate-level courses (363 students). Each course took place in
the Pepper environment.        Because  of ethics-related  concerns,  it was  not possible  to view   students' private
messages. However, our ethics protocols permitted computer-based statistical analyses of aggregate patterns of
the text within messages, both public and private (e.g., message size, sentence size, reading ease, etc.). This
allowed   us to  collect  data that would   help  triangulate our   interview findings   without  jeopardizing  student
privacy.
          Each of the 19 distance education courses was 12 weeks in length. Within these courses, students were
encouraged to collaboratively discuss various issues in the whole-class threaded discussion area. While graphics
or videos were sometimes used, the interaction was predominantly text-based. Students were not required to use
the private messaging environment within Pepper, but it was available if they wished to send a private message
to the course instructor or a classmate. Course grading schemes typically included a 10% to 20% mark for
students' participation in the class-wide discussions.     The remainder of their grade was based upon submitted
assignments.
          For the purposes of this study, we use the term "public" to refer to text-based messages that are posted
in the shared computer conferencing area in Pepper. These messages are visible to all members of the class,
including the teacher.    The term "private" refers to small private, text-based exchanges involving 2 or more of
the people in class. Pepper's   private messaging facility is similar to the private messaging facilities in Facebook
and Gmail.   Students in Pepper can see which of their classmates are currently online. A private message sent to
a person who is logged in will "pop up" on their screen, giving students the option of chatting in real time.
Messages sent to people who are offline are saved until the next time they login.

Results: Interviews
An analysis of the interview transcripts yielded the following findings concerning the most common reported
applications of the private messaging facility:
          · Coordinating group activity:    In classes where students were assigned a group project,       students used
private messaging to seek out potential group partners, schedule telephone meetings (or Skype meetings) for the
group, and assign tasks to different individuals.      Students felt that a private forum was more appropriate for
these sorts of administrative functions than the public conference.
          ·  Seeking help:     Students reported  they  often used   private messaging   to   obtain information  about
course deadlines, receive clarification regarding assignment expectations, or to help solve technical problems.
Often students would send a query to a classmate who was currently online, since that would generally produce
a rapid response.
          ·  Sharing drafts:    When   students  felt uncertain about    posting material  in the  public  forum, or in
situations where a passage of text was to be jointly authored, students would often use private messaging to
exchange drafts and receive feedback from one another.
          ·  Providing peer support and encouragement:        Students reported that private messages tended to be
upbeat, supportive, and empathetic in situations where people acknowledged that they were struggling.             "We
connect with each other at a different level in the text messages" according to one student.           One individual
described a situation in which one of her classmates privately messaged her, asking her to read the note she had
posted in the public forum, and write a response to it. "I don't feel like I'm part of the conversation. Would you
mind responding to my note?" Thus, in this particular case, private messaging was used to address a student's
insecurities    regarding  the   lack  of  activity   surrounding    her  contributions    to  the   class   conference.

© ISLS                                                                                                               47
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                    Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

       When asked to discuss the relative value of private messaging versus email, many students responded
that private messaging was more efficient because it was built-in to the software, and thus didn't require them to
go to a different application or website. It also provided them with speedier responses, because students could
see when their classmates were online, and communicate with them directly. However, in some situations,
people didn't trust private messaging.    One student recounted a situation in which a discussion moved from
private messaging to email.    The discussion concerned a sensitive issue (the questionable online behavior of a
classmate) and the participants became concerned that the instructor might be able to somehow access their
private messages and deem   them inappropriate. Consequently they moved their     discussion to email.

Results: Quantitative Analysis
The second half of the study consisted of a larger-scale, statistical analysis of differences in the texts of private
messages and public notes in the threaded discussions. A comparison of private and public texts across the 19
courses uncovered a number of significant differences:
       · Private messages were significantly smaller than the public messages in the class-wide computer
conference (p < 0.001). Private messages contained an average of 41.08 words compared to an average 186.82
words  for public messages.     Private  messages  also contained   significantly  shorter sentences   than public
messages (p<0.001).
       ·   Private messages tended to be more readable than Public messages. Two measures of readability
were examined: i) the Flesch Reading Ease metric and ii) the Flesch-Kincaid Grade Level. Private messages had
significantly higher readability scores and lower grade level scores than public messages (p<0.001 for both
message types).  Public notes were written at a 10.67 grade level, on average, while private messages were
written at a 4.94 grade level.
       ·   Public messages were more "academic" in tone.      The Academic Word List Ratio is a measure of the
degree to which a passage of text uses vocabulary that it is common in academic writing. It is based upon the
Academic Word List (AWL), a corpus of 3,110 words divided into 570 word families. The list includes such
words as "data", "discover", "rate", "theory", and so forth. The contents of the list comprise 10%-15% of the
words found in academic texts across all disciplines.   However, words in the AWL comprise only 1.4% of the
words  found  in  non-academic     texts (Coxhead, 2000).     In   the currently study, private  messages   had a
significantly lower percentage of academic words than public messages. Private messages had 4.4 academic
words per 100 words (on average), while the corresponding value for public messages was 7.83 words per 100
words. This difference was statistically significant (p<0.001).
       ·   Students used much more informal vocabulary in private messages.        Using Internet message boards
for source material, we developed a list of 45 informal terms such as "LOL", "yup", etc.         Private messages
contained 21.92 informal terms per 1000 words, while public messages used 2.06 informal terms per 1000
words. This finding was statistically significant (p<0.001).
       ·   Our studies failed to find differences in the "sentiment" of the respective texts. Sentiment analysis is
concerned with the level of positive and negative emotion expressed in a passage of text. To measure the
positivity and negativity of language, we employed an algorithm that uses a positive word list and a negative
word list, respectively, to examine the frequency of positive (and negative) words in students' notes. These lists
were provided  by a  tool   called LIWC    (pronounced  "Luke"   - Linguistic Inquiry and     Word count).  Studies
indicate that "LIWC accurately identifies emotion in language use" (Tausczik & Pennebaker , 2010, p. 32). The
LIWC algorithm produce scores that range from 1.0 (highly negative emotion) to 9.0 (highly positive emotion).
A score of 5.0 is neutral. In the current study, public messages had a mean sentiment score of 6.38, a score that
was not significantly higher than the sentiment score for private messages (6.33).
       Taken together, the quantitative results appear to be consistent with the findings from the interviews.
Private messages are more familiar, shorter, and less academic than the messages that are saved in the public
discussion conferences.

Discussion and Conclusions
Although the private messaging facility was an optional component of these courses, students made frequent use
of it. Private messages were significantly different than public computer conferencing messages in the following
respects: They tended to be shorter, contained simpler sentences, were easier to read, were less academic in
nature, and used informal vocabulary. Messages on the public forum, on the other hand, were longer, more
formal, and more academic in nature.
       Since we were unable to directly analyze the contents of private messages, we used interviews to learn
about the students' private messaging practices. Both the interview data and the quantitative analyses suggest
that students adopted a less formal style of discourse when conversing privately.    According to the interviews,
the private discourse provided learners with a place where they could ask ("dumb") questions to a classmate,
privately share an idea, or a draft of a text passage, before revealing it the larger group.  We suggest that this
informality may help foster social presence and interpersonal trust.   Asking another person for help or advice is

© ISLS                                                                                                         48
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                   Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

a particularly important step when building trust.  Threaded discussion environments are not particularly helpful
in this regard; many students are understandably wary about admitting their lack of knowledge in a public forum
that is monitored by their instructor.
        To create a genuine sense of community, it may be necessary to provide opportunities for participants
to interact in ways that lack some of the formality of public academic discourse (e.g., the use of jargon, humor,
and "I don't get it" kinds of statements). Learners need a risk-free place where they can "try out" ideas on a
trusted classmate before making the ideas public, much in the same way that academic researchers may "try
out" ideas with colleagues before attempting to publish the idea in a journal article, or make a conference
presentation.
        The differences between public and private discourse revealed by this study suggest that conventional
computer conferencing, on its own, may not meet all the needs of learners. It is proposed that opportunities for
private interaction may be a key ingredient for building student-student relationships. While it may  at first seem
like a counterintuitive relationship, the trust developed during private, interpersonal exchanges may play an
important role in the forging of a healthy, public, online community.

References
Bullen, M.  (1998).   Participation and   critical thinking in  online university distance   education. Journal  of
        Distance Education, 13(2), 1­32.
Coxhead, A. (2000). An academic word list. TESOL Quarterly, 34(2), 213-238.
Fung, Y. (2004). Collaborative online learning: interaction patterns and limiting factors. Open Learning: The
        Journal of Open and Distance Learning, 19(2).
Garrison, D.R. (2009). Implications of online learning for the conceptual development and practice of distance
        education. Journal of Distance Education, 23(2), 93-104.
Graff, M. (2006).   The importance     of online   community   in student academic  performance.    The  Electronic
        Journal of e- Learning, 4(2), 127 - 132
Gunawardena, C. (1995). Social presence theory and implications for interaction and collaborative learning in
        computer conferences. International Journal of Educational Telecommunucations, 1(2/3), 147­166.
Gunawardena,   C.,  &  Zittle, F. (1997).  Social  presence  as a  predictor of satisfaction within a com-  puter-
        mediated conferencing environment. American Journal of Distance Education, 11(3), 8­26.
Henning, W. (2004). Everyday cognition and situated learning. In D. Jonassen. (2nd ed.). Handbook of research
        on  educational  communications     and    technology.  (pp. 143-168).  New  Jersey:  Mahwah,    Lawrence
        Erlbaum.
McDonald, J., & Gibson, C. (1998). Interpersonal dynamics and group development in computer conferencing.
        American Journal of Distance Education, 12(1), 7­25.
Peters, V., & Hewitt, J. (2010). An investigation of student practices in asynchronous computer conferencing
        courses. Computers & Education, 54, 951-961.
Picciano, A. G. (2002). Beyond student perceptions: Issues of interaction, presence, and performance in an
        online course. Journal of the Asynchronous Learning Network, 6(1), 21-40.
Ross, J. A. (1996). The influence of computer communication skills on participation in a computer conferencing
        course. Journal of Educational Computing Research, 15(1), 37­52.
Stacey, E. (1999) Collaborative learning in an online environment. Canadian Journal of Distance Education,
        14(2), 14­33.
Stahl, G., & Hesse, F. (2009). Paradigms of shared knowledge. International Journal of Computer-Supported
        Collaborative Learning, 4(4), 365-369
Swan, S., & Shih, L. (2005). On the nature and development of social presence in online course discussions.
        Journal of Asynchronous Learning Networks, 9(3), 115-136.
Tausczik, Y. R. & Pennebaker, J. W. (2010). The psychological meaning of words: LIWC and computerized
        text analysis methods. Journal of Language and Social Psychology, 29(1), 24-54.
Vrasidas, C., & McIsaac, M. (1999). Factors influencing interaction in an online course. American Journal of
        Distance Education, 13(3), 22­36.
Wise, A., Chang, J., Duffy, T., & Del Valle, R. (2004). The effects of teacher social presence on student
        satisfaction, engagement, and learning. Journal of Educational Computing Research, 31(3), 247-271,

Acknowledgments
We gratefully acknowledge support from the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada.

© ISLS                                                                                                          49
