CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                          Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

         Learning with Collaborative Inquiry: a Science Learning
                    Environment for Secondary School Students
      Daner Sun, Chee-Kit Looi, Learning Sciences Laboratory, National Institute of Education, Singapore
                                 daner.sun@nie.edu.sg, cheekit.looi@nie.edu.sg,
                Evelyn Teo, School of Science and Technology, Singapore, evelyn_teo@sst.edu.sg

         Abstract: The paper presents a study of science instruction using collaborative inquiry with
         the CSI   (Collaborative     Science Inquiry) system   which    combines multiple  learning  design
         features with CSCL design elements. The study reported here explores the educational value
         of  the system   on  students'   conceptual understanding,   performance   on  inquiry phases  and
         collaborative work. Promising results have been received from the comparison of pre-test and
         post-test  achievements,     the  examination    of  artefacts, peer discussions,  and    interview
         transcripts. The results indicate that the collaborative inquiry facilitated by the CSI system can
         engage students in activities and promote their conceptual understanding in a progressive way.

Introduction
Computer Supported Collaborative Learning (CSCL) applications incorporating design elements such as shared
(work)   space, chat  tools, collaborative text  editor,  and argumentative   editor, have been  identified   as  being
capable of facilitating collaborative learning in pupils (Bouyias & Demetriadis, 2012; Gogoulou,et al., 2008).
Concerning the benefits addressed with the use of CSCL approach, the study reported here aims to implement a
web-based    science-learning   environment    employing     collaborative  inquiry   approach  to facilitate  science
instruction and learning at secondary schools in Singapore. The system, known as Collaborative Science Inquiry
(CSI)   science  learning  environment,    leverages   both  guided  inquiry  and   modelling  with   multiple   CSCL
components.   The   conceptualization   of the   learning design for  the  system is  influenced   by existing   design
principles and relevant applications, such as WISE, CMapTools, Co-Lab, and ModelingSpace, which seek to
integrate appropriate pedagogies with appropriate CSCL design elements.
         In the CSI system, learning designs included guided inquiry, modelling and visualization, have been
proved to be contributing positively to science learning (Buckley et al., 2004; Jackson, et al., 2008). The guided
inquiry process is developed and modified from dominant model-based inquiry principles (Bell et al. 2010;
White et al. 2002). It consists of eight phases: Contextualize, Questions and Hypothesis (Q&H), Pre-model,
Plan, Investigate, Model, Reflect, and Apply. Modelling pertains to the construction of scientific models by the
use of drawing-based, qualitative and quantitative modelling tools (Lerner, 2007). These modelling tools are
embedded in both the Pre-model and Model phases. The system allows the display of various visualizations,
such as images, videos, and dynamic simulations, to support virtual inquiry. Multiple CSCL design elements,
including synchronous modelling and editing, shared workspace, peer review, chat tool, and social presence, are
also integrated in each inquiry phase as required. Thus, the unique feature of the system is the tight coupling of
relevant CSCL design at each inquiry phase, such that each phase can be utilised in a flexible way towards
inquiry learning through modelling and visualization.
         To validate the educational value of the system, a series of pilot studies, each with different educational
aims, have been conducted (Sun & Looi, 2013). Due to the continuous efforts made in system development, we
have further continued the exploration of the deployment methods of the system in various classroom settings.
Hence in this study, we interpret a study of trial instruction of the CSI system in a biology class at Secondary 1
(Grade 7) level. The aims of the study are: 1) Demonstrating the effect on promoting conceptual understanding
of abstract concepts associated with the system. 2) Exploring the progressive process of students' conceptual
changes at every stage of the inquiry process. 3) Summarizing students' performance on peer discussion which
contributes to the accomplishment of collaborative artefacts.

System Overview
General Structure
There are two major functional modules in the system: teacher module and student module. The teacher module
consists of  six sections:   Profile, Subject  Management,    Project Management,     Simulation   Library, Solutions
Review, and Mailbox. An authoring tool is available for teachers to design lessons when they enter the various
sections. Project Management enables teachers to set up the inquiry project, and the stages by creating the
project  and tasks,  posing  guiding   questions and   configuring  student  groups.  Simulation   Library  allows for
importing visualizations (e.g. Java applets, videos, flash applications) for projects. Solutions Review facilitates
reviewing and evaluating students' artefacts (e.g. answers, models, reflections) and their chat logs. The student
module   consists  of four   sections:  Profile, My    Project, Group    Management,    and Mailbox.    As    the core

© ISLS                                                                                                            462
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                                                        Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

component, My Project allows students to access the assigned project to conduct inquiry activities and complete
a series of tasks with their group members. The tasks may include reading and discussing textual information,
proposing and negotiating solutions, manipulating and observing simulations, responding to guiding questions,
constructing models, and writing reflections at the assigned inquiry phases. The system supports the inquiry
either in a linear or non-linear manner. Students can switch between phases easily by clicking tabs on the tool
bar. The  project  work session              at  student   module      is       presented      in  Figure    1.     The     CSCL  design  elements  are
annotated (see the following introduction of CSCL design features).

                                                                                                      Inquiry phases

                                Shared workspace                                                                             Chat tool

                                                                                                                            Group members

                   Figure 1. General Interface of the Project Work Session in Student Module

CSCL Design Features
The system employs multiple CSCL design elements in inquiry phases to facilitate students' various forms of
collaboration as   mentioned   above              (Pozzi,       2009). Figure           2 depicts       a map       representing   how    CSCL  design
elements are combined and integrated in the system. In Overview and Contextualize, all online members can
share the text information. Besides peer review and mutual editing, students are allowed to edit and revise their
answers synchronously in the private editing box in Q&H, Plan, and Reflect. Furthermore, the shared workspace
in Pre-model  and   Model   is able              to  receive      inputs        from    multiple       devices      to    permit concurrent  multi-user
operations (Yang & Lin, 2010), such as co-constructing models, mutually reviewing and revising models in real
time. The design intends to encourage students to pursue the common goal of creating joint models through a
collaborative and interactional process. The system allows peer review of the individual models within the
private modelling space. Coupled with a chat tool, each phase supports students' peer discussion synchronously.

                                                                      Peer review
                                                                      Peer discussion

                                          Peer discussion                Overview                       Peer discussion
                                                           Apply                          Contextulize

                                 Peer reviewPeer discussionSynchronous writingReflect                   Peer reviewPeer discussionSynchronous writingCollaborationQ&H

                                 Peer review                                                              Peer review
                                 Peer discussion                                                          Peer discussion
                                 Synchronous modeling       Model                             Pre-Model   Synchronous modeling
                                                                    Investigate    Plan

                                                                Peer discussion   Peer review
                                                                                  Peer discussion
                                                                                  Synchronous writing
   Figure 2. CSCL Design Elements Integrated in the Inquiry Phases within the CSI System
          The system also integrates other CSCL design elements to facilitate ease of use. The task checklist in
Overview facilitates students within the same group to keep track of their progress in carrying out activities in
real time. The online   member               window       can    display        students'     social    presence        to  facilitate coordination and
collaboration between students from different spatial locations                           (Janssen, et al.,         2007).   An  email box  available in
both  the  teacher and  the student               modules        is used        for     exchanging        of ideas,       written materials  and other
information.

Methods
Participants

© ISLS                                                                                                                                              463
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                            Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

The trial instruction was conducted by four science teachers from a junior secondary school in Singapore. These
teachers had rich and extensive teaching experiences and had attended most of regular meetings of CSI project.
Hence, they had some understanding of the system development and its underlying pedagogy. A total of 201
secondary 1 (Grade 7) students from 9 classes participated in this study. During the instruction, students were
mostly   organized in  pairs (Npair=96),   with  only  three  groups working    in  triads. The  school    had  excellent
computer facilities, with each student owning and utilising a MacBook for daily lessons in the various subjects.
Lesson Design
The class studied the topic of "Diffusion and Osmosis". Science teachers, researchers and collaborators co-
designed and finalized the lessons. The study was conducted as two 50-min consecutive sessions for each class.
The lesson sequence was executed in the following order: Overview Contextualize  Q&H  Pre-model 
Investigate  Reflect  Apply. After students reviewed the textual information (e.g. brief description of the
project, learning  objectives, tasks)   in Overview,    they  were   introduced  to a   story   related to the  topic  in
Contextualize. In Q&H, the students were engaged in forming their answers to the questions. In Pre-model, the
students performed individual and collaborative modelling after observing two videos (a. the diffusion of red
ink in the water; b. the changes of egg in different solutions). In Investigate, students interacted with three
simulations and answered guiding questions. The simulations were: a) the diffusion of sugar in the water; b) the
movement of water molecules in osmosis; c) a dynamic simulation for observing the results of osmosis. Finally,
in Reflect and Apply, the students reflected, refined and validated their conceptual understanding. Except for the
Contextualize and Apply, the activities in other phases were conducted in collaboration.
Data Sources and Data Analysis
The  data sources  included    pre- and post-tests, field  notes, observation   sheets, interview    transcripts, on-site
videos and audio transcripts, learning artefacts, and chatting information (system log). The use of different data
sources  provided  complementary      information   and   enabled a  more   thorough  and   reliable  understanding   of
students' performance   observed    in CSI  lessons.   In data  analysis, a paired-samples    t-test was   conducted  to
identify the difference between pre-test and post-test scores; an item-by-item analysis of the test responses was
carried out to further expose misconceptions amongst students. Furthermore, students' responses to Q&H and
Apply, pre-models, and reflections were scrutinized to uncover the conceptual transformation process by the use
of coding methods. The chatting were further analysed to probe students' performance on collaborative work.
Only data from the participating students in all sessions and activities was used in the analysis.
Pre-test and post-test
In the study, identical pre- and post-test instruments were used at the beginning and concluding stages of the
lessons (10 minutes for each). The 10-paired questions in tests were built on the previously validated two-tier
"Diffusion and Osmosis Diagnostic Test" (Odom & Barrow, 1995). In all question sets, the A questions asked
for students'  direct answers  to   a given scenario   (the  "what"  questions), while  the   B  questions    focused on
students' explanations to the answer in A question (the "why" questions). The questions covered all the content
at the appropriate difficulty levels that the teachers expected the students to learn in the topic of "diffusion and
osmosis".  The  tests  can be  retrieved   from: https://sites.google.com/a/wimvt.info/wimvt/teacher-pedagogical-
resources/Diffusion-and-Osmosis-Test.
Q&H and Apply answers
A coding method was employed to assess the understanding levels of conceptions through categorizing answers
in Q&H and Apply into five categories. The categorization was built on the knowledge integration scoring
rubric (Linn & Eylon, 2011), which is an appropriate and effective way to obtain how students developed the
existing ideas to more normative and coherent understanding (Liu et al., 2008). The categories were refined and
modified  as  follows: L1: students   have  irrelevant  ideas and  make   incorrect links   between  context   and   their
explanations (incorrect answers); L2: students have relevant ideas and make partial correct links between context
and their simple   explanations  (partial  correct answers   with simple   explanations);   L3: students   have relevant
ideas and  make   correct  links between    context and   their simple  explanations    (correct answers   with   simple
explanations); L4:    students have    relevant  ideas  and   make   links  between   context    and    their elaborated
explanations  (correct answers   with  elaborated   explanations);  L5: students   have complete     relevant  ideas  and
make links between context and their elaborated explanations, as well as related contexts (correct answers with
extended  elaborated   explanations).  Frequency    of each   category  were  calculated    and  analysed  through    this
coding approach.
Pre ­ models
To evaluate students' modelling performance, we classified the quality of models into three levels based on a
literature review (Ergazaki,et al., 2005; Grosslight, et al., 1991; Halloun, 1997): A. High Quality Models (H)
refers to models containing accurate description of science concepts that involve objects with basic properties,
and reflect interaction between objects; B. Medium Quality Models (M) refers to models with partially exact
description of science concepts, which represent some of model components and the possible relations. C. Low

© ISLS                                                                                                               464
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                              Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

Quality Models (L) refers to models containing inaccurate description of all model components. If the models
are built at the macroscopic level, they are marked as sublevel "1", while models built at the particulate level are
marked as sublevel "2". For example, if the students draw high quality models at the particulate level, the
models are coded as H2. Furthermore, work completion is considered as another indicator for assessing students'
modelling performance.
Reflections
We coded the responses to Reflect into four categories: verification, explanation, improvement and critical
reflection.  The  method    was  modified    from  the   principle   of reflective thinking    (Kember,     et  al., 2000).
"Verification"  refers  to the reflection  with  simple   confirmation    of the artefacts.   "Explanation"    focused    on
interpreting  the definitions  of the   concepts,  but   without    commenting     on how     to improve    the    artefacts.
"Improvement" means the reflection expressing students' ideas on how to improve their artefacts. "Critical
reflection" pertains to those reflections that involve the critiques, and the proposals of improvement, as well as
further explanation of the artefacts. Reflection from low-level to high-level thinking is ranked progressively
from "verification" to "critical reflection". The ranking of students' reflection responses enabled researchers to
probe the degree of students' thinking and understanding of their work in the inquiry.
Peer discussions
We had extracted and analysed available peer discussions (taking one sentence as a unit) generated in the chat
box  to explore   students' performance    on  involvement    and   collaboration  in each    phase  and to    observe    the
process  of  conceptual  understanding    transformation.   The  method    was   developed    and   refined based    on   the
principles  of  good  feedback   (Nicol   &  Macfarlane-Dick,       2006). Aligning   with    these principles,    the   peer
discussions were classified into A. task-oriented, B. knowledge-oriented, C. strategy-oriented, D. assessment-
oriented  discourse  and   E.  affection-oriented discourse.   Category    A  clarifies the   task  specificities,   such as
procedures,   duration, and    work division.  Category     B  provides    necessary  information   relative   to    the key
concepts, such as definition, explanations, and reasoning. Category C provides strategic methods to complete
the task.   Category D  provides    constructive  comments     on   the work.   Category  E   provides   comments        with
intentions to improve motivation of group members.
          Video and audio data were transcript and analysed to reveal students' interactions in the class, as well
as their learning performances in the activities. Furthermore, interviews with the teachers (n=4) and randomly
selected students (n=16) were administrated to collect feedback on the system implementation. The data were
coded   and  analysed   independently   by   the  first author  and   another   researcher.   The   inter-rater reliability
coefficient for these coding was r = 0.93.

Findings and Discussions
Pre-test and post-test achievements
In this section, 139 valid tests were received. A one-way ANOVA was conducted to compare the initial levels
of the classes. The results indicates that students' prior knowledge varied very little among the classes, as F (7,
132) = 2.773, p =0.01 (the priori alpha level was set at .01). This implies that the students started the lessons
with the  equivalent   cognition  levels. Paired-samples     t-test analysis indicates   that the   post-test  scores    were
significantly higher than the pre-test, which received M=12.97, SD=2.774; t(36)=-4.299, p = 0.000, compared to
the pre-test (M=10.62, SD=2.792). It suggests, in general, CSI lessons enhanced the understanding of diffusion
and osmosis in most of the pupils.
          The   Item-by-item   analysis   shows   major   conceptual    changes   concentrated     on responses      on   the
reasoning of diffusion, the judgment of solution's concentration, the identification of osmosis and the effect of
osmosis (item 2B, 4A, 5B, 7A, 9A, and 9B). Specifically, a significant finding is that students attained great
understanding of the mechanisms of the scientific phenomena after the lessons. In the pre-test, we found that
approximately    40.8%  of  students failed   to answer     correctly the  "why"   questions  while   they    succeeded   in
answering   the  "what"  questions.  It suggests  that  students    often could  predict the  correct  outcome       but had
relatively little understanding about the underlying mechanisms. This may further demonstrates that students'
knowledge on the key conceptions remained at the superficial level before the lessons. After the lessons, only
15.3% of the students continued to have difficulties in responding to "why" questions.
          The   high rate   of failures   to answer     the questions   on   most  distracters   exposes    the   prevalent
misconceptions in both pre-and post-tests. Before the lessons, the high rate of failures was caused by distracters
distributed on most of the items (14 misconceptions were identified). After the lessons, the rate of failures due
to distractors reduced dramatically, with only two items (item 3B and 4B) continuing to receive high rate of
failure due to present distracters. Most of the students wrongly believed that the particles would cease moving
when equilibrium concentrations had been reached. Hence, it reveals that students still had some degree of
confusion of how the process of diffusion influences the particles' movement, and vice versa.
Students' performance on the inquiry

© ISLS                                                                                                                   465
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                              Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

Q&H
In Q&H, Question 1 (Q1) asked students to propose a reason for the smell of the cooked fishes from a distance
(diffusion). Question 2 (Q2) asked students to propose a reason on why drinking seawater killed the sailors faster
than expected compared to not drinking any water at all (osmosis). In sum, the responses to Q1 were usually
more correct and more complete compared to responses to Q2. Q1 received 38.6% of L2 response and 33.3% of
L3 response, compared to Q2 which received 56.1% of L1 responses. The results seems to confirm our findings
in  pre-test that  students  had  difficulty  in reasoning   scientifically and  deeply   about   the  basic processes  of
diffusion, because they provided (partially) relevant answers with simple explanations on the reasons for Q1. On
the other,   the result  is also consistent   with the   initial findings which    had  already   suggested  that   a large
percentage   of  students   struggled to   comprehend     osmosis  and  its   mechanism.    As  osmosis    contained  more
invisible attributes and processes, students failed to connect the macroscopic observations with the mechanism
of osmosis at the microscopic level. Only a fraction of students (Q1 with 14% of L4 and Q2 with 3.5% of L4)
managed    to  answer   them    correctly with  elaborated  explanations.   An   interesting   finding was   observed  that
although   the   general performance      on  responses  to Q1   was   better than  Q2,   a fraction   of  students (3.5%)
performed better in Q2 compared to Q1. These cases mostly existed among groups in which the pairs interacted
with each other frequently as we observed.
Pre-model
In  this section,  students   generally   responded  to   the  individual   modelling   tasks  positively   with  the high
percentage of work completion (80%). However, 70% of the students failed to finish the collaborative models.
Meanwhile,     the division  of  labour   on  collaborative  modelling   was   not  equally    distributed between    group
members. There are three possible reasons to these observations: 1) limited class time affected students' group
modelling. 2) few opportunities were offered for students to participate in synchronously collaborative activities
in previous lessons. 3) collaborative scripts were not provided in time by the teacher to guide and structure
students' collaboration.
          Data analysis of their resultant models suggests that most students constructed the individual models at
the particulate level but varied on the model quality. It reveals the different representations that individual
students had about the concept of diffusion and osmosis as found in Q&H. Positively, more than half of the
students drew the middle quality of diffusion models (M2=54.8%). However, some issues were found: 1) the
models lacked the necessary annotations of each model component; 2) most of the models described the result
of diffusion with water and ink particles in a container, but failed to represent the process of how particles
scattered over time; 3) the particles drawn were placed in an orderly arrangement in the container, which should
not be the case.
          Variation of model quality also existed among the osmosis models, with M1 and M2, taking up 40%,
and L2 taking up 35%. The significant proportion of M1 and M2 models may indicate that a significant part of
students, who had viewed and observed the videos, had acquired a more appropriate perception of the process of
osmosis and developed more accurate knowledge about osmosis. However, some students failed to distinguish
the functions of model components (e.g. the egg yolk membrane as the partially permeable membrane, and the
net movement of water molecules through the partially permeable membrane) although they knew that osmosis
would happen when the egg was immersed in the corn syrup, as inferred from the significant proportion of L2
models. We also notice that students' active engagement in peer review and discussion of models resulted in the
improvement of their prior knowledge of osmosis.
Reflect
Responses    in  the Reflect  varied, consisting   30.28%    of  "verification", 23.33%     of "explanation",  18.33%   of
"improvement" and 28.06% of "critical reflection". Although 30.28% of students reflected upon their artifacts
through   "verification",   the rest of   the reflections indicated   some    deep thinking    of the  artifacts. Students'
"explanations" were mainly concentrated on: 1) providing supplementary comments on interpreting the process
of diffusion and osmosis at particulate level. 2) writing the definition of diffusion and osmosis, in order to show
their current understanding. 3) explaining the effects of diffusion and osmosis correctly. Students that gave the
"explanation" reflections achieved better understanding of diffusion and osmosis, especially with respect to the
understanding of the definitions, the movement of the particles as the physical basis, and the results of diffusion
and  osmosis.    They   could   link the  key  concepts   or   terminologies   with   the context  after   receiving  more
knowledge from Investigate. Students that gave "improvement" reflection generally thought that they should
revise and improve their artefacts, it means they realised the misconceptions they held in their prior knowledge.
Students  that   gave  "critical reflection"   indicated  that   they succeeded    in developing   a   more  sophisticated
understanding and presentation of the target concepts.
Apply
Three questions, Q1, Q2, and Q3, were provided for students to answer in the Apply phase. Q1 concerned the
possible outcome of placing the microorganism Elodea into the ocean. Q2 was about the reasons on vegetables
becoming soggy when salad dressing was applied. Q3 asked for the explanations on killing weeds using salt

© ISLS                                                                                                                 466
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                            Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

water. The results show that Q1 and Q3 received more L2 (Q1: 30.3%, Q3: 30.5%) and L3 answers (Q1: 40.5%,
Q3: 34.6%), than L1 answers (Q1: 8.9%, Q3:15.3%). Furthermore, a number of students attained L4 (Q1: 20.3%,
Q3: 19.6%). The presence of L4 answers means that these students managed to apply their knowledge learnt
from the lessons in the new context. However, students seemed to have difficulties in understanding the nature
of the dressing relative to the vegetables in Q2, as most of the students defined the dressing as the hypotonic
solution compared to the cellular content in the vegetables (56.3% L1, 12.5% L2, 18.8% L3, 12.5% L4). This
issue indicates that it may not be advisable to assess students' new acquired understanding within a new context
that has little connection with the information in Investigate. In this case, it is easier for students to compare
between liquid solutions (e.g. ocean, salt water) with hypotonic, isotonic or hypertonic relationships. However,
students    were  hesitant  in linking  their new    knowledge    between  salad   dressing  (colloidal  mixture),  and
vegetables (cellular matrix).
Students' performance on the collaborative work
Peer discussions by students were mainly categorised as task-oriented, knowledge-oriented, strategy-oriented,
and assessment-related discourse based on our data analysis. The distribution is these categories in the specific
inquiry phases depicted in Table 1.
               Table 1. The percentage of the peer discussion in the inquiry phase
                  Category        Q& H /%            Pre-model/%      Investigate/%       Reflect/%
                  Task            34.2               50.5             41.2                48.3
                  Knowledge       35.6               9.0              42.0                32.2
                  Strategy        23.2               33.5             11.9                11.9
                  Assessment      7.0                7.0              4.9                 13.1
Among these discourse, task-oriented discourse was rated highest (42%). This indicates that students were
primarily   concerned   with    establishing   work   procedures   to  complete    different learning    related  tasks.
Furthermore, the proportions of task-oriented discourse were found to be the highest in Pre-model (50.5%),
followed by Reflect (48.3%), Investigate (41.2%) and Q&H (34.2%). The discourses were found to focus on
managing the division of labour and the procedures to complete the tasks. Students engaged with task-oriented
discourses were generally observed to perform better in time management, with most of them posing artefacts of
higher quality. Therefore, students' frequent engagement in task-oriented discourse is associated with resultant
higher work quality and efficiency.
         The proportions of knowledge-oriented discourse were found to be the highest in Investigate (42%),
followed    by Q&H   (35.6%)    and   Reflect (32.2%).   These  discourses were    mostly associated  with  knowledge
sharing and the construction of the new knowledge between team members (van Aalst, 2009). It was found that
students who had limited prior knowledge of diffusion and osmosis tended to discuss and share their existing
knowledge with their team members at the initial stage of inquiry. For example, in Q&H phase, students knew
the term "Diffusion" but lacked adequate knowledge on its mechanism. Thus, questions were raised, such as
"what  kind    of particles diffused   into the air", and  "what  is  the  trigger for particles  in diffusion".  Their
knowledge-oriented discourse also concentrated on negotiating the answer to Q2. Most students developed their
naïve  understanding    of  osmosis    based  on their   prior  knowledge.  The    terms  like "saltwater", "organs",
"dehydrate", "absorb" appeared in their chatting. In Investigate phase, it was noticed that while most of the
students used terminologies to respond to guiding questions, they were generally observed to work together to
synthesize   the  understanding    of  new  abstract  concepts. They   tend to  discuss   on the  best   definition and
mechanism of diffusion and osmosis, identification of solution concentrations, movement of particles and the
energy   associated  with   the molecules'    movements.    Hence,   the  frequent  discussions   on interpreting   new
knowledge and extending the prior knowledge have improved their understanding of diffusion, with greater
gains in understanding of osmosis. In Reflect phase, the discourses indicated that students started relating their
new knowledge with reference to the previous work. Through reflection, they improved their new understanding
and they could apply new knowledge in revising the previous work into better quality.
         The strategy-oriented discourse took place mostly at the stage of Q&H (23.2%), Pre-model (33.5%)
and Investigate    (11.9%).  The   discourse  provided   partners with   resources  or the  methods   to complete    the
activities. In  Q&H,   most    of  the strategy-oriented  discourse   emphasized   the  ways   to search  for relevant
information. However, some students were observed to refer either to the textbooks, Internet or the teacher
when the team member(s) did not reach a consensus on their ideas. In Pre-model, students discussed with their
team member(s) on choosing the appropriate drawing tools, and how to conduct individual drawings and group
drawings. Generally, these discourses directed them to find the best way to obtain the answers and to confirm
the quality of modelling work. Particularly in Investigate, it was observed that when some of the students did
not gain    knowledge  about   the new   concepts,   the strategy-oriented discourse   would   focus on  obtaining   the
answers through available resources. This strategy however, resulted in a fraction of students turn to the Internet
to get the answers directly rather do any further reasoning and deduction on their own.

© ISLS                                                                                                              467
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                               Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

          Students' assessment-oriented discourses were distributed with the lowest rate at each stage (7.0 % at
Q&H, 7.0 % at Pre-model, 4.9% at Investigate and 13.1 % at Reflect). The comparative higher rate appeared in
Reflect,  as students  were   allowed  to review   each  other's    reflections and   the students  generally  had  more
confidence of their conceptual understanding. We can conclude that the rate of assessment comments would
increase with the improvement of their conceptual understanding. At the beginning of the lesson, students might
not have a good understanding of the concepts and concerned about potentially providing incorrect assessments
on  their partners'  work.  When    they  obtaining    know   knowledge    in  Investigate,  they  were   observed  to  be
spending   most  of  time  to check   or  revise their  prior knowledge.     Therefore,   students'  assessment-oriented
discourse received the lowest coding at the stage of Investigate. Another reason we can infer is that the guiding
questions came in the form of multiple-choice. Hence, it is neither appropriate nor possible for students to
comment on their partners' ideas and reasons of their choice without reviewing the explanations.
Teachers and Students Attitudes towards CSI lessons
The interview transcripts indicates that both teachers and students conveyed overall positive attitudes toward the
CSI implementation in the science class. After conducting CSI lessons, the teachers recognize that the lessons
have its unique educational value on fostering conceptual understanding and developing collaborative learning
skills in pupils: 1) CSI can be an active and innovative pedagogy for science instruction; 2) the lessons can
improve students' involvement in the activities, and lead them towards new conceptual understanding through
various forms of manipulating data and information, collaborative work, peer review and discussion; 3) students
are given more opportunities to exhibit their thoughts about topic (e.g. do peer discussion with a partner instead
of in front of an entire class). Overall, the teachers are interested in continuing to use the system for other
scientific topics to probe more about potential value of the system in science education. The students comment
that they are more motivated when they were participating in the activities that were facilitated by real-time
chatting, modelling    and visualization.  In the  lessons,   their learning   can  be guided   by  both   instruction and
questions within the system. Meanwhile, peer discussion, review and social presence also help them to keep at
pace with their team member(s), which improve their time management skills and collaborative learning skills.
Furthermore, they benefit from the activities in Pre-model and Investigate. The Pre-model has been identified as
the most interesting and engaging stage for students, as it provides an avenue for them to explore and discuss in
great depth what they observe and construct. The simulations in Investigate provide important information for
them to learn new ideas such that when they were answering the guided questions, they can manipulate the
simulations to review the results and then check whether the answer agrees with the simulation result.

Conclusions and Further Work
In summary, the CSI system has been demonstrated as a valuable application for enhancing students' conceptual
understanding if the lessons are well designed and implemented. During the collaborative inquiry process with
the system,   students were   provided   with more     opportunities to   deal  with  the complex   problems.  Students'
conceptual understanding are mutually improved and elaborated which are the outcomes associated with the use
of multiple CSCL design elements. Besides the great improvement on the post-test achievement, students'
conceptual   changes  were    revealed in the inquiry   process progressively.     It can be  depicted  as: eliciting  and
applying prior knowledge in Contextualize and Q&H (exposing misconceptions)                      transferring knowledge
from the view of macroscopic level to particulate level in Pre-model (exposing misconceptions and establishing
the microscopic   view  of representing   the scientific phenomena)            obtaining new knowledge at particulate
level through Investigate (acquiring normative ideas of the scientific phenomena)                revising and improving
prior knowledge     by reflection   (Revising    prior knowledge)         reinforcing   new   knowledge     through    their
applications  in the  new  problematized     context   (elaborating  new   understanding).    The  presented  method    of
learning  also enables   teachers  to  trace  students'  progress   in  inquiry  activities, their  status of conceptual
understanding,   as well   as to identify their  learning  difficulties   in particular   phases (e.g.  group modelling,
responses to Q2 in Apply) as we discussed in the above section. In lessons, students have more opportunities to
participate in various forms of collaboration as they become more engaged in CSI activities. Students were
particularly more active with respect to collaborating with their team member(s) in Pre-model, Investigate and
Reflect phases. In conclusion, the multiple CSCL design elements that are integrated at the inquiry phases in a
flexible way supplement the different demands in the collaborative inquiry.
          Our  future  research  will  focus  on  the   instruction  of   biochemistry    topic  "photosynthesis".  More
emphasis will be paid on teachers' influence in the lessons through comparisons on the system implementation
and instruction  among    different teachers.  The   studies  intend   to investigate  the   relations between  students'
performance    and  teachers' teaching   methods,  strategies,  as  well  as  their  teaching belief   on  CSCL learning
environment.

© ISLS                                                                                                                 468
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                           Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

References
Bell,T., Urhahne, D., Schanze, S., & Ploetzner, R. (2010). Collaborative inquiry learning: models, tools, and
         challenges. International Journal of Science Education, 32(3), 349­377.
Bouyias, Y.,  &   Demetriadis,  S. (2012).   Peer-monitoring    vs. micro-script fading  for enhancing   knowledge
         acquisition  when   learning   in   computer-supported      argumentation  environments.    Computers     &
         Education,59(2), 236-249.
Buckley, B.C.,   Gobert,  J.D., &  Kinfield, A.C.,Willett,    J.(2004). Model-based     teaching and learning  with
         BioLogicaTM:   What    do they   learn? How   do  they  learn?  How    do we   know?   Journal  of Science
         Education and Technology, 13(1), 23-41.
Ergazaki, M., Komis, V., & Zogza, V. (2005). High-school students' reasoning while constructing plant growth
         models in a computer-supported educational environment Education. International Journal of Science
         Education, 27(8), 909-933.
Gogoulou,    A., Gouli, E., &   Grigoriadou,   M.  (2008). Adapting    and personalizing  the  communication   in  a
         synchronous communication tool. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 24(3), 203-216.
Grosslight, L., Unger, C., Jay, E., & Smith, C., L. (1991). Understanding models and their use in science
         conceptions of middle and high school students and experts. Journal of Research in Science Teaching,
         28(9), 799-822.
Halloun, I.  (1997). Schematic   concepts  for schematic   models   of the real world:  The  Newtonian   concept   of
         Force. Science Education, 82(2), 239-263.
Jackson,J., Dukerich,L., & Hestenes. (2008). Modeling instruction: An effective model for science education.
         Science Educator, 17(1), 10-17.
Janssen, J., Erkens, G., Kanselaar, G., & Jaspers, J.(2007). Visualization of participation: Does it contribute to
         successful computer-supported collaborative learning?. Computers & Education, 49(4), 1037-1065.
Kember. D., & Leung. Y.P., Jones. A., . . .Yeung, E. (2000). Development of a questionnaire to measure the
         level of reflective thinking. Assessment & Evaluation in Higher Education, 25(4), 381-395.
Kilinc, A. (2007). The opinions of Turkish high school pupils on inquiry based laboratory Activities. The
         Turkish Online Journal of Educational Technology, 6(4).
Lerner, N. (2007). Drawing to learn science: Legacies of Agassiz. Journal of Technical Writing and
         Communication, 37(4), 379-394.
Linn, M. C. & Eylon, B.-S. (2011). Science learning and instruction: Taking Advantage of Technology to
         Promote Knowledge Integration. New York: Routledge.
Liu, O.  L., Lee,  H.-S., Hofstetter, C., &  Linn,  M. C.    (2008). Assessing   knowledge   integration in science:
         Construct, measures, and evidence. Educational Assessment, 13(1), 33-55.
Nicol, D. J., & Macfarlane-Dick, D. (2006). Formative assessment and self-regulated learning: A model and
         seven principles of good feedback practice. Studies in Higher Education, 31(2), 199-218.
Odom, A. L., & Barrow, L. H. (1995). Development and application of a two-tier diagnostic test measuring
         college biology students' understanding of diffusion and osmosis after a course of instruction. Journal
         of Research in Science Teaching, 32(1), 45-61.
Pozzi, F. (2009). Using collaborative techniques in virtual learning communities. Lecture Notes in Computer
         Science, 5794, 670-675.
Sun, D., & Looi, Chee-Kit. (2013). Designing a web-based science learning environment for model-based
         collaborative Inquiry. Journal of Science Education and Technology, 22(1),73-89.
van Aalst, J. (2009). Distinguishing knowledge-sharing, knowledgeconstruction, and knowledge- creation
        discourses. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 4(3), 259-287.
White,  B.Y., Frederiksen,  J., Frederiksen,   T., Eslinger, E., Loper,   S., &Collins, A.  (2002). Inquiry  Island:
         affordances of a multi-agent environment for scientific inquiry and reflective learning. In: Proceedings
         of the 5th international conference of the learning sciences (ICLS), Erlbaum, Mahwah, NJ.
Yang, J. C., & Lin, Y. L. (2010). Development and evaluation of an interactive mobile learning environment
         with shared display groupware. Educational Technology & Society, 13(1), 195-207.

Acknowledgments
This research is funded by National research Foundation in Singapore (Project #: NRF2009-IDM001-MOE-019,
IDM   SST    Future School-Science    project).We  would   like  to thank  Baohui  Zhang   for his contributions   in
conceptualizing this project, and the CSI team members and our collaborators: Weikai Fu, Chaohai Chen, Jean
Phua Yin Chiun, Shan Gao, Karel Mous, Kwai Yin Loh, Charles Low Soo Peng, Kassandra Lim Lay Han,
Justin Ke Kaijie and their students for working with us.

© ISLS                                                                                                         469
