CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                             Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

    Experts Learn More (than Newcomers): An Exploratory Study of
                         Argumentation in an Online Help Forum
                                  Hon Jie Teo, Aditya Johri, Virginia Tech, USA
                                          Email: hjteo@vt.edu, ajohri@vt.edu

          Abstract: Online help forums have emerged as a powerful form of knowledge sharing with
          significant implications for CSCL. To understand knowledge construction and learning within
          online help  forums,  this  study   examined     the interactional  dynamics    amongst   help-givers
          (experts) and help-seekers (newcomers) in an open, voluntary help forum for Java computer
          programming language. A purposive sample of active threads was analyzed using a coding
          scheme   adapted   from the  argumentative      knowledge    construction  (AKC)    framework.   The
          study found that while help-givers actively engaged in advanced argumentative and social
          moves, help-seekers seldom did. Furthermore, the number of advanced epistemic messages
          was lower than expected and both help-givers and help-seekers often veered off-topic towards
          socialization and conflict-oriented interactions. The study questions the feasibility of online
          help forums  for   facilitating acquisition  of  domain-specific   knowledge    by  help-seekers but
          demonstrates   the viability    of the platform   as  a   mechanism    for experts  to expand   their
          knowledge. Our findings suggest that those who know more are able to learn more given their
          ability to engage in argumentation.

Introduction
With the increase in access and use of digital media among youth (Johri, Teo, Lo, Dufour, & Schram, 2013),
research  on   online learning  has  gained    increased   significance. Within   CSCL,     contexts for research    have
included online virtual math chat groups (Stahl, 2006, 2011), online mathematics help forums (van de Sande,
2010; van der Sande & Leinhardt, 2007), forum for mathematics teachers (Renninger & Shumar, 2002), online
distance learning classes (Johri, 2005), free non-course-related mathematics forum (Chen, Chiu & Wang, 2010),
and K12 programming communities such as Scratch (Resnick et al., 2009) and MOOSE Perl (Bruckmann,
2006). Researchers are interested in online contexts because of their ability to augment formal learning by
supporting knowledge construction (Scardamalia & Bereiter, 2006; Law, Yuen, Wong & Leng, 2011), sense-
making   (Kirschner,  Buckingham     Shum    &   Carr, 2003)   and  facilitating complex    problem  solving (Munneke,
Andriessen, Kanselaar & Kirschner, 2007). Furthermore, the online discussion can be enhanced through the use
of mechanisms such as `scripts' which allow learners to engage in discourse of high epistemic quality (Stegman,
Wecker, Weinberger & Fischer, 2007). The viability of asynchronous online discussions in fostering knowledge
construction   and  acquisition   has  been    well-documented.     Analytical    frameworks   (Suthers   et al.,   2010;
Weinberger & Fischer, 2006) and content analysis instruments (Clark & Sampson, 2007; Gunawardena et al.,
1997; Pena-Shaff & Nicholls, 2004) have been used to understand learning in online settings. In this study, we
adopt the    argumentative   knowledge    construction    (AKC)   framework   proposed    by   Weinberger  and    Fischer
(2006) to obtain an in-depth picture of the interactions between help-givers and help-seekers in an unscripted
online forum (1). Our interest in this study and the framework emerged from two primary research questions
about online help forums ­ what does learning look like and who learns by participating in these communities?
As we discuss in detail below, our use of the Weinberger and Fischer (2006) framework is that it lends itself
well to  our goal  ­  an examination      of the quality  of  arguments  and  the    degree of social   interaction in an
unscripted environment where contributions are voluntary and expertise levels may vary amongst learners.

Argumentative Knowledge Construction
Knowledge construction is a useful framework for analyzing collaborative online activity as it emphasizes the
role of social activity in negotiating meanings relevant to the learning task (Dillenburg, 1999; Stahl, Koschmann
&   Suthers, 2006).   Through  dialogue,     participants are  able to create a  coordinated   activity where   they   can
maintain a shared conception of a problem (Dillenburg, 1999; Scardamalia & Bereiter, 2006; Pena-shaff &
Nicholls, 2004; Hmelo-Silver, 2003) .Within the knowledge construction framework, researchers interested in
the design of learning environments have examined learner interaction and discourse to identify mechanisms
that make knowledge construction viable and have found that argumentation activities support help students
learn about argumentative structures and constructing explanations       (Andriessen, 2007; Berland & Resier, 2008;
Toulmin, 1958). Argumentative knowledge construction (AKC) has emerged as a useful construct for framing
and understanding learning tasks. It emphasizes problem discussion by making argumentative elaborations with
the  goal to  contribute towards   multiple    perspectives,   produce   joint-solutions, and  acquire  domain-specific
knowledge (Astleitner, Brunken & Leutner, 2003; Jamaludin, Chee & Ho, 2009; Stegmann, Weinberger &
Fischer 2006). To achieve AKC, learners collaborate and exchange their knowledge through discourse on an

© ISLS                                                                                                               470
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                         Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

open and complex learning task through the construction of arguments, balance of arguments and supporting
their arguments with evidences, and counter arguments (Weinberger, 2003; Weinberger & Fischer 2006). The
examination of argumentative discourse produces further insights into how learners engage in negotiation of
different perspectives through theoretical conceptualization and application (Weinberger & Fischer, 2006). For
instance, Stegmann and colleagues (2007) studied a problem-based learning in a higher education setting and
found that argumentative collaboration scripts can foster the quality of argumentations, such that there are more
arguments contain verifiable claims  and qualifying      statements, and help learners acquire knowledge    about
argumentation. However, they reported that there are no learning gains when it comes to the acquisition of
content-specific knowledge. Overall, the ability of the knowledge construction framework to illuminate joint
activity where learners improve upon initial ideas through dialogue makes is pertinent for studying online help
forums. In these forums interaction takes place through text based dialogue which is stored and available for
analysis and this is the only form of interaction that takes place among the participants thereby increasing the
usefulness of the data in terms of interpretation.

Research Setting ­ Java Newcomer Forum
Online help forums are as old as electronic communication itself and their continued viability and growth over
the years is an indicator of their usefulness to users. In recent years, one form of online communities ­ help
forums ­  have flourished in membership   and       have become   a  powerful complement   to  informal   learning
opportunities available to people and both the level of participation as well as the diversity of topics covered by
help forums is astounding (Singh, 2008). In the seven websites she sampled, Singh (2008) found approximately
3.8 million registered users excluding the guests who post and the visitors who lurk on the forums as invisible
visitors and never post or register. One arena in which help forums have had a persistence and successful
presence is computer programming. The usefulness of online help-forums for learning to program is easy to see.
It is easy to represent software code online and relatively straightforward for the help giver to `run' the code and
see if it works. For our study, we targeted a popular programming language with millions of user worldwide and
significant online support ­ JavaTM. The popularity of Java comes from its usefulness for developing Internet
related applications and the fact that it is open-sourced. Open sourcing of any software artifact ­ language,
program or product ­ results in significant growth in the supporting online community (Crowston & Howison,
2003) and Java is no exception (Johri, Nov & Mitra, 2011a, 2011b). Studies have found that users in online
communities that  are formed  around open  source      software actively engage  in collaboration, learning and
socialization (Lakhani & Wolf, 2005) and leverage tools such as      code repositories, forum discussion, blogs and
chat clients to facilitate interaction (Crowston, Wei, Howison & Wiggins, 2012). In these communities help-
seeking and help-giving are common and Lakhani and Von Hippel (2003) found that help-givers spent 2% of
the total spent time on the online community answering questions and 98% of their time reading questions as
well as crafting potential answers to the questions. Singh (2008) found that the process of help-giving in these
communities is many-to-many (many help-seekers and many help-givers are involved) and that the process of
help-giving is seldom dyadic and often iterative (Singh & Twidale, 2008; Singh, Kathuria & Johri, 2012).
        In contrast to formal and highly structured instruction, the site we selected for this study (the Java
community) has an informal structure and both participation and collaboration is voluntary and not mandated by
coursework. Help is mainly provided by a core group of volunteers and the discussion task structure deviates
from the common   set-ups of  common  wrapper/starter     roles and   open-ended class  discussions without  pre-
designated roles. This setting is problem driven as help-seeker starts a discussion soliciting help from voluntary
help-givers to assist them with their learning needs and that challenges emerge through the engagement of
newcomers with a programming task. Figure 1 shows a screenshot of the forum and Figure 2 represents the
structure of a sample discussion. The forum explicitly prohibited off-task discussion ­ such as discussion of
Java as a language or its open sourcing ­ in the forum. The terms of participation made this explicit.

               Figure 1. A page listing discussion topics in the `New to Java" discussion forum

© ISLS                                                                                                       471
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                        Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

                      Figure 2. Example of a help request and follow-up discussion

Methodology, Data Collection, and Data Analysis
       The discussion forum data that we collected consisted of a total of 37,472 discussion topics. Our data
collection complied with both internal institutional IRB protocol and the `terms of services' of the forum. We
limited data collection to public data that that did not require creating an account and logging in to the site to be
able to read the forum messages. The data ranged from a time period between 2006 and 2010. User post counts
(see Table 1) indicates that most users have less than 10 posts in this discussion forum with only 326 users
having post counts more than 500. Therefore, similar to other help forums, the majority of users participate
infrequently in contrast to a much smaller number of expert helpers who contribute much more frequently to the
forums. For the study reported in this paper, data were collected from the most active discussion topics created
in the month of September in year 2009 and which accounted for 9.4% of all topics started in the month. By
only examining the most active discussion topics, we are able to focus on the entirety of discussion to account
for a wide range of domain-specific content, argumentative and interactional moves. In total, 1119 messages
from 47 discussion threads amounting to a total of 108 pages of conservations were analyzed. Further details of
the research site and data collection are available in Mitra (2011).

                       Table 1: Users activity in the New to Java discussion forums

                           Post Count               Number of Users
                           0 to 10                  14114
                           11 to 50                 5076
                           51 to 500                1922
                           > 500                    326

Our coding scheme is based on the three independent dimensions: epistemic, argumentative and social modes
(See Table 2) as described by Weinberger & Fischer (2006). The epistemic dimension allows us to investigate if
learners are on-task and if they are able to convey theoretical concepts to explain concepts or apply concepts to
provide a solution to the case at hand. The argumentative dimension is focused on the argumentation sequences
and whether learners make arguments, counter arguments, and interactive arguments in addition to drawing
from prior knowledge. The social   modes dimension is concerned          with the extent to which the learners
externalize their thoughts, question others, accept the contributions of others and disagree or agree with the
perspectives of others. While the analytical framework (Weinberger & Fischer, 2006) is useful for guiding
analysis at both the micro and macro levels, a macro-approach was chosen such that the complete message was
chosen as the unit of analysis for the coding. This is in line with the suggestion by Rourke et al. (2001), who

© ISLS                                                                                                   472
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                        Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

argued that taking the complete message as the unit of analysis is the most objective approach as data analysis is
performed under the entirety of interaction. The inter-rater agreement for this study is 0.78 (Cohen, 1960).

Table 2:  Coding  scheme   with categories  in epistemic,  argumentative  and   social dimensions    (adapted  from
Weinberger & Fischer, 2006)

Code     Category                                Description
EPI1     Non-epistemic activities                Learners discussing off-topic or digressing off-topic
                                                 Learners convey contextual information within the
                                                 argumentation space with the aim of fostering understanding
EPI2     Construction of problem space           of the topic
                                                 Learners convey theoretical concepts and explain theoretical
EPI3     Construction of conceptual space        principles to foster theoretical understanding of the topic
         Construction of adequate relations      Learners convey theoretical concepts of case information and
         between conceptual and problem          apply relevant theoretical concepts adequately to provide a
EPI4     space                                   solution for the topic problem
         Construction of relations between       Applying concepts that stem from prior knowledge rather than
EPI5     prior knowledge and problem space       the new theoretical concepts that are to be learned
                                                 Questions, coordinating moves, and meta-statements on
ARG1     Non-argumentative moves                 argumentation
ARG2     Argument                                Statement put forward in favor of a specific proposition
                                                 An argument opposing a preceding argument, favoring an
ARG3     Counterargument                         opposite proposition
                                                 Statement that aims to balance and to advance a preceding
ARG4     Integration                             argument and counterargument
SOC1     Externalization                         Externalizing or articulating thoughts to the group
                                                 Eliciting a response, questioning the learning partner, or
SOC2     Elicitation                             provoking a reaction from group
                                                 Accepting the contributions of group members in order to
SOC3     Quick consensus building                move on with the task
         Integration-oriented consensus          Taking over, integrating and applying the perspectives of
SOC4     building                                group members
                                                 Disagreeing, modifying or replacing the perspectives of group
SOC5     Conflict-oriented consensus building    members

Findings
Our analysis (see left most bar in Fig. 2) indicates that non-epistemic (EPI1) messages comprised 42.2% of all
messages corresponding to the epistemic dimension followed by epistemic activities of higher order such as
conveying  of  contextual  information  (EPI2)   at 32.6%     and  conveying    of theoretical concepts  (EPI4)  at
17.6%.We, however, also found that both help-givers and help-seekers seldom explicitly drew from any prior
knowledge (EPI5) at 1.6%.     Chi-square analysis showed that help-givers are more likely to engage in non-
epistemic messages (2 (18, N = 94) = 43.5, p < 0.001). Together with the previous finding, that there are a
large number of non-epistemic messages, this significant difference suggests that as help-seekers engage in
help-oriented discussions they do not at the same time actively participate in any off-task activities, such as
engaging in socialization moves.  On the other hand, experts are more likely to engage in higher level epistemic
activities from explanation of theoretical concepts (2 (5, N = 94) = 38.5, p < 0.001) to application of theoretical
concepts (2 (10, N = 94) = 60.6, p < 0.001). This finding reflects the nature of help-oriented discussion where
help-givers have more expertise and more likely to share their theoretical and conceptual knowledge to provide
a solution to the case at hand or to explain theoretical concepts.
         In the argumentative dimension, we found that non-argumentative moves (ARG1) constitute 90.6% of
all argumentative messages and made up the majority of messages in the argumentative dimension (see middle
bar in Fig. 2). This is not surprising since topics started by help-seekers may not be entirely conductive for
AKC. Amongst the argumentative moves, the occurrences of ARG2, ARG3 and ARG4 make up 37.5, 41.3 and
21.2%  of the  total  moves. Our  analysis  also highlight that    help-seekers seldom  engaged   in  any of   these
argumentative moves at 99%. Chi-square analysis showed that that help-givers are more likely to engage in
argumentative moves ARG3and ARG4 which are putting forth arguments (2 (4, N = 94) = 16.1, p = 0.0013)
and counterarguments (2 (5, N = 94) = 13.8, p = 0.0058) and integrative arguments (2 (3, N = 94) = 16.5, p <
0.001). This discussion platform, being a help-oriented online discussion forum, is made up of help-givers
dominantly engaged in putting forth their arguments when the topic at hand requires it. This seems to suggest
that help-seekers are not actively participating in the argumentative processes as they may lack the knowledge
needed to engage in any arguments. It is therefore suspect that the multiple perspectives that originate from
help-givers' arguments have any positive impact on help-seekers' learning experiences, especially when experts

© ISLS                                                                                                         473
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                                Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

touch on advanced domain-specific content without explicit explanation of the content. The limitation of this
finding is that we are not able to detect any form of lurking behavior and therefore cannot account for help-
seekers who are observing yet do not make a contribution to the discussion.
         In the social dimension, the use of questions or provocation to elicit responses (SOC2) constitutes
32.0% of all social messages whereas externalization of thoughts occurred at a frequency of 22.7%. On the
other hand, quick consensus building and conflict-oriented consensus building messages (SOC3 and SOC4)
constitutes 14.0% and 26.4% of all social messages respectively (see right most bar in Fig. 2). The relatively
higher  number  of SOC2      moves  can  be     explained     by the nature  of     the help-oriented discussions where
information or prompts, rather than solutions, was provided to enable help-seekers to meeting their learning
needs  (Lakhani &      von Hippel, 2003). It    is also observed     that both     help-givers and helps-seekers  seldom
participate in moves that show integration of others' perspectives into their viewpoints (SOC5) and these moves
only feature in 4.9% of all social messages. Through chi-square analysis, our analysis suggests while help-
seekers are more likely to use questions and provocation to solicit responses, help-givers are more likely to take
over the perspectives of others (2 (4, N = 94) = 9.5, p < 0.028) and are more likely to engage in conflict-
oriented consensus     building social moves     (2  (13,     N = 94) =   44.7,    p <  0.001). There are no significant
differences in our examination of the frequencies of SOC2 (2 (7, N = 94) = 8.6, p < 0.001) and this suggests
that both help-seekers and help-givers are also engaged in questioning and provocation, which is a positive
aspect of the online help discussion. To complement the discussion of our findings, we also present Table 3
which shows an excerpt for a help-discussion featuring acts from the three dimensions.

              Figure 3. Frequencies of Occurrence of Epistemic, Argumentative and Social Acts

Table 3: Excerpt from a help discussion on the computational concept of "inheritance"

Actor      Message Content
           Hello again, Guys I've read this tutorial : http://java.sun.com/docs/books /tutorial/java/IandI/subclasses.html As one
           of you suggested in one of your replies to my question on topic about inheritance and that's fine. Unfortunately in
           this tutorial two sentences contradict each other:
 Help-     1. A subclass inherits all the members (fields, methods, and nested classes) from its superclass. Constructors are
seeker     not members, so they are not inherited by subclasses, but the constructor of the superclass can be invoked from
  (HS)     the subclass.
           2. A subclass does not inherit the private members of its parent class.
           Moreover in netbeans while debugging it shows that private members of superclass are inherited by child class. So
           what's going on? Which sentence is true? And really, but on sun's official website this kind of error shouldn't have
           place. Looking forward to your reply
           It's really semantics. The only difference it makes if they're inherited or not is what the definition of inheritance must
 Help-     be. However, according to the Java Language Specification, I would say that private members are not inherited.
 giver     Quote: 6.4.3 The Members of a Class Type says: Members are either declared in the type, or inherited because
(HG) #1    they are accessible members of a superclass or superinterface which are neither private nor hidden nor overridden.
           Although it's entirely possible that the JLS contradicts itself elsewhere in that regard. As I said though, it makes no
           difference.

© ISLS                                                                                                              474
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                                Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

             If it's not clear, please provide feedback, so Sun can improve the tutorial (the link from the bottom of the tutorial
 HG #2       page):
             http://developers.sun.com/contact/tutorial_feedback.jsp
             Well it's not really semantics. Its fundamental very important concept. Well you saying that it makes no difference
             but I cannot agree. It is fundamental to know and understand how the mechanism of inheritance work and in order
             to understand that one has to know about basic concepts like inheritance and which members are inherited and I
   HS        really wish that sun would make it clear and do not make any more such a basic mistakes. Is there in java (I'm sure
             there is) a method which will allow me to check size of an object of any class? Doing so I would answer to my
             question myself but logically thinking every member is inherited otherwise on what member would we operate in
             derived class through public methods? Regards [user id removed]
             Maybe they could have been clearer, but then how much did you pay for that tutorial (or for any Java-technology
 HG #2       from Sun, for that matter) to Sun? Do as I suggested and provide feedback to Sun. I don't recommend to access
             fields of superclasses directly. If you need to access them, use either public or protected accessors.
             Quote HS: Well it's not really semantics. Its fundamental, very important concept.
             Same thing. The semantics of the fundamental concept.
             Quote HS: I really wish that sun would make it clear
             They have. See the Java Language Specification.
             Quote HS: And do not make any more such a basic mistakes.
 HG #3       Such as??Quote HS: Is there in java (I'm sure there is) a method which will allow me to check size of an object of any class?
             No.
             Quote HS: Doing so I would answer to my question myself but logically thinking every member is inherited
             otherwise on what member would we operate in derived class through public methods?
             Every member is inherited, but they are not all accessible to derived classes, depending on the access modifiers
             concerned. It's in the JLS. Have a look. And stop guessing.

Discussion and Conclusion
Online communities represent a significant avenue to understand many learning and education related issues
such as newcomer socialization (Ducheneaut, 2005), free user-to-user help (Lakhani & von Hippel, 2003), and
distribution of tasks (von Krogh, Spaeth & Lakhani, 2003; Mockus et al., 2002).Through examination of the
epistemic, argumentative and social tendencies of help-givers and help-seekers in an open unscripted learning
environment, we gained deeper insights into how help discussions can be characterized and how learning is
taking place in unscripted online discussion. The high number of off-topic messages raises a concern whether
the forums are a productive avenue for significant acquisition of domain-specific knowledge and echoes                             the
concerns raised by Stegmann and colleagues (2007). Both help-givers and help-seekers were likely to veer off-
topic towards    socialization and   conflict-oriented social     interactions.  In our analysis,    we  often      find that      the
quality of help is highly dependent on the social interactions between the help-seeker and the help-givers.
Taking into account that help-givers are volunteering their time, effort and offering their expertise, it is not
surprising that specific social and community practices have been established to allow them to maximize their
voluntary efforts. As such, help-seekers who are accustomed to these practices are more likely to attain highly
productive   learning   experiences. In our data analysis,        we observed   that help-seekers,    as  newcomers         to     the
community, were often not cognizant of the community practices such as using code-tags to organize their
program codes and provide sufficient contextual information desired by the help-givers.
        In sum, we found that while voluntary and open online discussion in this educational setting are rich in
discourse and can span a long period of time, they seldom feature advanced levels of knowledge construction
that  result from   the integration  of multiple perspectives        and  argumentations.       This runs contrary       to other
researchers who found high levels of arguments in discussion forums tied to formal instructional settings (Pena-
Shaff & Nicholls, 2004). Advanced discussions are most likely not to occur because the multiple perspectives
that the experienced help-givers provide through their arguments are most likely not able to be absorbed or
understood by help-seekers. This can be attributed to the existence of a core group of help-seekers (see Table 2)
who may possess a high level of domain-specific knowledge but may not capably provide learning support to
maximize help-seekers' learning experiences. In the statistical examination of differences between the two
groups of learners, we found that the help-seekers are more likely to engage in argumentative moves and engage
in integration-oriented   consensus   building moves.    These       findings highlight  an     opportunity for      community
leaders to address the design of tasks and roles to address the expertise gap between the experts and newcomers
as well as to foster more engaged learning experiences.           Online communities have much to gain by encouraging
participation from the larger pool of newcomer learners as it will in turn encourage higher levels of collective
contributions and learner diversity. Finally, consistent with prior research on expertise we found that due to their
ability to organize knowledge and connect concepts ­ metacognitive proclivity ­ experts were able to engage
more  centrally   with  the discussion, argue  strongly, and       thereby  also construct      knowledge and       learn (NRC,
2000). Our findings hint at a unique problem with informal learning in that those who know more are able to
learn more as they can argue more both due to prior knowledge, and in some instances, the culture of their
profession or community.

© ISLS                                                                                                                         475
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                             Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

Acknowledgement(s)
This material is based upon work supported, in part, by the U.S. National Science Foundation under Grants
EEC-0954034 & EEC-0935143. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this
material are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the funding agency.

Endnotes
(1) As other scholars have suggested, the role of `help-givers' and `help-seekers' in online communities is correlated with
     `experts' and `newcomers' respectively and we use the terms interchangeably.

References
Andriessen, J. (2007). Arguing to learn. In K. Sawyer (Ed.), The Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences
         (pp. 443 ­ 460). Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Astleitner, H., Brunken, R., & Leutner, D. (2003). The quality of instructional materials for argumentative
         knowledge construction. Journal of Instructional Psychology, 30(1), 3­11
Berland, L.K.,  &  Reiser, B.J.   (2008). Making    sense  of argumentation     and   explanation. Science Education,
         93(1), 26-55.
Bruckman, A. (2006). Learning In Online Communities. In K. Sawyer (Ed.), The Cambridge handbook of the
         learning sciences. (pp. 461-472). Cambridge University Press, New York, NY.
Bruner, J. (1999). Some reflections on education research. In E. C. Lagemann & L. S.         Shulman (Eds.), Issues in
         education research: Problems and possibilities (pp. 399-409). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass Publishers.
Chen, G., Chiu, M. M., & Wang, Z. (2010).Group micro-creativity in online discussions. Proceedings of the 9th
         International Conference of the Learning Sciences, volume 1 (pp. 357-364).
Clark, D.  B., &   Sampson,    V. (2008).  Assessing    dialogic  argumentation      in online environments  to relate
         structure, grounds, and conceptual quality. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 45(3), 293­321.
Cohen, J. (1960). A coefficient of agreement for nominal scales. Educational and Psychological Measurement
         20(1), 37­46.
Crowston, K., & Howison, J. (2003) The social structure of open source software development teams. Paper
         presented at the OASIS 2003 Workshop (IFIP 8.2 WG).
Crowston, K., Wei, K., Howison, J., & Wiggins, A. (2012). Free/Libre open-source software development:
         What we know and what we do not know. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), 44(2), 7.
Dillenbourg, P. (1999). What do you mean by "collaborative learning"? In P. Dillenbourg (Ed.), Collaborative
         learning: Cognitive and computational approaches (pp. 1-16).       Amsterdam, NL: Pergamon
Ducheneaut,  N.  (2005).  Socialization   in an Open    Source    Software  community:     a socio-technical analysis.
         Computer Supported Cooperative Work, 4(4), 323-368.
Gunawardena,    C. N.,  Lowe,    C.  A., &   Anderson,  T.  (1997).    Analysis   of  a global online debate  and the
         development   of  an  interaction analysis  model    for examining   social    construction of knowledge   in
         computer conferencing. Journal of Educational Computing Research, 17(4), 395­429
Hmelo-Silver, C. E. (2003). Analyzing collaborative knowledge construction: Multiple methods for integrated
         understanding. Computers and Education, 41, 397-420.
Jamaludin, A., Chee, Y.S., & Ho, C.M.L. (2009). Fostering argumentative knowledge construction through
         enactive role play in Second Life. Computers & Education, 53(2), 317-329.
Johri, A. (2005). Online, Offline, and In-Between: Analyzing Mediated-Action among American and Russian
         Students  in an  Online  Class.  In Roberts,   T. (Ed).  Computer-Supported       Collaborative   Learning in
         Higher Education. Idea Group Publishing. pp. 259-280.
Johri, A., Teo, H.,   Lo, J., Dufour, M.,    & Schram,   A.   B.  (2013). Millennial    Engineers: Digital Media  and
         Information      Ecology     of     Engineering      Students.    Computers        in    Human      Behavior,
         http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2013.01.048
Johri, A., Nov,   O.  &   Mitra,  R. (2011a).   Environmental     Jolts: Impact    of   Exogenous  Factors on   Online
         Community Participation. Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative
         Work, pp. 649-652.
Johri, A., Nov, O., & Mitra, R. (2011a). Cool or monster?: company takeovers and their effect on open source
         community participation. Proceedings of the 2011 iConference (pp. 327-331).
Kirschner, P. A., Buckingham Shum, S. J., & Carr, C. S. (2003). Visualizing Argumentation: Software Tools for
         Collaborative and Educational Sense-Making. London: Springer Verlag.
Lakhani, K. & Wolf, B. (2005). Why Hackers Do What They Do: Understanding Motivation and Effort in
         Free/Open    Source  Software    Projects. In: Feller,   J., B.  Fitzgerald,   S.Hissam,  K. Lakhani   (eds.),
         Perspectives on Free and Open Source Software, Cambridge, MA, The MIT Press
Lakhani, K. R., & von Hippel, E. (2003). How open source software works: "Free" user-to-user assistance.
         Research Policy, 32(6), 923-943.

© ISLS                                                                                                            476
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                            Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

Law, N., Yuen, J., Wong, O. W., & Leng, J. (2011). Understanding Learners' Knowledge Building Trajectory
         Through Visualizations of Multiple Automated Analyses. In S. Puntambekar, G. Erkens & C. Hmelo-
         Silver (Eds.), Analyzing interactions in CSCL: Methodologies, approaches and issues. (pp. 47-82).
         New York, NY: Springer.
Mitra, R.  (2011).   Collaborative  learning  in   Open Source   Software (OSS)   communities:   The  dynamics  and
         challenges in networked learning environments. M.S. Thesis, Virginia Tech.
Mockus, A., Fielding, R., & Herbsleb, J.D. (2002). Two case studies of open source software development:
         Apache and Mozilla. ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, 11(3), 309-346.
Munneke,   L., Andriessen,   J., Kanselaar,   G.,  &  Kirschner, P. (2007).  Supporting  interactive  argumentation:
         Influence of representational tools on discussing a wicked problem. Computers in Human Behavior,
         23, 1072­1088.
NRC (National Research Council) (2000). How People Learn: Brain, Mind, Experience, and School. National
         Academy Press.
Pena-Shaff, J., & Nicholls, C. (2004). Analyzing student interactions and meaning construction in computer
         bulletin board discussions. Computers & Education, 42(3), 243­265.
Renninger, K. A., & Shumar, W. (2002). Community building with and for teachers at the math forum. In K. A.
         Renninger   &  W.   Shumar    (Eds.),  Building virtual communities   (pp.60­95).  New   York:  Cambridge
         University Press.
Resnick, M., Maloney, J., Monroy-Hernandez, A., Rusk, N., Eastmond, E., et al. (2009). Scratch: programming
         for all. Communications of the ACM, 52(11): 60-7.
Rourke, L., Anderson, T., Garrison, D.R. and Archer, W., (2001). Methodological issues in the content analysis
         of computer conference transcripts. International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education, 12.
Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (2006). Knowledge building: Theory, pedagogy, and technology. In R. K.
         Sawyer  (Ed.),  The   Cambridge     handbook    of the learning  sciences (pp. 97­115).   New   York,  NY:
         Cambridge University Press.
Singh,  V. (2008).   Knowledge   Creation,   Sharing    and Reuse  in Online Technical   Support  for   Open Source
         Software. Unpublished Doctoral Dissertation Submitted to University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign.
Singh, V., Kathuria, S. & Johri, A. (2012). Newcomer integration and learning in technical support communities
         for Open Source Software. Proceedings of 2012 ACM Conference on CSCW.
Singh, V. and Twidale, M.B. (2008). The Confusion of Crowds: non-dyadic help interactions. Proceedings of
         Computer Supported Cooperative Work 2008, (San Diego, CA, 2008), ACM.
         Software. Unpublished Doctoral Dissertation, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 2008.
Stahl, G. (2006). Group cognition: Computer support for building collaborative knowledge. MIT Press.
Stahl, G. (2011). How to study group cognition. In S. Puntambekar, G. Erkens & C. Hmelo-Silver (Eds.),
         Analyzing interactions in CSCL: Methodologies, approaches and issues. (pp. 107-130). NY: Springer.
Stahl, G., Koschmann,    T., &   Suthers,   D.  (2006). Computer-supported    collaborative learning:   An historical
         perspective. In R.  K.     Sawyer  (Ed.), Cambridge    handbook  of the  learning  sciences  (pp. 409-426).
         Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Stegmann, K., Weinberger, A., & Fischer, F. (2007). Facilitating argumentative knowledge construction with
         computer-supported collaboration scripts. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative
         Learning, 2(4), 421­447.
Stegmann, K., Wecker, C., Weinberger, A., & Fischer, F. (2007). Collaborative argumentation and cognitive
         processing:  an empirical    study  in  a computer-supported   collaborative  learning environment.   Paper
         presented at the Proceedings of the 8th international conference on Computer supported collaborative
         learning, New Brunswick, New Jersey, USA.
Suthers, D.D., Dwyer, N., Medina, R., & Vatrapu, R. (2010). A framework for conceptualizing, representing,
         and analyzing   distributed   interaction.  International  Journal of   Computer-Supported    Collaborative
         Learning, 5(1), 5-42.
Toulmin, S. (1958). The uses of argument. Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press
van de Sande, C. & Leinhardt, G. (2007). Help! Active student learning and error remediation in an online
         calculus e-help community. Electronic Journal of e-Learning. 5(3), 227-238,
van de  Sande,   C.. (2010). Free,   open,   online, mathematics   help forums:   the good, the  bad, and  the ugly.
         Proceedings of the 9th International Conference of the Learning Sciences, pp. 643-650.
von Krogh,   G., Spaeth,  S.   &    Lakhani, K.  (2003). Community,     joining, and  specialization in open source
         software innovation: a case study. Research Policy, 32(7), 1217-1241.
Weinberger, A. (2003). Scripts for computer-supported collaborative learning: Effects of social and epistemic
         cooperation   scripts   on  collaborative   knowledge   construction.   Unpublished doctoral   dissertation.
         Germany: University of Munich.
Weinberger,  A., &    Fischer,   F. (2006).  A  framework    to analyze  argumentative  knowledge    construction in
         computer-supported collaborative learning. Computers & Education, 46(1), 71­95.

© ISLS                                                                                                          477
