CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                               Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

 Identification of patterns of tool use and sketching practices in a
                                       learning by design task
   Kate Thompson, David Ashe, Dewa Wardak, Pippa Yeoman, Martin Parisio, CoCo Research Centre, The
                   University of Sydney, Building A35, The University of Sydney, NSW 2006
       Email: kate.thompson@sydney.edu.au, david.ashe@sydney.edu.au, dwar9402@uni.sydney.edu.au,
                          philippa.yeoman@sydney.edu.au, martin.parisio@sydney.edu.au

         Abstract:    The   complex   interaction of  tool  use  (both physical   and  digital) in  face-to-face
         collaborative learning situations, and the role that these tools play in facilitating group work is
         increasingly important as tools for learning become more sophisticated and specialized. In this
         paper, a group of five high school students is studied as they engage in a learning by design
         task to design an educational resource about a local waterway. They carried out this design
         work   in The    Design  Studio at  the  University   of   Sydney,   using an iPad   projected  onto  a
         whiteboard    wall. Multiple   streams   of data  were  collected,   visualized and  analyzed,   which
         allowed   the  overall patterns of  tool  use  for  all members    of the  group  to   be identified in
         relation  to the   development   of their   design. Two     patterns of  tool use are  identified   and
         analyzed according to the practice of sketching identified in other fields of design.

Introduction
As learners  engage    in more  complex    tasks, the  ability   to capture  the processes of   learning  is increasingly
challenging. This paper presents initial research into the combination of tools used by high school students
during their design work in a dedicated design space. As part of a project funded by a regional government
organization, a group of school students engaged in the design of a learning resource about a waterway of local
significance, to be shared with other schools throughout the region. Students were observed and guided through
a design process, intended to help them learn about issues relating to water quality in their area. Students did
their design  work   in a   physical space resourced    with tools   for educational   designers.  Many   aspects of  the
processes of design are of importance to learning, particularly in learning by design tasks. As yet, these have not
been discussed in the research literature. In this research, work on combinations of tool use in the process of
learning in online environments, is aligned with knowledge of the importance of sketching in other areas of
design, in order to identify patterns of productive activity in learning by design tasks.
         The paper begins with a brief overview of research involving integrated tool use and the processes of
collaboration (Thompson      &   Kelly,  2012a,   2012b;   Zenios    &   Holmes,   2010;  Thompson,    Ashe,   Carvalho,
Goodyear, Kelly & Parisio, accepted), as well as background to learning by design (LBD), and the role of
sketching during the design process. The physical and digital space in which the study was conducted will be
described, as well as the participants and context of the LBD task. Multiple streams of data are then visualized
and analyzed to describe the integrated, and specialized way in which students used and appropriated the tools
available to them, for their purposes.

Literature Review
Much   of the   work    examining    the processes    of  learning    during  complex    collaboration   with  regard to
combinations  of   tool use,  has been   performed   in  online  spaces  (see  for  example   Zenios  &   Holmes,  2010;
Thompson & Kelly, 2012a; 2012b). These studies have examined the affordances of using a combination of
online tools for discussion and idea development (such as chat or video conferencing tools), for the permanent
recording of the progress of the group, and for in-depth investigation of a problem (such as wikis). In these
studies, the permanence of the recording space (the wiki) was important for the progression of the collaboration;
more   complex    discussions   were  able   to take  place  once     ideas  were   recorded.   The  recordings  enabled
participants to refer back to previous ideas. In work on face-to-face collaboration, Thompson et al. (accepted)
have shown that differentiated tool use can be an indicator of successful collaboration, in a group, as students
develop expertise in the role and tasks related to the tool used.
         Analyzing the processes of learning in CSCL is important, in particular as the context of learning
environments are able to be better described (Thompson et al., accepted). Work in this field has discussed this
importance in terms of social interactions, analyzing the discourse, as well as non-verbal interaction (for a
review of this, see Goodyear, Jones & Thompson, forthcoming). By extracting additional data from complex
datasets, analysis of additional processes of learning can be added to our understanding of collaborative learning
(Thompson    et al.,  accepted;  Kennedy-Clark     &   Thompson,      accepted).  This paper    addresses the  processes
involved in tool use in a dedicated design space.
         Design    activity has been  demonstrated    to  facilitate  deep  learning about  complex    systems   (Hmelo,
Holton, & Kolodner, 2000; Kolodner et al., 2003). The goal-orientation of design-based science learning, where

© ISLS                                                                                                               478
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                           Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

the content is fundamental to producing a working artifact, acts to contextualize the process of inquiry. "Design
is used as a vehicle through which scientific knowledge is constructed and real-world problem-solving skills are
cultivated. The design challenge provides impetus for identifying what needs to be learned and for sustaining
engagement    in inquiry  over   time, as  well  as providing need   for cultivating and  using  a variety  of skills."
(Vattam & Kolodner, 2008, p. 407). Vattam and Kolodner (2008) describe LBD as internally driven by a "need
to know" and a "need to do". During this iterative process students share experiences and ideas as they articulate
what they will need to learn in order to successfully complete the design challenge. In describing this process
they highlight   the importance    of  the   design rule of thumb,   which  assists learners to  connect content    and
application.
        The   early  conceptual   phase   of  design is  cognitively very demanding.    During  this phase,   ideas are
generated rapidly. Designers need to try out new ideas quickly and cheaply before committing to one for further
development (McGown, Green, & Rodgers, 1998). During this process, the intentions of the designers are
represented,  or  externalized,  in   the  form  of  verbal explanations,   written documents,   sketches,  drawings,
diagrams, and sometimes as models. Free-hand sketches are an indispensible tool at this stage not only for
externalizing design    ideas in order    to communicate    with others, but also   for examining  the potential of   a
solution before further commitment. For designers, drawing is the act of exploration (Hokanson, 2008), of
discovery (Berger, 2007), and an aid to their thought process (Buxton, 2007). Designers draw in order to spot
problems, see new features and relations among elements, discover or promote new ideas, and refine current
ideas (Suwa & Tversky, 2002).
        The importance of sketching in design is not the sketch as a final product of design, but as a process
that explores, questions, suggests, proposes, and provokes thoughts and ideas (Buxton, 2007). In other words,
"sketching is thinking" (Goldschmidt, 1991, p. 130). This process enables the designer to find new aspects of
the problem and to generate new ideas (Suwa, Gero, & Purcell, 2000). Designers from various fields rely on the
use of visual representations as thinking tools in their design process. For example, Henderson (1999) quotes an
engineer who stated "I can't think without my drawing board". Sketches can greatly improve communication in
collaborative team situations (Eppler & Burkhard, 2006); they can be used to assist a group's reflection and
communication process. This is because sketches and drawings bring the main features of the object of design to
the conversation by making them explicit and thus debatable.

Methods
A group of 16 students and 11 adults participated in the project funded by a regional organization of councils,
and supported by their high-school and a local environmental rehabilitation organization. The aim of the project
was to develop an innovative fieldwork and multimedia framework to engage other students in water and land
management issues. South Creek, the focus of the project has been described as the most degraded creek in the
region. Threats to its health include vegetation clearance, urbanization and agriculture; resulting in concerns
about increased nutrient levels and an increase in the number of weed species within the riparian zone. Over a
number  of   months  students   and   stakeholders  participated in  a  multidisciplinary design process   to create  a
learning resource for use in schools across the region. The students participated in planning sessions, a site visit,
and a day of hands-on site restoration at the creek, before attending a Design Day at the University of Sydney.
        The Design Day was an opportunity for the students to develop their ideas about the design of the
educational resource, propose possible formats, identify constraints and generate a consensus upon which a brief
for the multimedia designer could be written. Participants included expert learners (the students), who ranged in
age from 12 to 17 years, and experts from education, environmental science and multimedia design. The Design
Day began with each of the expert groups outlined their desires and constraints for the design of the educational
resource, and these initial parameters were summarised and referred to during the rest of the day. In the Design
Studio(1) participants were led through the first three stages of a design process: empathize, define, and ideate
(following the Stanford University Institute of Design ­ An Introduction to Design Thinking(2)). The empathize
stage took the form of a whole group brainstorming activity during which the initial desires and constraints were
discussed and the critical components extracted. Participants worked in pairs for the define stage; each dyad
performed a needs analysis to help define the resource. During the third stage, ideate, the participants worked in
groups according     to discipline  area.    One group   contained  all the adults  including educators,   multimedia
designers and environmental scientists. The other three groups each included between five and six students ­
expert learners. During the ideate stage, participants were asked to generate ideas. They were asked not to limit
themselves to their knowledge of technology and were instructed to record all ideas. The intention was to
explore a wide solution space so that, later in the Design Day, these ideas could be distilled into one coherent
solution and a brief presented to the multimedia designer for the creation of a resource prototype.
        This paper follows one of the student groups during the ideate stage of the design day. There were five
members of the group, three females and two males, whose ages ranged from 12 to 16. Video, audio and
photographs of the collaborative design work were collected. Each group was given a choice regarding the
digital tool they used (computer, interactive whiteboard, or iPad). This group chose to use an iPad that was

© ISLS                                                                                                              479
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                               Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

projected onto a wall painted in whiteboard paint (a `white-wall', see Figure 1). Their interactions with both the
physical tools (whiteboard/pens/erasers) and digital tools (iPad and projected screen) were recorded using video.
In addition, two members of the group wore audio recorders, and photographs were taken every 12 seconds of
the whitewall on which students were working.
       Data describing the tool use, for each member of the group, in 30 second intervals was extracted from
the video. The tool, action (writing or erasing), and location (inside or outside the projected area) were coded.
The transcription of their discourse was analyzed in order to identify ideas important in the development of their
design. These were then discussed and agreed upon by all authors of the paper in a group meeting (Thompson,
Ashe, Yeoman & Parisio, accepted). In addition, the photographs of the whitewall taken every 12 seconds, were
coded using The Collaborative   Process Analysis Coding Scheme  (CPACS)        (Kennedy-Clark  &  Thompson,
accepted). CPACS is a multi-level coding scheme that includes macro-levels (action and content) as well as
micro-levels (pronouns, tense, modality, and attitude) of collaboration; only the macro-level code, Content, was
used in this paper. The Content section of CPACS contains six codes: phatics (social ­ phatics, salutations,
leave taking), planning, topic, task, tool use, and off-task. The photographs were coded by one researcher, and
half were coded by a second researcher. Inter-rater reliability of 55% was achieved in the first instance, and 86%
after further discussion. The ideas were plotted, over time, in combination with the tools used by each person
and taking into account the content to which they were contributing. We used this visualization to determine
patterns of tool use, and analysed the photographs taken of the whitewall from the perspective of sketching
practices of designers.

Analysis
The design studio was equipped with a variety of design tools and participants were able to use them as they
wished. This group of students was assigned to an area of the studio that had a white-wall (the entire wall set up
as a whiteboard) an assortment of coloured marker pens and the ability to project either a desktop computer or a
tablet computer, onto the wall (see Figure 3). They were also given blank paper and pens, sticky notes and
various paper-based templates along with reference materials, which included maps and curricula resources. The
students made no use of the paper-based tools; at no point did any of the group use, or even make reference to
using, the paper-based resources provided. All activity revolved around the digital projection onto the white-
wall; even the use of the physical marker pens was influenced by the projected image.

                                 Figure 1. Tool use by participants over time
Figure 1 shows tool use during their collaborative design task. Each student is represented by a different color,
and each section of the graph represents the use of a different tool. Circles, at the bottom, show the use of the
iPad. Sue (black) was the main user of this tool. Other students had brief turns, Mark (green, 4, 27 minutes),
Philip (yellow, 11 minutes) and Beth (red, 36 minutes). The next two sections on Figure 1 refer to writing on the

© ISLS                                                                                                 480
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                         Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

whitewall, inside and outside of the space illuminated by the iPad projection (Figure 3). All members of the
group undertook this activity; there were periods of time when four of the five students were writing on the
whitewall in the projected space simultaneously. Some work was performed outside the projected space, the
most notable from about minute 34 by Mark (green). Finally, erasing activity is shown in Figure 1. While all
members erased markings from the whitewall, Mark was primarily responsible for this activity.
         Based on an analysis of the video recording, the session was divided into five phases; setup, briefing,
design (I), technical problems, and design (II). Initially Sue requested that a computer (used by another group,
operated via a wireless keyboard and mouse) be projected onto the whitewall. Her opinion was that the task
would be simpler with a desktop system rather than an iPad. Sue took control of the computer keyboard in
anticipation that the group would accept her request. When the group elected for the iPad to be projected, Sue
relinquished control of the iPad to Mark. Sue soon asked Mark to hand her the iPad, which he did. During setup
and briefing, the iPad was not used significantly; it was mostly used during the two design phases. In both of
these phases Sue was, by far, the dominant user. During the task, there were only two minutes of the design
work in which Sue relinquished the iPad; and during this time she was actively writing on the whitewall.
         The students recorded their ideas by writing and drawing with both the physical marker pens on the
whitewall and the digital pens on the iPad. These physical and digital tools were used in combination. Even
though the entire wall was available, the students mainly confined their design work to an area formed by the
projection of the iPad. As this space was relatively small, it became necessary to keep a record of what was
written on the whitewall before erasing to make more space. Sue copied the text from the whitewall onto the
iPad, making a permanent digital record of the writing. This text could be projected onto the whitewall, from the
iPad, after the original had been erased. By taking control of the iPad, Sue effectively controlled the pace of the
design task and also had some autonomy over which sections of the written text were preserved in digital form.
         At various times, one or more students broke away from the accepted practice of writing within the
projected area to build up an independent section on the whitewall. This could be regarded as a prototyping
area, a place to sort out ideas before committing them to the projected area (and hence into the iPad), or as a
method of rebelling against the group with ideas that had not been accepted.
         Sue was an   active member       of the group. Once  the task began,  she took   control of the   iPad and
dominated the creation of the digital artifact. Twice Sue relinquished the iPad; during the first, she became very
active writing on the whitewall, effectively controlling the wall space, and the other was when the iPad had a
technical fault. Sue stopped using the device when it was no longer being projected onto the whitewall. During
this time, Sue did not use the iPad, however she did hold onto it, releasing it for technical assistance.
         The use of the tools in relation to the development of ideas was visualized (Figure 2). Each photograph
was also coded to illustrate any contributions the students made to the development of the content through
writing, in addition to discourse. Figure     2  shows  the ideas (the larger circles), with each  individual   idea
represented by a horizontal line. Photographs of the whitewall were coded for the content of what was drawn,
written and displayed. The CPACS content codes were phatics (x.1), tools (x.3), planning (x.5), topic (x.7) and
task (x.9). Each person is represented by a different color, in addition to the five members shown in Figure 1,
Steve, the facilitator, is also included.

© ISLS                                                                                                          481
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                              Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

 Figure 2. Additions made by participants during idea development, according to the content added over time

Figure 2 shows that the design process was not linear, that students often returned to earlier ideas and continued
discussion. The whitewall was mostly used for recording information about the task and the topic, rather than
for planning, phatics, or further reference to the tools. Often, the iPad was used just before a new idea was
suggested; this could be because students were waiting for decisions to be recorded before they moved on.
There are two occasions that were chosen for in-depth analysis of sketching practices due to the distinct patterns
in students' use of the tools. The first, collaboration, occurs from 18 minutes to 23 minutes, when students
simultaneously write on the whitewall while the iPad is also being used. It is at this time that they return to the
ideas that were generated earlier in the collaboration. The second, specialization, occurs from 31 minutes to 37
minutes, when two members of the group dominate the use of two of the tools, for different purposes (Sue, with
the iPad, focuses on the task, and Mark, on the whitewall, focuses on the topic).

                                     Figure 3: Collaboration

© ISLS                                                                                                  482
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                     Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

The collaboration analysis included an indepth analysis of 30 photographs, taken every 12 seconds (images
4248-4277). The students (shown in Figure 3) are collaborating to produce the `objectives' for their idea of a
game. It is notable that the students demonstrate behavior similar to practicing designers in many design fields.
For example, the students use a variety of ways, using the available tools, to communicate their ideas to the
other members of the team. Their verbal expressions are supported by drawings and text on the whitewall. This
is similar to `talking sketches' produced in the early stages of engineering design where ideas are exchanged and
negotiated using sketches, text and diagrams (Ferguson, 1992). Visual representations, such as these drawings
and marks on the whitewall, hold the design ideas stable so they can be argued and negotiated.
        Students made   several types of marks on  the whiteboard   during  collaboration.    A bulleted   list of
possible platforms for the game was produced, including computer, iPad, and Xbox. Some of the main ideas are
written in capitals and enclosed by irregular shapes. Important terms and headings are underlined for emphasis.
Groups of ideas, such as similar device types, are bracketed to illustrate similarities and relationships. At one
point, lines were drawn across the bottom of the screen, projected on the wall, to symbolise the creek.
        At this initial stage, ideas were still developing as they were being negotiated; some ideas were further
developed and some were erased and replaced by new versions. For example, Phillip adds (and underlines) the
words `get funds' on the whiteboard. Beth develops the idea by adding `selling lemonade' underneath. Phillip
realizes that Beth has misunderstood the idea and continues with his line by adding `off entrepreneurs'. The
vagueness of the ideas and words on the whitewall does not seem to be an issue of concern for the students. In
fact, it stimulates the conversation as the students try to make sense of the design task. This is a typical situation
in most design fields where visual representations of ideas are initially vague and     not fully explained     but
become clearer as the designers' thoughts progress (Hansen, 2000). The drawings and text on the whitewall
have a fluid status. They represent ideas that are still changing. Sue is in control of the iPad and once an idea is
relatively crystallized she commits the idea to digital ink, thereby giving the idea more permanence. After Sue
copies the ideas onto the iPad, the other team members erase the text on the whiteboard wall.
        Another similarity with typical design practices that this session demonstrates, is that drawings and
marks on the whiteboard can be considered as either individually owned or as a shared entity (Eppler, 2007).
For example, at one stage Anna decides to write her objectives for the game on the board by commandeering
one section of the available space and drawing a line around it (see the lower, centre area of the projected image
in Figure 3). She makes sure that the other students know that these are her ideas and they are not to be changed
or erased. This is an example of individual ownership of a visual representation. The rest of the representations
on the whiteboard are mostly shared where anyone can add to them; no one has declared their ownership.
        This instance also shows how design representation can take both physical and digital formats (Eppler,
2007). This is clearly seen by observing how Sue records the team's ideas using the iPad, which is projected
onto the wall, while the rest of the team draw and write on the whitewall with physical pens. The interplay
between these two tools, the iPad and the whitewall, is worth noting. All of the team members are at once able
to see the wall and what is being added to the iPad. They often comment on the text added to the iPad and even
suggest more additions to the perceived permanent, master version residing on the iPad.

                                          Figure 4: Specialization

© ISLS                                                                                                       483
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                              Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

Later in the session, the design needed to be finalized and a set of objectives put in place. This specialization
session was analyzed using 25 images, taken every 12 seconds (4334-4359). Shown in Figure 4, ideas and
representations on the whitewall were slowly erased as they were stored on the iPad. The idea of permanence
given to the digital form is obvious here as the previously individually owned, and fiercely contested ideas on
the wall are erased and replaced by the compiled list on the iPad. For example, Beth tried hard to protect her
ideas written  on  the wall    throughout  the   session. At  one   stage she   proclaimed    "don't  rub   out  my  ideas".
Nevertheless,  after Sue   copied   her  ideas   onto the iPad,    Beth took  the eraser   and  wiped    the text   from the
whitewall herself. This is typical in most design areas where the initial sketches and representations are disposed
of in favor of more formal representation of the design, often expressed in textual format (McGown, Green, &
Rodgers, 1998).
         While this sorting and storing stage was underway, Mark started drawing on the whitewall away from
the collaborative area. Mark's drawings did not appear to be intended for sharing with the group since they were
drawn outside of the screen area illuminated by the iPad projection. Mark was visualizing the previous ideas
that he shared on the whitewall under the heading `Objectives'. These ideas were about "trying to keep your
part of the creek clean while urbanising around it". Mark visualized this idea by drawing a creek in blue pen
with roads surrounding it in black pen. He also drew high-rise buildings in red and added grass areas in green.
Mark did not share or discuss his drawings with anyone else. This seems to be an example of a `thinking sketch'
(Ferguson, 1992). Thinking sketches are often drawn by designers in order to better understand a situation and
to develop personal ideas. Mark appears to be drawing for a similar purpose; he used the whitewall, away from
the projected screen, because the drawing was not meant to be a permanent record; it was not intended for
sharing with the group.

Conclusions
The   collection of  multiple    streams of data    allowed   a detailed,  multimodal      analysis   of the   processes  of
collaboration. Visualisations of tool use, and design processes over time allowed the recognition of patterns, and
directed the in-depth analysis of sketching practices of students. Students used the tools available to them in
complex ways and for different purposes ­ they used the whitewall for ideas development and the iPad for
recording in a more permanent way. The iPad became central to their collaboration. When the iPad failed, the
group also ceased writing on the whitewall. Perhaps without the ability to create a permanent record, they were
reluctant to move on, despite the availability of the whole wall. During the 40 minute collaborative design task,
students developed expertise, and adopted specialized roles within the group. This was seen most clearly with
Sue and Mark. Only one person could control the iPad at any one time; multiple people could use the white-wall
simultaneously. Figure 1 shows significant overlap at the wall, with multiple people contributing to the task.
This  may   indicate that  the task was   indeed    collaborative  in nature  and  that   the use  of the   iPad  was more
pragmatic (to keep records of theideas) than an attempt to control the design task. All students were key in the
development of ideas, demonstrated in their collaborative activity at the whitewall. The ownership of ideas was
important, as was the requirement for a permanent record of them to exist.
         This paper represents the initial analysis of a large data set, collected over several meetings. Future
work will include analyzing the other groups who participated in the project, and tracking the development of
their ideas to the   final brief  given to the   multimedia   designer.  Understanding     behavior   associated    with the
intersection of the social interactions of students, the physical and digital tools, and the development of ideas as
part of the design process is vital to the design of learning by design projects in the future.

Endnotes
(1)  The  Design   Studio   is  a  multimedia    educational  design  research   facility  at  the  University   of  Sydney:
     http://sydney.edu.au/research/stl/facilities/EDRS/index.shtml
(2) Retrieved from: https://dschool.stanford.edu

References
Berger, J. (2007). Berger on drawing (2 ed.): Aghabullogue, Co. Cork : - Occasional Press.
Buxton, B. (2007). Sketching User Experiences: Getting the Design Right and the Right Design. Redmond,
         Washington: Microsoft Research.
Eppler, M. J. (2007). Toward a visual turn in collaboration analysis? Building Research & Information, 35(5),
         584-587. doi: 10.1080/09613210701355724
Eppler, M., & Burkhard, R. (2006). Knowledge Visualization Encyclopedia of Knowledge Management: Idea
         Group Inc.
Ferguson, E. S. (1992). Engineering and the mind's eye. Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press.
Goldschmidt,   G.    (1991).   The  dialectics   of sketching.     Creativity Research     Journal,   4(2),  123-143.    doi:
         10.1080/10400419109534381

© ISLS                                                                                                                   484
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                      Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

Goodyear,  P.,  Jones,  C.  &   Thompson,    K.  (forthcoming)   Computer-supported       collaborative  learning:
       Instructional approaches, group processes and educational designs. In Spector, M., Merrill, D., Elan, J.,
       &Bishop, M. J. (Ed) Handbook of Research on Educational Communications and Technology.
Hansen, Y. M. (2000). Visualization for Thinking, Planning and Problem Solving. In R. E. Jacobson (Ed.),
       Information design (pp. 193-220): MIT Press.
Henderson, K. (1999). On line and on paper: visual representations, visual culture, and computer graphics in
       design engineering. Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press.
Hmelo, C. E.,  Holton, D.  L., &   Kolodner, J. L. (2000). Designing   to Learn     about Complex    Systems.  The
       Journal of the Learning Sciences, 9(3), 247-298.
Hokanson, B. (2008). The Virtue of Paper: Drawing as a means to innovation in instructional design In L.
       Botturi & T. Stubbs (Eds.), Handbook of Visual Languages for Instructional Design: Theories and
       Practices (pp. 76-89). New York Information Science Reference.
Kennedy-Clark, S. & Thompson, K. (accepted). Using multimodal discourse analysis to identify patterns of
       problem solving processes in a computer-supported collaborative environment. In Sudweeks, F. &
       Lim, H. (Eds) Innovative Methods and Technologies for Electronic Discourse Analysis.
Kolodner, J. L., Camp, P. J., Crismond, D., Fasse, B., Gray, J., Holbrook, J., Puntambekar, S., et al. (2003).
       Problem-based learning meets case-based reasoning in the middle-school science classroom: Putting
       learning by design into practice. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 12(4), 495­547.
McGown, A., Green, G., & Rodgers, P. A. (1998). Visible ideas: information patterns of conceptual sketch
       activity. Design Studies, 19(4), 431-453. doi: 10.1016/s0142-694x(98)00013-1
Suwa, M., Gero, J., & Purcell, T. (2000). Unexpected discoveries and S-invention of design requirements:
       important  vehicles    for  a design  process. Design  Studies, 21(6),       539-567. doi:  10.1016/s0142-
       694x(99)00034-4
Suwa, M., & Tversky, B. (2002). External Representations Contribute to the Dynamic Construction of Ideas.
       Paper   presented   at  the Proceedings  of  the Second   International      Conference  on  Diagrammatic
       Representation and Inference.
Thompson, K., Ashe, D., Carvalho, L., Goodyear, P., Kelly, N., & Parisio, M. L. (accepted). Processing and
       visualizing data in complex learning environments. American Behavioral Scientist.
Thompson, K., Ashe, D., Yeoman, P., & Parisio, M. (accepted). Phases of design: Following idea development
       and patterns of collaborative discussion in a learning by design project. The 10th Int'l Conference on
       Computer Supported Collaborative Learning, Madison, Wisconsin.
Thompson,  K., &  Kelly,   N.  (2012a). Combining  collaboration spaces:  identifying     patterns of tool use for
       decision-making in a networked learning environment. Paper presented at the Eighth International
       Conference on Networked Learning.
Thompson, K., & Kelly, N. (2012b). Processes of decision-making with adaptive combinations of wiki and chat
       tools. Paper presented at The Future of Learning: Proceedings of the 10th International Conference of
       the Learning Sciences (ICLS 2012).
Vattam, S. S., & Kolodner, J. L. (2008). On foundations of technological support for addressing challenges
       facing design-based science learning. Pragmatics & Cognition, 16(2), 406­437.
Zenios, M., & Holmes, B. (2010). Knowledge creation in networked learning: combined tools and affordances.
       Paper presented at the 7th International Conference on Networked Learning 2010.

Acknowledgments
This work was funded by the Australian Research Council grant FL100100203. We would like to acknowledge
the intellectual contribution of Peter Goodyear to the ideas developed in this paper, as well as the dedicated
work of the students, teachers, and other experts who participated in this project.

© ISLS                                                                                                         485
