CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                                   Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

       Using automated and fine-grained analysis of pronoun use as
         indicators of progress in an online collaborative project
       Kate Thompson, CoCo Research Centre, The University of Sydney, kate.thompson@sydney.edu.au
   Shannon Kennedy-Clark, Learning and Teaching Centre, Australian Catholic University, shannon.kennedy-
                                                      clark@acu.edu.au
           Nick Kelly, CoCo Research Centre, The University of Sydney, nick.kelly@sydney.edu.au
Penny Wheeler, Learning and Teaching Centre, Australian Catholic University, penny.wheeler@acu.edu.au

          Abstract: Multimodal discourse analysis has been shown to be useful in adding depth to our
          understanding of the processes of computer supported collaborative learning. We take one of
          the codes used in a multimodal coding scheme (CPACS), and apply automated data extraction
          techniques to a large corpus of data aimed at one code in the micro-level (pronouns). The
          results of    this are plotted  over   time,   and patterns    of  pronoun    use  identified for further
          investigation using an in-depth systemic functional linguistics (SFL) approach. Complications
          concerned with singular and plural second person are discussed, and patterns of pronoun use
          that indicate movement of the group from one phase of design work to the next are identified.
          Further refinement of the techniques of automated extraction are required to capture additional
          patterns noted in the SFL analysis.

Introduction
Multimodal   discourse       analysis adds  depth    to our  understanding       of the processes  of   computer  supported
collaborative learning. The use of a coding scheme such as CPACS (Kennedy-Clark & Thompson, accepted)
combines macro- and micro-level approaches to discourse analysis in a systematic way. In this paper our focus
is at the micro-level, particularly the use of pronouns in online group interactions. Other work has focused on
the macro   components       of CPACS,    such   as  decision-making      or  content   (see Kennedy-Clark   &  Thompson,
accepted). We apply automated extraction of pronoun usage to a well-researched corpus of data from a month-
long online group collaboration on a design task. Patterns of pronoun use were identified, and an in-depth
analysis from a systemic functional linguistics perspective was applied. We related these micro-level patterns to
the macro-level patterns previously identified in the data (Reimann, 2009; Thompson & Kelly, 2012).

Background information
Without entering into the debate of the actual definition of a pronoun, personal pronouns can be viewed as a
person   marker   (Kummerow,      2012):    that is,  as a   part of speech,      pronouns   identify speaker(s), hearer(s)/
addressee(s) and `spoken of'. One of the functions of pronouns is to establish a continuity of reference; that is,
they show how locally constructed reference forms are used to construct relationships between episodes and
sequences of events over time: as Kitzinger, Shaw & Toerien (2012) state, "People don't just find themselves
having a focus ­ rather, they create it" (p. 133). An analysis of the use of person markers is of interest in CSCL
as  it enables researchers    to construct   a visual   representation    of  how   participants  arrange their actions and
relationships within an online group through the choices they make in presenting themselves and others in the
discourse. Traditional English grammars distinguish pronouns in terms of person, number, gender (in the third
person) and case (Table 1):

Table 1: Traditional grammatical categorization of English pronouns

SINGULAR                                                                     PLURAL
Person            Subject             Object            Possessive           Subject          Object          Possessive
First             I                   me                mine                 we               us              ours
Second            you                 you               yours                you              you             yours
Third             he / she / it       him / her / it    his / hers / its     they             them            theirs

          Systemic functional linguistics (SFL) focuses on description and emphasizes choices within a specific
situation or cultural context (the `systemic' in its title summarizing the concept that each instance of writing or
talk or other text is a selection from a set of alternative features which are systematically related to each other by
the particular language or language subset). The foundation of SFL is four connected observations on language,
that language is (Eggins, 2005): (i) functional, that it serves a use; (ii) semantic, that its function is to make
meaning; (iii) contextual, that meaning is influenced by social and cultural context; and (iv) semiotic, that using
language involves a choice of which signifiers to use. These principles encourage an "activist bent" (Jacobs &
Ward,   2000)  in   its practitioners   and  educators,   who  can,      for example,   help  students  examine   unfamiliar

© ISLS                                                                                                                  486
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                        Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

academic registers as the first step to mastery, or reveal how language enables justice to be restored or to fail to
be done, although SFL analysis can also be used, as here in an examination of CSCL, for humbler purposes.
         In SFL, personal pronouns can be analyzed as key features in the `interpersonal' metafunction of the
text, "enacting our personal and social relationships with the other people around us" (Halliday & Matthiessen,
2004, p. 29), and as linked to other interpersonal components such as the Mood element (which in English is
made up of the Subject and Finite operator of a clause, and realizes the declarative, interrogative, or imperative
mood of a clause); modality (the uncertainty or possibility in a clause, for example `can' or `must'), and the role
of clauses in offering and exchanging services and information. The other two linguistic metafunctions in SFL
theory are the ideational, which looks at the categories and processes being identified and experienced by the
speakers, and the textual, those parts of a text that provide cohesion and organization for the discourse as a
whole. Personal pronouns can be examined for the agency that they realize in the clause, and also for their
cohesive role in providing a continuous thread of reference to the participants in the conversation, written text
or, as here, computer-mediated chat.
         Word counting has been used in text analysis in the social sciences for many decades. Two notable
examples are DICTION (Hart, 2001) and LIWC (Chung & Pennebaker, 2012; Pennebaker & Francis, 1996),
both of which use pre- and user-defined dictionaries to count and subsequently analyze corpora of text for
features such as attentional focus, emotionality, social relationships, thinking styles, and individual differences
(Tausczik    & Pennebaker,  2010). Natural   language processing    has significantly advanced    over the  past few
decades (Jurafsky & Martin, 2008; Manning & Schütze, 1999), and advanced techniques have recently begun to
be applied to the learning sciences, such as the mapping of words in vector spaces to discover use of concepts
through  clustering  (Sherin,  2012)  and    the use  of  parts-of-speech  (PoS) tagging   for    segmentation   and
classification. In this work we make use of the Python programming language (Bird, Klein, & Loper, 2009) to
apply some of these techniques to our analysis of pronouns used during CSCL. We use these tools as aids in
reconstructing the contextual use of person markers in relating to other members of the group, before more
closely examining    their functions in this context  via a grammatical   analysis based  on      systemic functional
linguistics.

Methods
The corpus of data used in this analysis is the online chat record of a group of four postgraduate students (one
male, three females) collaborating over one month on a design task. The task was to identify an existing system
dynamics model and turn it into an educational resource both by adding to the model and providing materials to
accompany the model. Students had access to a chat and a wiki to support their work. Previous research has
described the data collection (Reimann, Weinel & Thompson, 2007) and the patterns of decision-making in the
chats (Reimann, Frerejean & Thompson, 2009) as well as in the wiki (Thompson & Kelly, 2012). This paper
returns to focus just on the chat data. The collaborative exercise took place over one month in 2006; students
met as a whole group on eight occasions, and 2182 utterances were used in the automated process.
         The Collaborative Process Analysis Coding Scheme (CPACS) was used to code the synchronous chat
data. (For a full description of the coding scheme, see Kennedy-Clark & Thompson, accepted). This coding
system considered several SFL phenomena, such as those described by Halliday (1994) and elaborated upon by
Martin and Rose (2007). CPACS functions on two levels. At the macro level, the action code concerns goal
identification and solution, and the content code covers the content of the utterance. At the micro level, the
attitudinal code describes the type of attitude each utterance was taking towards the problem-solving design; the
tense is the marker of temporality; the modality is the degree of certainty; and pronouns relate to personal
references. In this study we use the pronouns code: 1 (first person singular); 2 (second person singular); 3 (third
person singular); 4 (first person plural); 5 (second person plural); and 6 (third person plural).
         We hypothesized that by combining the macro elements of discourse (e.g. Poole & Holmes, 1995) with
the micro or grammatical levels that are often the target of discourse analysis (e.g. Nivre et al. 1999) we could
obtain a better understanding of the conversations than if we analyzed the macro levels only, using a coding
system such as the Decision Function Coding System (Poole & Holmes, 1995) as we had done in our earlier
analysis (see, for example Kennedy-Clark & Thompson, 2011; Thompson, Kennedy-Clark, Markauskaite, &
Southavilay, 2011). We found that by drilling down into the discourse and examining the conversations at a
finer grain size we could get a detailed understanding of the function of language in establishing roles and
responsibilities within a group.
         Naturally occurring classroom language and patterns of discourse produced by the students were mined
for linguistic and social insights about how the online groups managed their shared task through the language
that they used (Gee, 2005; Schallert, et al., 2009). SFL analysis was carried out by considering correspondences
in the data between the variables of DFCS, personal pronoun use, and author, and investigating the language in
use at  this point. To carry  out these  analyses, one   researcher worked  on the    utterances  as filtered by the
quantitative analyses, and provided additional columns of annotation on specific linguistic aspects, namely:
modality; mood of the clause, that is, imperative, interrogative, or declarative; annotations to the automated

© ISLS                                                                                                           487
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                            Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

pronoun identification data, where, for example, the author has omitted the Subject that should be understood
and produced    an  elliptical utterance,  particularly by  omitting  a first person singular pronoun;   cohesion,  by
marking the chain of reference for each neutral third person pronoun used; and process type, from the three
principal categorizations in SFL of material; mental; and relational processes.
        These general categorizations are ones that are immediately evident to the reader, and these types of
annotations are rapidly made: by working directly on the filtered data source, the researcher can compare the
occurrence  of  different linguistic  aspects  within   the target variables,  counting occurrences    and looking  for
`marked'   clauses, that  is,  linguistic constructions which    show a  non-typical structure. This   level of  human
linguistic analysis was   possible   because  the  preceding    automated  analysis  and visual interpretation   of the
quantitative aspects of the linguistic data reduced the number of segments and sequences that require individual
assessment, and because the categorizations are at the most general level of SFL analysis. Aspects of appraisal
and analysis of circumstantial elements (such as realizations of location, manner, or cause), both of which can
provide deep insights into interactions and experiences as represented in more highly structured oral and written
texts, did not form part of this SFL analysis.

Analysis

Automated extraction of data and identification of patterns
Two phases of automation were used in the analysis of this corpus of chat text(1). The first involved counting
pronouns, whilst the second used PoS tagging to assist in understanding the word counts. Pronouns function as
both person markers and indications of focus. A count of the pronouns uttered by each author gave an overview
of how the author positioned their own experience of the collaboration, whom they addressed during the group
exchanges, and when they addressed entities outside the exchange. The count was conducted using a Python
script to iterate through chat text and count each utterance. The pronouns counted were each assigned to a
CPACS pronouns code: 1 (my, me, mine); 2 (you); 3 (her, him, it, he, she); 4 (us, we, ours) and 6 (they, them).
The result of this analysis was a count of each CPACS code for each author. A limitation of this automated
approach to pronoun counting is that it loses the context of the utterance. This means that it always assumes that
the use of a pronoun by a participant is in their own voice, when in some cases it may be a quote of something
that another participant or third party has said. An analysis based upon use of the words 'said' and 'says' shows
that this use of another voice occurs 23 times in the corpus.
        Further    analysis   was possible  by breaking    these numbers   down   in two ways:    (i) seeing how   they
changed    over time; and   (ii) seeing   how  they changed   within  context.  Students met   in eight  separate   chat
sessions and separating the count of pronouns in each session allowed for the analysis of changes that occurred
over time. In addition, each utterance within this corpus of text had previously been grouped into five tasks:
choosing,  adding,  implementing,     overall  and  coordinating   (Reimann,   Frerejean  &   Thompson,    2009).   The
counting of pronouns was indexed to these categories, allowing for an analysis of the changing use of pronouns
within these different contexts.

                    Figure 1: visualization of pronoun use for each participant, for each session
Figure 1,  in combination      with results from  coding    and  counting not  presented here,  was   used   to identify
instances of variation. Figure 1 shows the percentage of pronoun use (the CPACS code is along the y-axis,

© ISLS                                                                                                              488
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                          Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

session number along the x-axis) for each member of the group. Each section (for example, between 1 (me, my,
our) and 2(you)) represents 100% of the pronouns extracted. An issue with second person is that the same word
is used for both singular and plural, and so all second person was recorded as `2': this is the first complication to
be discussed   below.   Five patterns  were  observed   during   examination   of  the extracted  pronoun    data. (1)
Pronouns and tasks: the combined percentages were different when examined across tasks (not presented in
Figure 1).  Higher   percentages   of use  were observed   in coordination  and    implementation than   choosing   or
additions. Within coordination, Charles and Jane used this more than other members, while Beth had the highest
proportion in implementation. (2) Use of first person changes over time: if we examine the patterns across time,
within each pronoun code, it can be seen that the use of first person, while remaining quite consistent, differs
amongst the group members. (3) The task of choosing had a different distribution of pronouns than other tasks:
coding and counting results indicated that with respect to task, choosing had a different distribution amongst
team members than other tasks. (4) Session 5 was different to other sessions with respect to pronoun use: Figure
1 shows a different distribution amongst team members in Session 5. (5) First person plural is used differently
over time: Sessions 7 and 8 show a slightly lower percentage across all group members than other sessions. The
use of third person showed a higher proportion apparent when participants were discussing implementation.

`You' ­ plural or singular?
PoS tagging (Mu, et al., 2012; Schmid, 1994) was utilized in the deeper analysis of the word `you' within the
corpus. Because English no longer has a singular and plural form of the second personal pronoun, a simple
count of the occurrences of `you' does not distinguish between the author's focus upon one person or upon
some or all of the people in the exchange. A Python script was used to apply PoS tagging to the corpus(2), to
produce  an  output  consisting of,   each time the   word `you'  is uttered;  the two   words  before and   after this
utterance of the word `you', and the PoS indicated. The assumption in doing this was that the PoS tagging
would reveal patterns that could allow for automation of the context of the word `you', and it was partially
successful  in this, highlighting   two   linguistic features particularly relevant   to  the successful  conduct   of
computer-mediated discussion: a marked use of the vocative, and the conversational workarounds that English
speakers use   to indicate  plural reference for the  `you'   pronoun. In  the latter case, the PoS  tagging  clearly
revealed the uses of `you both' (1 instance), `you all' (4 instances), `you guys' (25 instances: note this reference
is non-gender-specific) as well as `you girls' (6 instances) and `you ladies' (4 instances), both of these authored
by the  sole male    speaker  within  the  group of   4 collaborators, and    all of  these examples   of the author
disambiguating the `you' pronoun to indicate all addressees in the context of the discussion in order to check for
their consent, for example, or direct their action. (In subsequent human analysis, reviewing the PoS tagging
output, an additional refinement of this distinction between `you' singular and plural was identified in the use of
`u', a text-chat specific variant of the pronoun, which was used by one author as a singular `you' reference
only.) The PoS tagging also highlighted where authors were employing the vocative as a means to target their
utterance to only one of their collaborators: a few examples of this linguistic choice, one frequently found in this
corpus, are `jane, do you have that link handy?' (segment 14); `what d'ya say beth and jane?'(98); `beth do you
what [want]    to start with your  questions?'  (2958);  `lydia, jane, what   about   you guys?'  (5065);  `beth   you
mentioned you had some resources' (7743); and `charles what do you think about beths question?' (6212).
         This marked usage of the vocative in CSCL is paralleled by a similarly marked rejection of the use of
personal pronouns in favour of names as the subject or object of a clause. For example, in standard conversation
or writing, the context often makes unnecessary the specific naming of your partner in an action: it is the de-
contextualised nature of CMD that makes it preferable to choose `lydia and me' instead of standard `we' in an
utterance such as `In that way Lydia and me should find additional resources' (2989) or to use a name rather
than a third person pronoun to emphasize to which person's utterance your response refers:        `my that's right is
with charles answer' (6510) or to reject `you', when Jane and Lydia are both present, in favour of `we need to
see if jane or lydia want to add anything / amalgumate anything' (7279).

Guiding behavior
An important way in which personal pronouns provide a shortcut to an analysis of what is going on in the
discussion is by indicating the kind of exchanges occurring in the text, and the salient personal pronoun is `you'.
Figure 1 shows that both Charles and Jane are strong users of `you', particularly in segments that are coded as
overall and coordination phases in the DFCS. SFL sees an analysis of what is being `exchanged' by these `you'
clauses as a fundamental indication of the roles and statuses adopted by the authors of these clauses.
         Clauses can be structured as an exchange of information or as an exchange of goods-and-services: most
simply, the choices can be represented as giving information (making a statement) or giving goods or services
(making  an  offer); or  as  demanding/requesting     information (questioning)    or demanding   goods   or services
(issuing a command, also discussed in the previous section). An example of how clauses function in these
exchanges can be seen in Table 4.

© ISLS                                                                                                             489
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                         Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

Table 4: Utterances from Session 5, Jane's use of `you' as part of overall decisions (planning, trouble-shooting)

Author   Clause                                       Role in exchange      `You' refers to:
Jane     did you tell lydia about what Kate told      question  ­ asking    `you' (here, Sayer and Subject), `you
         you guys ?                                   for information       guys' (here,  Audience)    = Beth    and
                                                                            Charles
Jane     have   you guys      seen the storytelling   question              you  guys (Subject)  =    Beth, Charles
         feature how it works?                                              and Lydia
Jane     beth you were interest in seeing how         statement,            you (Subject) = Beth
         storytelling works see the immigration       command       (`see
         and Easter Island models                     the ... models')
Jane     but I don't see how lydia and I help you     ==                    you guys = Beth and Charles
         guys
Jane     I could work with you charles                offer                 you = Charles

It is clear, in tracing the referent(s) of the `you' pronoun, that additional mapping beyond pronoun counting and
PoS tagging would be required to precisely outline who was working with whom, but what is evident from
looking at the clauses as exchange is the role that the author can variously assign herself/himself.
        Another example where the distribution indicates a strong use of `you' is Charles (see Table 5), in
coordination mode, requesting goods-and-services from others in the group. It appears that his earliest demands
on his group members (here, Beth) are couched as a request rather than a requirement, but he does not use this
strategy in later sessions.

Table 5: examples of Charles' use of `you' in coordination

Session  Clause                                       Role in exchange
1        sure beth. are you going to link it in the   Structured as a request for information, this is actually
         wiki?                                        functioning as a command (asking for Beth's action).
2        jane, do you want to put in your             Request for information in structure, by implication a
         response to beth' s questions first          command for action, an instruction
2        if you like set up a forum.                  Suggestion: a command (`set up a forum') modulated by a
                                                      concessive clause
2        jane, can you also archive the notes         Command structured as a yes/no question
3        for sure beth! you get some sleep girl!      Command
4        ok. first let me tell you that you have      Both a command (for `you') and an offer (from `me'):
         made a huge contribution to the team         `let's'
6        ok. jane. were you ok about tomorrow         Request to attend, structured as a yes/no question
         night at 10:30?
7        can you give me a link?                      Request for action

The examples shown in Table 5 are in fact not the typical clause structures for realizing a command, as they are
marked for person. Usual or unmarked imperatives cannot be identified in an automatic count of pronouns, as
they do not contain  the    Subject component    of the  clause:  take, for example,  the   instances of unmarked
imperatives from Charles in the first session (see Table 6).

Table 6: Imperative clauses (unmarked): author, Charles, coordination

Session  Clause                                                   Role in exchange
1        check page now                                           Command
1        bullets in now = refresh                                 Command (= `Now, refresh!')
1        check now!                                               Command

Making suggestions
We can extend the discussion of the clause as exchange by examining a marked difference in first person
pronoun use within the `choosing' component (DFCS coding) for team members than in the other DF tasks.
Using SFL tools to probe this more closely, we can identify the linguistic choices accompanying this first
person  pronoun use (chiefly,   the  use of  `I' or `we' in   focus or  thematic  position) as contributing  to  the
successful use of `suggestion'.

© ISLS                                                                                                          490
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                           Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

       There are two choices that the group must make to progress with the collaborative task: the selection of
model, and the selection of audience or class level. The selection of model comes first, and, it being early in
their joint history (completely contained in Session 1), group members are initially unwilling to baldly assert a
choice: instead, they make suggestions. The linguistic choices required for successful suggestions are seen by
SFL as part of the interpersonal resources of language, and, matching pronoun use to DFCS choosing, and
following this with  human  analysis,   we found    that strategies  used in suggestion  and   negotiation include   a
modulation in  the  Finite verb   used   when   `I' was  the  Subject  (for  example, using  modals   with    a lower
representation of certainty ("Charles: i agree. having a look at the some the models we might just need to pick
the one that best suits us"): mitigation of the imperative mood (that is, softening the command, as in "Beth: not
yet, but come prepared with one each and then vote, i suppose" (segment 9); or, "Beth: how about we give each
other a day or two" (segment 3); and omission of first person singular pronouns to conceal who is the Actor, in
SFL terms, in  these  processes   (as Charles   does repeatedly   as he reports his  additions to the wiki,   perhaps
concealing his dominant role here: "Charles: just updated that element"; "Charles: just put in the link to the
October 5th archive", and so on).

Creating active artifacts
A higher pattern of third person usages within segments coded as implementation warrants a closer look at these
occurrences. The English third person singular pronoun distinguishes its referents by genders, and by simply
using the filters in the pronoun count view, it is apparent that the human referents for these pronouns are
straightforward: `he' = the supervising   male   teacher  for the activity,  `she' = the female   teacher  or,  in one
sequence, one group member who was temporarily absent. More frequent is the neuter pronoun `it', and, in
those utterances related to the task of implementation, the referent is the group's collaboratively created digital
artifact and/or the task of creating this artifact. For example, when Beth directs the group's attention to the
visuals and sound effects that she has added to the model in the wiki, they respond:

       Jane: it's very good, girls (10238)
       Charles: will just open it now (10239)
       Beth: it's a little rough...i need to adjust it now i've spoken to Kate (10240)

       Beth: and then it goes into storytelling mode... and by pressing the space bar, the 'story' appears step by
       step according to the sequel in trac (10252)
       Lydia: the female learners will luv it yah :) (10253)

       By this stage in the operation of the group, the design task is getting close to completion, and this is
indicated by the increased reference to the model they have worked on as one of the `participants', that is, in
SFL transitivity terms, one  of   the  entities involved  in  the events  or processes   being  referred  to,  and  its
emergence as a possible subject and Actor (as in 10252).

Contributing independently and within the group
The pronoun count indicates a decrease in use in first person plural in the later sessions, and a follow-up by a
human reader indicates that in part this is because the participants have organized themselves into pairs, and
report on the pair's activity as, for example, `lydia and me'. The addition of a broad classification of process
types (the major categories of SFL transitivity analysis, that is material, mental, verbal and relational processes)
associated with the first person plural pronoun reveals that the actions the group is depicted as taking are not
often material, and certainly not physically effective processes. For example:

       Charles: we did some refinements [Material]
       Charles:   we  came  up  with   a "test  some  values  and   come  up with   something  better as  an   activity
                  basically [Material]
       Charles: can we get away with two? [Material]
       Charles: I think we can probably whip another scenario up pretty quickly. [Material]
       Lydia: shd we add a short story to explain the stock and flow concept? [Material]

       These clauses with Material processes are most importantly realizing the actions of the group members
in creating or extending the enhanced model: `came up with'; `whip up'; and `add'.
       In clauses with relational processes, the pronoun `we' is more likely to be referring to the group of four
participants as a whole (Table 7). The relational process subsystem of `possession' is realized strongly here, as
well as the idea of representation, an identification process again related to the idea of creation. Metaphors of
process here are relational processes realizing mental states: `got any ideas' = `thinking'; `are we on the sane
[same] page' = `agree'

© ISLS                                                                                                             491
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                              Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

Table 7: Examples of relational and verbal processes from the chat

Author      Clause                                                                                Process
                                                                                                  type
Jane        I think we all have that impresion                                                    relational
Charles     we need the stocks to be different for each scenario.                                 relational
Lydia       if we represent the scenarios with graphs,                                            relational
Jane        in trac we have limited space to upload files                                         relational
Jane        charles are we going to have 1 or two scenarios                                       relational
Charles     got any ideas for it?                                                                 relational
Lydia       are we on the sane page?                                                              relational
Charles     we are nearly there!                                                                  relational
Jane        should we talk about our progress ?                                                   verbal
Beth        lydia, we need to talk about the text                                                 verbal
Charles     so we still agree that [we get them done on Wednesday]                                verbal
Lydia       is there anything else we need to discuss?                                            verbal
Charles     we chat more tomorrow                                                                 verbal

         By  contrast, the first  person singular pronoun    is  extensively      employed  in these  last two    sessions,
particularly in segments coded as `implementing' in the DFCS, and this may indicate that the group members
are operating independently, having negotiated particular sets of tasks during the earlier sessions of choosing,
planning and coordinating. Looking at the processes which the group members self-describe themselves as
performing in broad SFL categories, it is evident that `I' is associated with more effective material actions. Note
the  over-representation of  Beth   in   using  `I': she   has  a significant      share of  the  utterances     coded   as
implementation and particularly utterances using `you' as the object of a request for help. The other types of
processes done by `I' in these sessions are, in the segments coded for implementation, evenly split between
mental, verbal, and relational, with just a few instances from each category.

Conclusions
This initial combination of methods of analyzing this data has indicated areas for follow-up research in other
corpuses of data. There is some evidence provided here that changes in patterns of pronoun use could indicate
changes in phases of design work (from choosing to additions, and also the beginning of implementation). In
several instances, automation did not identify the patterns identified by human raters. There is significant scope
for further application of automation to systemic functional linguistics in education and refinement of this work,
as  was carried out with   `you', and  reported in   this paper.  One      of the key areas for  development      is in the
calibration of the diverse methods available with human input. Once we know what patterns to look for, we will
be better able to identify automated techniques that could be used to help students manage their own progress,
as well as instructors to monitor the progress of groups through their collaborative work. Future work too needs
to tie these findings more explicitly to the macro-level of discourse analysis.

Endnotes
1  All scripts used in the analysis were written in the Python programming language and are available by request
1  The Python package Natural Language Toolkit was used for the PoS tagging, specifically the algorithm trained on the
     Wall Street Journal corpus of over 270 000 words (Bird, et al., 2009)

References
Bird, S., Klein, E., & Loper, E. (2009). Natural language processing with Python: O'Reilly Media, Incorporated.
Chung, C. K., & Pennebaker, J. W. (2012). Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count (LIWC): Pronounced "Luke,"
         and Other   Useful  Facts   Applied   Natural    Language  Processing:       Identification, Investigation     and
         Resolution (pp. 206-229): IGI Global.
Eggins, S. (2005). Introduction to systemic functional linguistics: Continuum.
Gee, J. P. (2005). An Introduction to Discourse Analysis: Theory and method (2nd ed.). London: Routledge.
Halliday, M. A. K. (1994). Introduction to Functional Grammar. London: Arnold.
Halliday, M. A.  K.  &   Matthiessen,  C. (2004).    An   Introduction     to Functional Grammar (3rd      ed.).  London:
         Arnold.

© ISLS                                                                                                                  492
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                         Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

Hart, R. P. (2001). Redeveloping DICTION: theoretical considerations. Progress in communication sciences,
         43-60.
Jacobs, G.   M.,  &  Ward,    C.  (2000),   Analysing Student-Student   Interaction from   Cooperative    Learning
         and  Systemic   Functional   Perspectives.  Electronic Journal   of Science   Education,  4(4).  Retrieved
         http://ejse.southwestern.edu/article/view/7639/5406
Jurafsky, D., &   Martin,  J. (2008). Speech   and  Language  Processing    (2nd Edition)  (Prentice Hall Series  in
         Artificial Intelligence): Prentice Hall.
Kennedy-Clark, S., & Thompson, K. (2011). What Do Students Learn When Collaboratively Using A Computer
         Game in the Study of Historical Disease Epidemics, and Why? . Games and Culture, 6(6), 1-25.
Kennedy-Clark, S. & Thompson, K. (accepted) Using multimodal discourse analysis to identify patterns of
         problem   solving processes  in  a computer-supported    collaborative  environment.  In Sudweeks,    F. &
         Lim, H. (Eds) Innovative Methods and Technologies for Electronic Discourse Analysis.
Kitzinger, C., Shaw, R., & Toerien, M. (2012). Referring to Persons Without Using a Full-Form Reference:
         Locally Initial Indexicals in Action. [Article]. Research on Language & Social Interaction, 45(2), 116-
         136. doi: 10.1080/08351813.2012.673376
Kummerow, D. (2012). The Person That Isn't: On Defining the Third-Person, Negatively and Positively So.
         Australian Journal of Linguistics, 32(2), 259-290. doi: 10.1080/07268602.2012.669099
Manning, C. D., & Schütze, H. (1999). Foundations of statistical natural language processing: MIT press.
Martin, J. R., & Rose, D. (2007). Working with Discourse: Meaning Beyond the Clause (2nd ed.). London:
         Continuum International.
Mu, J., Stegmann, K., Mayfield, E., Rosé, C., & Fischer, F. (2012). The ACODEA framework: Developing
         segmentation   and    classification  schemes   for  fully  automatic   analysis  of  online   discussions.
         International  Journal    of  Computer-Supported       Collaborative    Learning,  7(2),    285-305.   doi:
         10.1007/s11412-012-9147-y
Pennebaker,   J. W., &  Francis,   M. E.  (1996).  Cognitive, emotional,    and  language  processes in  disclosure.
         Cognition & Emotion, 10(6), 601-626.
Poole, M. S., & Holmes, M. E. (1995). Decision Development in Computer/Assisted Group Decision Making.
         Human Communication Research, 22(1), 90-127.
Reimann, P. (2009). Time is precious: Variable- and event-centred approaches to process analysis in CSCL
         research. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 4, 239-257.
Reimann, P., Frerejan, J. & Thompson, K. (2009). Using process mining to identify models of group decision
         making in chat data. Paper presented at the CSCL Conference, Rhodes, Greece.
Schallert, D. L., Chiang, Y.-h. V., Park, Y., Jordan, M. E., Lee, H., Janne Cheng, A.-C., Song, K. (2009). Being
         polite  while fulfilling different discourse functions   in online  classroom discussions.  Computers    &
         Education, 53(3), 713-725. doi: 10.1016/j.compedu.2009.04.009
Sherin, B. (2012).   Using computational    methods   to discover student science  conceptions  in   interview data.
         Paper presented at the Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Learning Analytics and
         Knowledge.
Tausczik, Y. R., & Pennebaker, J. W. (2010). The psychological meaning of words: LIWC and computerized
         text analysis methods. Journal of Language and Social Psychology, 29(1), 24-54.
Thompson, K., & Kelly, N. (2012). Processes of decision-making with adaptive combinations of wiki and chat
         tools. Paper presented at the The Future of Learning: Proceedings of the 10th International Conference
         of the Learning Sciences (ICLS 2012).
Thompson, K., Kennedy-Clark, S., Markauskaite, L., & Southavilay, V. C. (2011). Capturing and analysing the
         processes and patterns of learning in collaborative learning environments. Paper presented at the 9th
         International Conference     on  Computer   Supported  Collaborative    Learning.CSCL2011:     Connecting
         computer supported collaborative learning to policy and practice, Hong Kong.

Acknowledgments
Part of this work was funded by the Australian Research Council grant FL100100203.

© ISLS                                                                                                         493
