CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                        Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

  Experiences as Resources for Sense Making: Health Education
 Students' I-positioning in an Online Science Philosophy Course
         Maarit Arvaja, University of Jyväskylä, P. O. Box 35, 40014 University of Jyväskylä, Finland,
                                               maarit.arvaja@jyu.fi

         Abstract: This study on dialogical learning explored how different philosophical approaches
         and  reflections  on  these   issues became    a  resource for  health   education  students   for
         understanding  their  work  and  discipline-related experiences.  Especially, the   focus was  on
         exploring what "I-positions" the students constructed, and how different "voices" encountered
         in the  students' discourse.  The subjects,   11 health education  students,  attended  an  online
         course on the philosophy of science in the context of higher education. In order to study
         students' internal and external dialogue in terms of analyzing multivoicedness in their sense
         making   process, a   discourse analysis  was  used.  Results  showed   that  by  reflecting their
         experiences in the light of different scientific approaches the students became aware of the
         different voices that underlie their thinking and activities and seemed to cause tensions in their
         professional positioning.  This  resulted in  refining, strengthening  and  re-constructing  their
         professional and scientific I-positions, and constructing a We-position.

Theoretical background
The dialogical perspective on learning and instruction has stressed the importance of acknowledging students'
personal  lives  as  resources for  meaning-making.     Building  on   Dialogical Self   theory  (Hermans,    2001),
Akkerman    and  van Eijck  (2011)  talk about  I-positions, which  people  use  to  express their  different voiced
perspectives. These I-positions vary within single individuals and are connected to the person's cultural and
historical experiences and social relationships. In educational contexts, the fact that students come from various
groups,  communities   and   social networks,  which   are essentially reflected  in their different  voices  and I-
positions, should be therefore valued and recognized. One way to nourish students' different I-positions in
educational contexts is by encouraging them to use their personal life experiences as resources and subjects for
learning (Arvaja, 2012). This can be seen as promoting student identity work through giving personal meaning
to learning activities. Therefore, as Ligorio (2010) argues, an educational process should help the students make
sense of culture and communities, as well as themselves as active members of these communities.
         According to Ligorio (2010), in education the dialogical nature of learning is often related to external
dialogue between individuals, whereas internal dialogue within individuals, namely between I-positions of the
self, are excluded. As a consequence most analyses and also efforts to promote learning in interaction have
typically focused on the talk-in-interaction. Stressing the value of external dialogue only may lead people to
assume and insist that learning situations must always be organized around some sort of conversation between
individuals. This, in turn, might lead into neglecting the role of individual reasoning and internal dialogue in
students' learning activities (Ligorio, 2010; Linell, 2009). However, if we consider learning from a dialogical
perspective, it broadens our focus from the situated talk-in-interaction to the wider sociocultural and material
aspects, and to the dialogism of the self (Akkerman & van Eijck, 2011).
         From   a dialogical  point of view   human    sense making   processes  are profoundly    interactional and
contextual in their nature (Grossen & Salazar Orvig, 2011; Linell, 2009). Interaction comprises not only talk-in-
interaction, but also interaction `with the world'. Therefore, even a solitary activity, such as thinking, writing,
reading, and sense making in general, is also interactional in its nature. More particularly, dialogism stresses the
occurrence of several voices within individual persons as they are thinking on their own or being engaged in an
external dialogue. This means that the self is based on multivoicedness manifested in expression of various and
heterogeneous voices that have different social and cultural origins (Akkerman & van Eijck, 2011; Grossen &
Salazar Orvig, 2011; Koschmann, 1999). The contextual aspect of human sense making highlights the fact that
meaning making is anchored in both a physical and sociocultural world. Therefore, human interactions always
take place in concrete situations that are mediated by artifacts and institutional rules and norms, for example
(Grossen  &  Salazar   Orvig,  2011).  This   stresses the importance   of  understanding    the characteristic  and
"framing" of the learning situation in understanding the subject's behavior and discursive activity.
         Talking about the dialogical approach to learning Akkerman and van Eijck (2011) speak for horizontal
learning  seeing  "a learner  as continuously  shifting   between different worlds,   hybridizing   and negotiating
insights from different sites". They continue that learning should be seen as a dialogical practice through which
students' different  I-positions are  stimulated.  This   presupposes  recognizing   the simultaneity   of  different
positions that are part of students' identity and thereby part of their meaning making process. Ligorio (2010),
argues that acknowledging students' personal perspectives by giving them a space to voice themselves and their
perspectives in the school context can enhance students identity (de/re)construction.

© ISLS                                                                                                            49
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                        Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

        Keeping the above notions in mind, in this study the health education students were encouraged to
reflect on their discipline and work experiences when studying the reading material. The texts dealing with the
philosophy of science provide different perspectives, "ideological voices" to reflect on one's own multivoiced
experiences. Through the reading material and discussions with one another the students come into contact with
several voices (multivoicedness) that provide a context for negotiation and meaning making. Learning occurs
when different voices (from different origins) are negotiated in the learning situation. Making learners contrast
their own voices or perspectives with several other voices promotes reflective processes that are important for
learning (Tsang, 2007). Reflecting individually and together on philosophical texts from the perspective of
one's work related experiences may also provide resources for students' identity re-negotiations.
        This study  on dialogical   learning explores  how  the health education  students   make     sense of the
philosophical knowledge through their own experiences and positions, and how they see themselves and their
activities in the light of this knowledge. Furthermore, the focus is on analyzing what kinds of negotiations occur
between different voices encountered in the students' discourse. This, in turn, targets our attention to learning as
identity building. It allows us to explore how the different philosophical approaches and reflections on these
issues become a resource  for understanding    oneself  and  one's own  experiences, and   thereby    for identity
construction. In sum, the aim of this study was on studying what I-positions the students took and constructed,
and how different voices were encountered in the students' internal and external dialogue during the course.

Methods

Participants and context of the study
The subjects of this study comprised 11 health education students (all female) attending an online course on the
philosophy of science in the context of higher education. The students had a job, working as physiotherapists
and action therapists, for example, and pursuing additional studies in health sciences, e.g. aiming at teacher
qualification in health-education. They were thus studying part-time by distance learning while also working
full-time. The students participated in the course from all over the country, and they met only virtually. The
course utilized a web-based learning environment consisting of an asynchronous discussion tool, a tool for
making text documents, and folders containing course material.
        The  course consisted of    six learning tasks, all of which   dealt with historical approaches     in the
philosophy of science. Each task was a reasoning task where the students were first supposed to read a given
text (or texts) dealing with a particular approach within the philosophy of science. In reasoning about the task,
the students were asked to use their prior experiences or conceptions about their own field of science or work as
resources in interpreting the texts. Based on these tasks, each of the students was first supposed to write an
individual reasoning text. In the next phase, the students posted their individual writings onto a shared web-
based (asynchronous) discussion forum, and their task was first to read each other's writings and finally to have
a shared discussion based on these.

Data sources and analytical approach
One type of data consisted of students' individual writings based on the reasoning tasks. There were altogether
66 writings. The other data consisted of shared asynchronous discussion postings. Across the six tasks, there
were altogether 52 such discussion postings that commented on other's writings or responses.
        In order to study students' internal and external dialogue in terms of analyzing multivoicedness in their
sense making process, a discursive approach is necessary (Gee, 1999; Gee & Green, 1998). Discourse analysis
is an analysis of social language, not an analysis of language per se (Gee & Green, 1998). According to this
approach, language is seen as a socio-cultural practice and social resource of groups, and the focus of analysis is
basically on what the participants accomplish through their discourse rather than on the linguistic forms or
functions used as such. This allows for studying social meanings embedded in discourse as well as examining
the cultural models, social and discourse practices that the participants draw on in learning and making sense of
new situations. In this study, particularly the feature that the students are encouraged to discuss and reflect on
their work and discipline related experiences is supposed to elicit discussion with the transpersonal dimension of
the self (Grossen & Salazar Orvig, 2011). Therefore, zooming into the students' discourse reveals how they
position and see themselves through and in relation to their work, study and scientific communities, and how
they display the norms, values, and beliefs attributable to these communities and/or to their Self.
        In analyzing the individual writings and discussion postings around and about the learning tasks, the
first thing to do was to extract from the data those work-, study-, and discipline-related experiences that were
made discursively relevant (Linell, 2009) in interpreting and making sense of the phenomena under reasoning.
These "tellings of personal experience" (Ochs & Capps, 1996, p. 21) were manifested in explicit discursive
references to texts, people, discourses, contexts, practices, activities, values, norms, and conceptions related to
the students' work, studies, or discipline. These data segments, consisting of thematic meaning units or episodes

© ISLS                                                                                                         50
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                           Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

were separated upon further analysis. Then, a more intense focus was set on those data segments where students
were expressing their I-positioning that depicted a personal tendency of thinking or doing (Akkerman et al.,
2012). The analysis focused on what kinds of I-positions the students constructed and reflected and how these
were related to other positions and voices that emerged in the course through different resources, such as the
philosophical reading material, other students' contributions, and other "third parties".

Results
This section sums up the different I-positions found in the analysis of the students' discourse including both the
individual writings and discussion around these writings. When it comes to interpreting the findings, attempts
are made    to  illustrate the dialogicality    of the    I-positions,  and the   encounters   of  different  voices
(multivoicedness) in the student discourse. The section is divided into four themes that form a narrative of the
course, serving also as a timeline that enables tracking possible continuities, changes and developments in the
students' I-positions. For the purposes of this paper the presentation of the findings is particularly focused on
exemplifying one of the students', Aino's, internal and external dialogue.

The role of science in defining one self
In the beginning of the course the most of the students define themselves as professionals whose work is
strongly based on research, theories and scientific knowledge. The following example represents this position:

         Aino: "Correctly and well conducted studies are of primary importance in my own work, for
         instance, and I always try to find an explanation for what I am doing, so that I can plead to
         "research-based knowledge". So there's great confidence in research."

         In the example above Aino describes how research based knowledge is manifested in her everyday
practices and guiding her actions and thinking in everyday work. Therefore, through her discourse it seems
evident that scientific I-positioning is a strong part of her professional self. In the study, theories, frameworks
and research-based knowledge can be seen as third parties that play a significant role in defining the way
students think and act in their professions. Therefore, the way of seeing their activity through "science" can be
seen as a relatively stabilized perspective in the professional self. This position highlights the transpersonal
dimension of the self. In other words, positions within the self are not solely personal but connected to the social
groups or communities (generalized other) that set rules, norms and beliefs in Me.
         While  the student   discourse portrays   a professional  whose    work    is highly defined  by scientific
knowledge and theories, there are also traces of internal dialogue that questions the dominance of science in
positioning oneself. The next dialogue between Aino and Niina is an example of a situation where the students
are shifting between positions in their internal dialogue:

         Aino: "We can think that in physiotherapy, for instance, the reliability of the therapies applied
         need to be proved scientifically before they can be used. This, I think, is just for the reasons of
         effectiveness and safety. And also for the reason that the particular field of science becomes
         better known and    gains credibility. I  myself  always try   to find  research -based knowledge
         before therapy. But isn't the success of a process after all dependent on the client's/patient's
         subjective feelings rather than on a bunch of studies? If the patient is dissatisfied and finds that
         the therapy was of no help, even if it were scientifically proven, does it make any difference,
         then? Then again, if we reach the desired goal, does it matter what means were used?"

         In her discourse Aino first defines herself as a person whose work as a physiotherapist is strongly based
on scientific evidence. However, in her internal dialogue she raises another perspective for succeeding in a
therapy process. She contrasts the patient's perspective ("subjective feelings") with "a bunch of studies". This
shows how different stances struggle in Aino's overt talk and her inner dialogue seems to contain several
`voices' (Linell, 2009).   Therefore, despite   a  strong  research-orientation  in her  work,   Aino questions  the
dominant role of science in defining the therapy process by taking up a patient's perspective, thereby accounting
for the patient's personal voice. This situation illustrates how there are two points of views struggling within the
same person. Later in the same writing Aino categorizes herself as a mathematical and numerical type:

         Aino: "I am such a mathematical and numerical type myself that sometimes at work I have had
         to consciously    broaden my   views   from  staring at  gauges.   Do   angle   degrees  make  any
         difference for the end result in terms of the patient's functioning? Sure they do, but they need
         to be used together with broader thinking."

© ISLS                                                                                                           51
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                        Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

         This self-categorization is a mark of a transpersonal self (Grossen & Salazar Orvig, 2011) through
which Aino relates her activity to certain kind of science (but not the other).  However, she questions her own
activity "staring at gauges" in her internal dialogue.  Her internal dialogue reveals that she finds this positioning
as  too narrow;   "I have had to consciously   broaden    my views".   The inner confusion  manifested    in  Aino's
internal dialogue is supported by Niina's telling of personal experience from her own work:

         Niina: "Aino, you took up an important issue about the effectiveness of therapy. Just how
         many intervening factors there are, considering human-related research! This week at my work
         again I got to find several times the fact that no matter how strictly according to the rules of
         science/knowledge   you    worked   (i.e. as a therapist), human mind   is always  taking you   by
         surprise. Indeed, what an impact does the psyche have on recovery! Once the "core" of a
         person is all right, many other things will settle and improve. Often my clients ask about so-
         called alternative treatments of different kinds (massage of neural pathways, zonal therapy,
         etc.). As you know, conventional medicine does not acknowledge these alternative treatments,
         so there is no so-called research evidence for these. Yet, some clients have got help from these,
         would this be worth noting after all?"

         Niina grasps Aino's internal dialogue and continues her discourse in the same frame. Thus, Niina
identifies an internal dialogue in Aino's utterances and verbalizes it further. It seems that the external dialogue
provides a space for supporting the contradiction in an inner dialogue. Also in Niina's internal dialogue there
are traces of   conflicting  I-positions. She  sees   a  contradiction  between  "the rules of science"      and the
unpredictability of the "human mind".     Furthermore, as in Aino's case, also in Niina's internal dialogue there is
a struggle between her own faith in science and the client's different perspective. Therefore, Aino and Niina are
both voicing a patient's/client's perspective. Even though they position science as a strong part of Me, they also
define themselves as practitioners whose work with patients is defined by their interpersonal encounters with
them, and cannot be solely defined by the rules of science. In their personal tellings they define these encounters
as unpredictable, subjective and situated and hence opposite to what they see science to be. In this way the
students question the authoritative voice (the rules of science) that dominates and defines their activity as
physiotherapists. Furthermore, we can see that their I-position shifts from strong faith in science to questioning
the meaning of science. This demonstrates well their inner struggle when facing fundamental questions relative
to their professional practice. According to Markova (2006), internal dialogue usually involves personal issues
that require reflection and evaluation of one's own and other people's behavior, both past and present. It can be
seen as an attempt to solve a person's inner conflict between different `voices'. This can also be seen as a
struggle between the collective and personal positions (Hermans, 2001), where the collective position represents
the norms adopted by the generalized other, while the personal position represents true subjective feelings that
may contradict with the collective position. Therefore, there is a tension between the students' social position,
outlined by societal definitions and expectations, and the students' personal position.
         A frequently used device in the students' discourse was categorization. In the next example quite
opposite to the "reliance on science" position that most of the students took in their discourse is a position where
the emphasis of science is questioned. In her comment Nea indirectly criticizes others' (physiotherapists) strong
need to define their own field as science-based. In doing this she uses we-categorization including herself to the
same collective (collective self, cf. Hermans, 2001), as if to soften the criticism toward the others:

         Nea: "I wonder if we physiotherapists have a particularly strong need to prove our field as
         more scientific, so that people just wouldn't include it to the so-called scam treatments? I
         haven't heard very many physicians, nurses or, say, social workers to ponder whether this and
         this treatment was scientifically investigated and effective. As far as I understand, not many of
         the present generally used treatments/therapies/interventions have been studied exhaustively,
         not more than any other ­ if I recall it right, of medicines only penicillin has a `clean record'."

         In her criticism Nea emphasizes the categorization by distinguishing physiotherapists from physicians,
nurses and social workers, who according to her observation do not speculate whether the treatment is based on
scientific research. She also brings forward the idea that many of the things bearing influence in their work have
not been (thoroughly) investigated. Aino answers Nea's criticism by acknowledging the role of education in
defining their (physiotherapists) thinking and acting as "evidence-based":

         Aino: "In our training, at least, evidence-based was emphasized so heavily that it may have
         become an obsession to physiotherapists. I guess we are such type of people that one must
         always be a little better, more efficient and more careful."

© ISLS                                                                                                            52
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                         Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

       Like Nea, Aino uses we-categorization in her positioning. In this statement Aino explicitly highlights
the role of institutional education in the construction of the self. Through this transpersonal dimension Aino
associates `physiotherapists' with  their educational  community  and    its values  and  norms   in defining   their
professional self. Therefore, leaning on evidence-based research stressed in education is regarded as a culturally
correct activity for a physiotherapist and as such as a norm of generalized other. Evidence-based research can be
seen as a part of a professional genre, which consists of activities with a history in their educational and work
community. The term evidence-based, which is constantly used in many students' discourse, is therefore part of
a social language or professional jargon of the students' communities.  Aino also categorizes physiotherapists as
a certain kind of "human type" with certain qualities. In this way she integrates the professional self with the
personal self. In a way Aino defends her ideas presented before by relating them to the generalized other, which
has become part of Me (a physiotherapist) or We (physiotherapists). Through these categorizations the students
build their professional identity; on the one hand the categorizations define what they are, but also what they are
not. Therefore, these categories have a social origin and are based on activities and practices in the students'
educational and   work  communities.    According   to  Grossen  and    Salazar   Orvig (2011),   (institutions and
institutional) categories are kept alive through discourse and interaction and contribute to the construct of a
person's identity and as a result lead the person to define him/herself through these categories.
       The examples show how students make sense of the meaning of science in their work by referring to
their experiences and past activities and practices. In their discourse the students construct different positions to
science. Furthermore, there are struggles, integration and shifts between different voices and positions in the
student discourse. The examples illustrate how the dialogical self is polyvocal, taking up different positions in
internal and external dialogue, and may therefore appear quite fragmented at times. In particular, the examples
highlight  the role of institutions in the construction of the   self. The   examples   demonstrate  how  science,
education and work practices are all third parties or generalized others that define the students' beings and
doings as professionals. On the other hand, they are also challenged, which is manifested in internal dialogue
between different voices and perspectives. The discursive space between the students seem to arise mostly from
their shared or similar experiences and perceptions and acknowledging the same position.

The boundaries of (natural) sciences too narrow
       Aino: "In this week I've been reading texts from web and on paper, and frankly speaking I feel
       that my head is somewhat overloaded. One doesn't really know anymore what to think of what
       issue, and now one is questioning one's own work and science and research and whatever it
       was and I cannot make any sense of this, there are simply too many ideas. So I decided to look
       once more at this 'what is science' issue, on the basis of Niiniluoto's article, because it bears
       most relevance to me personally. I have always considered myself a type very much oriented to
       science and especially to natural science, and being somehow schematic and mathematical. For
       this reason it feels somehow overwhelming to question everything now. Admittedly at the
       same time really interesting, too. What's hard for me is that one can keep elaborating the idea
       endlessly and never reach a solution."

       In the beginning of her text Aino explicitly describes an inner tension and confusion she is facing when
reading the philosophical course material. This results in "questioning one's own work, science and research".
Again she categorizes herself as "a type oriented to natural science", and it seems that from that position she is
facing a challenge when being introduced with fundamental questions of the essence of science. It seems that
her orientation to natural science (according to her constant self-categorization) represents a dominant voice
adopted from authorities in her working and study environment. According to Linell (2009), an authoritarian
voice is often like cultural assumptions that the individual does not question and once the ideas of this voice are
internalized it often becomes a kind of self-discipline. However, it seems that when Aino is introduced with
texts that offer different perspectives or alternative conceptions her beliefs pertaining to her "natural science
oriented"  position becomes   questioned.  Later in her internal dialogue    this tension is externalized and   she
juxtaposes oriental and western medicine and questions the dominant voice of western medicine:

       Aino: " Oriental medicine treats a person as a whole and takes the psyche more intensely into
       account than western medicine. The effect of the psyche cannot be measured or questioned,
       still it is a fact. How much is getting well based on what our society considers appropriate
       treatment? In western countries we are used to think in a different way compared to the Orient.
       Along with globalization, sciences and pseudosciences are mixing and changing, however. In
       my opinion we should remain open to take into consideration also matters that we regard as
       pseudoscience, and look at them with equal interest to what we are able to show toward "our
       own science"."

© ISLS                                                                                                           53
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                             Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

         It seems that when Aino is introduced with ideas (voices) that do not support her current beliefs (an
authoritative voice adopted) these beliefs become questioned and negotiated in her internal dialogue. It seems
that in her particular work, science and study communities Aino have been involved mostly with research
pertinent to natural science, and mostly from the perspective of physical activity. The research dealing with the
psyche,  therefore, seems   to be   in  a minor   position or in   a position  of the pseudoscience     in her scientific
positioning. The inner confusion that Aino faces is, therefore, a result of questioning the voice of a generalized
other or authoritative voice she has adopted. She sees this dominant perspective as too narrow from her personal
position  or from   the position  of   another perspective  (e.g.  oriental science). The   examples    show   that when
confronted with different perspectives and ways of thinking, the students also reflect and become aware of the
underlying voices in their (collective) thinking and practices.

Constructing holistic We-position through heterodialogue
At the end of the course the students' are introduced with two philosophical texts representing two different
points of view as regards human and natural sciences.      In his text Varto emphasizes the radical     difference in the
basis and methodology between natural and human sciences, whereas Raatikainen finds a lot of similarities in
their scientific approaches and research practices. On the one hand, the texts seem to help the students to
conceptualize and construct their positions through providing definitions and qualities of different scientific
approaches.   On the other hand the students are engaged in      heterodialogue (Linell, 2009)  with  the ideas stated in
the texts, which serve as resources for strengthening the students' position either by supporting (Raatikainen)
their ideas or by contradicting (Varto) some notions presented in the reading material. Through Varto's and
Raatikainen's  texts,   the students   construct   a  `holistic' We-position,   where   they  acknowledge      the  equal
significance of human and natural sciences, qualitative and quantitative research as well as strict and exact
sciences in their professions. Next example represents this position:

         Anita: "You're discussing [Satu and Tia] the utilization of the perspectives of human and
         natural sciences at your own work on the basis of Raatikainen's article. Good reflections from
         both of you. In my own field as an action therapist I see this issue very largely in the same
         way. At work one just often comes across with what for example the referring body (doctors)
         value and appreciate (research consistent with natural science; unfortunately)."
         Aino: "Yes, indeed, this is precisely the way I see it in physiotherapy and for my own work.
         The problem just lies specifically in that, for example, at work people have too high regard for
         the views of natural science. One has to measure mobility and muscular strength etc. and
         compare the results and assess effectiveness in that way. [...] Another issue I face at work is
         compilation of statistics. If I spend time at the ward discussing with a patient, talking about
         goals and   motivation,    listening  to the person  and    evaluating her emotional    state,  without
         performing actual physiotherapy i.e. muscular or mobility or functional exercises, so can I then
         record the visit as a physiotherapeutic visit? As I didn't actually perform any therapy, but as
         much time was spent and after the discussion the patient is likely to be more motivated to
         engage in rehabilitation and more cooperative when we start actual training. [...] There's only
         the problem that I can't really mark on my daily nursing record sheet just that `discussed about
         therapy'. Then one will cheat and take say a stretching or a quick inspection in the end. That's
         how it is; the emphasis is too much on natural science. :)"

         The above discussion thread can be seen as an example of internal sharing of an I-position (Hermans,
2001).  The  students   recognize   in themselves  and  in others    the same  position as  regards  different scientific
approaches and their role in their professions.       Through    a dialogue they  construct   then a We-position.   Even
though Anita and Aino take a similar `holistic' position as Satu and Tia, they also acknowledge that this position
is  not supported   in  their  work    communities,   and  in    the dominant   practices,  norms    and   values  of the
communities. In Anita's and Aino's discourse it is evident that they experience a contradiction between their
own values and the values ("what the doctors value") and practices ("compilation of statistics") of the work
community. Thus, Anita and Aino share the view about the dominance of the natural sciences and describe work
practices that reflect  and   support   this   dominance.  Therefore,    their  positions  as an   action  therapist  and
physiotherapist are in conflict with the prevailing practices in their workplace. Thus, while their discourse is
based on agreement and shared viewpoints in general, they also share the same critical position toward their
work practices. The students' external dialogue reveals a struggle between their professional/personal voice and
the authoritative voice  in   their work   community.   In  other    words, the students'  are  engaged    in `collective
criticism' against the authoritative voice they recognize in their work and related science practices. Here, others
(doctors) come to function as defining positions in what is not Me and practices (compilation of statistic) as
defining practices with which I do not agree (Akkerman & Meijer, 2011). Hence, through these conceptions that
the students voice one can interpret a strong support for the view that the technical-rational model (Tsang, 2007)

© ISLS                                                                                                                54
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                              Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

is inappropriate when it comes to their professional practice where they need to take into account not only the
body but also the mind; feelings, motives, and values in inter-personal interactions.

The (dis)continuity of the I-positions
An  interesting finding   concerning   Aino's    discourse   is that while throughout   her  discourse she   categorizes
herself as a natural science type - as a person who has adopted the practices, norms and beliefs of natural
sciences dominant in her work and study communities, yet, at the end of the course she ends up criticizing those
practices. However, as we can see Aino is engaged in an internal dialogue at various points of the course, where
different voices from different perspectives meet. Therefore, by engaging in reflective talk in which one can
reflect on one's own beliefs, values and practices, these become explicit and re-negotiable. A change in Aino's
I-position is also explicitly stated in her last writing:

          Aino: "At    least for me  this course  has  taught   a quite  different way  of  thinking  for doing
          research and broadened my approach to science in general. It seems that I started from Sharply
          positivistic notions   and ended    up in a  fairly   broad and  open    view on  the importance    of
          qualitative research and human sciences, for example. It's good to stop and reflect on things
          and their meanings every now and then. At work one is often measuring just for the fun of it
          and it bears no significance, after all, to the patient let alone for science. Actually it may have
          been the most important lesson for me in this course; to consider what really significant science
          is. It is by no means about angle degrees and gauges but consideration of causal relationships
          more broadly and consideration of humans and interaction. Although it sometimes feels that
          thinking was really tangled, in the end one must say that this has been a good process."

          Aino's statement clearly demonstrates how the things discussed, read and written in the course had an
impact on "what I am". Aino implicitly states that what I think now is different of what I thought before,
therefore indicating    re-negotiation  of   an  I-position.  As  previous  examples    demonstrate,   Aino   constantly
categorized herself as being "a natural science type". However, exposure to the diversity through the different
approaches and perspectives challenges and changes her scientific I-position. It seems that in this process she
loses "the sense of dogma" that characterizes her earlier conception of science, and she now sees science as
negotiated and changeable (cf. Ligorio, 2010).
          In the course all the students refined their scientific I-position by conceptualizing their experiences in
the light of the philosophical knowledge, and through considering and becoming aware of the various voices
underlying  their thinking.   Therefore,  providing   a   forum  for  `identity talk' (Cohen,  2010), the  writings and
discussions and   reflections    around   the learning    materials  gave  an   opportunity to  strengthen,  refine and
reconstruct one's own I-positions.     In other words, they provided the students with a forum for the recognition
and construction of their disciplinary and professional identity.
          At the end the criticism toward the dominance of science in general in the first task is refined into
criticism toward  the   dominant   position   of quantitative   research and  natural  sciences as  well  as toward  the
emphasis on physical aspects in their work and discipline. Hence, now the internal conflicts that the students
highlighted in their earlier discourse are explicitly stated and conceptualized, and their origin is understood. The
students recognize the tension between different value systems that is reflected in their professional practice.

Discussion and conclusions
Supporting the students' agency by acknowledging their own lives and experiences as resources for learning can
lead to a learning situation where the (institutional) knowledge provided by the teacher becomes a mediating
tool for understanding those lives rather than being an end in itself. The analysis revealed that the philosophical
knowledge seemed to serve as a resource through which the students learned also about their own 'lives' and
not only   about  the   philosophical   knowledge     content.   Prompting    the  students to  use  their   professional
experiences as a resource in interpreting the different approaches described in the philosophical texts led them
into a discourse where they were able to reflect on and analyze their work and discipline related perceptions. By
engaging themselves in reflective talk (Cohen, 2010), through which they could reason and share beliefs, values,
and practices associated with their professional identity, the students made visible to one another who they are
and what they are doing (Gee, 1999). Making one's understanding explicit and reviewing the current practices
in the light of new knowledge led to new awareness and, for some students further to refined and wider
perspectives and new identity constructions.
          Throughout the course it seemed that the contrastive pattern the students used in discussing human and
natural sciences  as   well  as  qualitative and quantitative   research  helped   them understand   the  philosophy of
science and its different approaches. It also served as a resource for making explicit and critically evaluate the
contradictions they perceived with regard to work and science, and also facilitated conceptualization of their

© ISLS                                                                                                               55
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                           Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

professional and study-related experiences. By analyzing their experiences in the light of different scientific
approaches the students became aware of the different voices and value systems that underlie their thinking and
activities  and seemed     to cause  tensions   in their professional  positioning.  This    provided  possibilities  to
strengthen, refine and re-construct their own professional I-position. Therefore, the study showed how material
resources such as texts can be meaningful in introducing the students with different voices, and how these can
be a powerful resource for their meaning making and identity negotiation processes.
         Altogether, it seemed that the reasoning tasks were able to raise internal dialogue, that is, negotiation
between different I-positions of the self or heterodialogue with the texts (Linell, 2009). This was manifested in
tensions   and  contradictions  in   the students'   overt discourse.  When   the    students   were  discussing   their
experiences,   the nature  of  their  external  dialogue   was mostly  harmonious    and     characterized  by  sharing,
acknowledging     and  taking  the   same  position.  However,    even though   the  students   were  not   engaged   in
argumentative talk, which is often regarded as necessary for collaborative learning, it can be argued that their
external dialogue had an important role in their discussion and learning. According to Tsang (2007), while
internal dialogue has a "self-generative capacity" leading to new possibilities for thought and action, external
dialogue can be seen as essential for the validation of one's ideas. For example, in this study the views of others
seemed to shed light on some inner tensions and add weight to a particular option in settling the inner struggles.
Through sharing and constructing a We-position the students strengthened their professional identity. The way
of defining one's own identity in the discussions was based not only on identifying with similar positions or
shared views, but also on differentiating oneself from those who "are part of what I am not" (Akkerman &
Meijer, 2011, p. 315). This kind of contrastive discourse was targeted against different "others". In their shared
discourse   the students' were questioning, criticizing and challenging different third parties, voices in the texts,
and generalized    others, even  though   their external   dialogue remained  harmonious.     It can  be   said that the
students shared a similar professional identity through recognizing the similar values, beliefs and practices
present in each other's discourse.
         It can be argued that the online environment provided an ideal context for the students' reflective
discourse that combined institutional and personal knowledge. In the online environment the students' writings
and related discussions, were available for elaboration and reflection at any time. Linell (2009) has argued that
some communication types favor reflective processes more than others. Reflection presupposes that one can
take an observer's role in the flow of discussion. One advantage of an asynchronous discussion forum was that
it supported the occurrence of such reflective processes. It gave time to observe and reflect on one's own and
others ideas, as these were readily present and available for the whole process of learning. Therefore, the online
environment used in the course provided a supportive context for reflection and identity discourse.

References
Akkerman, S., Admiraal, W. & Simons, RJ. (2012). Unity and diversity in a collaborative research project.
         Culture & Psychology, 18(2), 227-252.
Akkerman, S. & Meijer, P. (2011). A dialogical approach to conceptualizing teacher identity. Teaching and
         Teacher Education, 27, 308-319.
Akkerman, S. & Van Eijck, M. (in press). Re-theorising the student dialogically across and between boundaries
         of multiple communities. British Educational Research Journal.
Arvaja, M. (2012). Personal and shared experiences as resources for meaning making in a philosophy of science
         course. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 7(1), 85-108.
Cohen,   J. (2010).   Getting  recognized:   teachers negotiating  professional   identities as  learners through  talk.
         Teaching and Teacher Education, 26, 473-481.
Gee, J. (1999). An introduction to discourse analysis: Theory and method. London: Routledge.
Gee, J., & Green, J. (1998). Discourse analysis, learning and social practice: A methodological study. Review of
         Research in Education, 23, 119-169.
Grossen,    M.  &  Salazar    Orvig, A.  (2011).   Dialogism   and  dialogicality in the study    of  self. Culture   &
         Psychology, 17(4), 491-509.
Hermans, H. (2001). The Dialogical Self: Toward a theory of personal and cultural positioning. Culture &
         Psychology, 7(3), 243-281.
Koschmann, T. (1999). Toward a dialogic theory of learning: Bakhtin's contribution to understanding learning
         in  settings of collaboration.   In C.  Hoadley   &   J. Roschelle (Eds.)  Proceedings    of the   CSCL  1999
         Conference (pp. 308-313). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Ligorio, B. (2010). Dialogical relationship between identity and learning. Culture & Psychology, 16(1), 93-107.
Linell, P. (2009). Rethinking language, mind and world dialogically: Interactional and contextual theories of
         human sense making. Charlotte, NC: Information age publishing.
Marková, I. (2006). On the "inner alter" in dialogue. International Journal of Dialogical Science, 1(1), 125-147.
Ochs, E. & Capps, L. (1996). Narrating the self. Annual Review of Anthropology, 25, 19-43.
Tsang, N. M. (2007). Reflection as dialogue. British Journal of Social Work, 37, 681-694.

© ISLS                                                                                                               56
