CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                         Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

  Phases of design: Following idea development and patterns of
         collaborative discussion in a learning by design project
   Kate Thompson, David Ashe, Pippa Yeoman, Martin Parisio, CoCo Research Centre, The University of
                          Sydney, Building A35, The University of Sydney, NSW 2006
    Email: kate.thompson@sydney.edu.au, david.ashe@sydney.edu.au, philippa.yeoman@sydney.edu.au,
                                          martin.parisio@sydney.edu.au

       Abstract:   Learning   by  design  (LBD)  has a  long association  with  learning  about  complex
       environmental systems. This investigation traces the development of ideas within a group of
       five students engaged in a collaborative design process. Tasked with the design of an online
       educational resource, about a waterway of local significance, this group was one of three for
       which   multiple   streams of   data (audio  and  video)  were   collected. Ideas   central to the
       progression of their design were identified and represented visually over time, showing the
       impact of each group member and the facilitator, and discourse was coded according to the
       content  code  of  the CPACS    scheme.   Four  phases of design   were  identified and   Markov-
       transition diagrams of the content were interrogated. This paper makes a contribution to our
       knowledge of the phases of design evident during LBD tasks, which could have implications
       for the design and management of such projects in the future.

Introduction
Engaging   school students  in   tasks that  support   collaboration,   technology enhanced     learning, and  the
understanding  of complex   systems    is challenging. As  part  of   a project funded   by   a local government
organization, a group of school students engaged in the design of a learning resource to be shared with other
schools in their region. The group included 16 students across multiple year groups and the focus of the project
was a waterway of local significance. The students were observed and guided as they worked through a design
process structured to help them learn about issues critical to water management in their area. This paper begins
with a brief overview of the existing research in the field of learning by design (LBD) and the processes of
learning about complex systems. The analysis examines one group of students during a forty-minute session.
Their task was to develop ideas about their design in order to present the design concept to the group as a whole.
Attention is given to the way in which the design progressed during this session with a focus on the initial
development of ideas, the use and reuse of ideas, the way the task, topic, tools, and social interactions were
communicated during verbal exchanges; and the role of the facilitator in the process. The implications of this in-
depth analysis are discussed in terms of what is known about the processes of learning during a design task.

Literature Review
Learning by design (LBD) is the blending of what is known about case-based reasoning, with what is known
about problem-based learning, resulting in a project-based inquiry approach to science learning (Kolodner et al.,
2003). A case is described as a "contextualized piece of knowledge representing an experience that teaches a
lesson fundamental to achieving the goals of the reasoner" (Bergmann, Kolodner, & Plaza, 2006, p. 209). LBD
leverages what is known about promoting deep and effective learning by situating it in activity that is both
purposeful and engaging.   Involving   learners in the process   of design  facilitates their movement    between
evaluation and creation. Designing presents an opportunity for deep learning to occur because student-designers
are required to use their knowledge of natural systems to build an artificial working replica of a functional
system (Hmelo, Holton, & Kolodner, 2000). In order to complete the task the designer needs to: (1) select an
approach, (2) understand nuances in function and behavior, (3) sequence and interrelate multiple functions, and
(4) evaluate compliance with functional requirements. The process of building a working replica, rather than an
appearance-model, presents the learner with a project that will inevitably require multiple iterations. With each
iteration the learner is presented with an opportunity for reflection on current levels of fidelity requiring them to
revisit their knowledge of the natural system. Linn (1996) describes how navigating between the model as
studied and the model as currently under construction helps build an ever more sophisticated understanding of
the system being studied.
       Vattam and Kolodner (2008) describe LBD as internally driven by a "need to know" and a "need to
do". During this iterative process students share experiences and ideas as they articulate what they will need to
learn in order to successfully complete the design challenge. Numerous LBD studies have illustrated positive
learning outcomes for students (Bamberger, Cahill, Hagerty, Short & Krajcik, 2010; Fortus, Dershimer, Krajcik,
Marx & Mamlok-Naaman, 2004; Hmelo, Holton, & Kolodner, 2000; Sadler, Coyle, & Schwartz, 2000), and the
role of providing support for these projects with paper-based reflective journals and computer based scaffolding
(Domeshek   &  Kolodner,   1994;  Guzdial,   1998; Kolodner   et al.,   2003; Puntambekar     &  Goldstein,  2007;

© ISLS                                                                                                        494
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                       Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

Puntambekar & Hubscher, 2005; Puntambekar & Kolodner, 2005; Vattam & Kolodner, 2008). In investigating
the role of the teacher in LBD tasks, Puntambekar & Stylianou, (2007) highlight the need for students to make
connections between the design activity and the learning, both of which were evident in classrooms where
teachers helped students to connect prior learning to the topic studied, and where they assisted students in the
generation of goal-related questions. Despite positive gains across a number of areas, Vattam and Kolodner
(2008) identify two significant challenges to the implementation of design-based science learning (DBSL): (1)
the need to bridge the design-science gap, and (2) finding a way to manage time and material constraints. They
investigate software solutions that integrate explanation-construction scaffolding with modeling and simulation,
and conclude that their strategy enhanced collaborative understanding and social construction of knowledge in
DBSL environments. In a more recent study Bamberger, et al. (2010) reveal that students who engaged in LBD
tasks were better able to understand scientific content and, in particular, the workings of scientific systems.
       Generally,   systems  are characterized as having components      or   definable elements,  interactions   or
interrelations between the elements; and in open systems such as ecological systems, fluxes across the system
boundaries (Reimann & Thompson, 2009). To understand the local creek and its surrounding environment,
students in this study needed to consider all of the components of the system as well as the fact that the system
may change over time (Limburg, O'Neill, Costanza, & Farber, 2002; Ossimitz, 1997). Another characteristic of
complex systems is emergence, where aggregate level structures affect the behavior of the elements of which
they are composed (Wilensky & Reisman, 2006). Many learners have trouble understanding complex systems
even when they are illustrated using tools such as models. It was hypothesized that a learning by design project,
in which the design task was to create an educational resource, may result in a greater understanding of, the
connections between elements of the system, as well as changes over time, and emergent features of the system.
       Visualizing and analyzing the processes of learning is a relatively new area in the learning sciences.
Reimann's (2009) seminal work outlines the importance of time and order in considering the processes of
learning. Generally, work in this field has concentrated on decision-making (Reimann, Frerejean & Thompson,
2009; Kapur, 2011), and has used a variety of methods of analysis, such as heuristics mining (Reimann et al.,
2009), first-order Markov models (Thompson & Kelly, 2012), and hidden Markov models (Southavilay, Yacef,
& Calvo, 2010). In this study, we examine the processes of design in a learning context, with a focus on the
development of ideas and the content of the discourse (using Kennedy-Clark & Thompson's CPACS (accepted).

Methods
A group of 16 students and 11 adults participated in the project funded by a regional organization of councils,
and supported by their high-school and a local environmental rehabilitation organization. The aim of the project
was to develop an innovative fieldwork and multimedia framework to engage other students in water and land
management issues. South Creek, the focus of the project has been described as the most degraded creek in the
region. Threats to its health include vegetation clearance, urbanization and agriculture; resulting in concerns
about increased nutrient levels and an increase in the number of weed species within the riparian zone. Over a
number of    months students and  stakeholders participated   in a multidisciplinary design  process to create     a
learning resource for use in schools across the region. The students participated in planning sessions, a site visit,
and a day of hands-on site restoration at the creek, before attending a Design Day at the University of Sydney.
       The Design Day was an opportunity for the students to develop their ideas about the design of the
educational resource, propose possible formats, identify constraints and generate a consensus upon which a brief
for the multimedia designer could be written. Participants included expert learners (the students), who ranged in
age from 12 to 17 years, and experts from education, environmental science and multimedia design. The Design
Day began with each of the expert groups outlined their desires and constraints for the design of the educational
resource, and these initial parameters were summarised and referred to during the rest of the day. In the Design
Studio (the Design Studio is a multimedia educational design research facility at the University of Sydney:
http://sydney.edu.au/research/stl/facilities/EDRS/index.shtml) participants were led through the first three stages
of a design process: empathize, define, and ideate (following the Stanford University Institute of Design ­ An
Introduction to Design Thinking (https://dschool.stanford.edu). The empathize stage took the form of a whole
group brainstorming activity during which the initial desires and constraints were discussed and the critical
components extracted. Participants worked in pairs for the define stage; each dyad performed a needs analysis to
help define the resource. During the third stage, ideate, the participants worked in groups according to discipline
area. One group contained all the adults including educators, multimedia designers and environmental scientists.
The other three groups each included between five and six students ­ expert learners. During the ideate stage,
participants were asked to  generate ideas. They  were asked     not to limit themselves  to their knowledge      of
technology and were instructed to record all ideas. The intention was to explore a wide solution space so that,
later in the Design Day, these ideas could be distilled into one coherent solution and a brief presented to the
multimedia designer for the creation of a resource prototype.

© ISLS                                                                                                          495
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                        Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

                                  Figure 1: Students working on the design task

This paper follows one of the student groups during the ideate stage of the design day. There were five members
of the group, three females and two males, whose ages ranged from 12 to 16. Video, audio and photographs of
the collaborative design work were collected. Each group was given a choice regarding the digital tool they used
(computer, interactive whiteboard, or iPad). This group chose to use an iPad that was projected onto a wall
painted in whiteboard paint (a `white-wall', see Figure 1). The transcription of their discourse was analyzed in
order to identify ideas important in the development of their design. These were then discussed and agreed upon
by all authors of the paper in a group meeting. The Collaborative Process Analysis Coding Scheme (CPACS)
was used to code the transcript. CPACS is a multi-level coding scheme that includes macro-levels (action and
content) as well as micro-levels (pronouns, tense, modality, and attitude) of discourse; only the macro-level
code, Content, was used in this paper (Kennedy-Clark & Thompson, accepted). The Content section of CPACS
contains six codes: phatics (social ­ phatics, salutations, leave taking), planning, topic, task, tool use, and off-
task. Initial agreement between raters was 52%, after discussion 96% agreement was achieved. Other work
using the Content code has shown that a periodic oscillation between phatics, tool use, planning, topic, task,
with all elements  included,   is indicative of successful collaborative    work.  This   tends  to correlate with
observable patterns in other macro-level processes, such as decision-making (Kennedy-Clark & Thompson,
accepted). The generation of Markov transition probabilities has been shown to be a useful tool to visualize the
patterns of decision-making (Thompson & Kelly, 2012) and content (Kennedy-Clark & Thompson, accepted) in
discourse, and will be used in the analysis presented here. Markov transition diagrams illustrate the probability
of each state transition (for example, from topic to task), and are appropriate for processes in which there is an
expected order of states.

Analysis
The ideas considered to be important to the development of the group's design were identified in a transcript of
the group's discourse. Selection   was based  on key descriptors     of the final design, rather than  methods  of
implementing the design, or examples of existing games the students used as inspiration. They are presented in
Table 1, below.

Table 1: Idea development

                            Idea                  Description                     Proposed by
                             1                  Original illustration              Sue (Mark)
                             2                  A computer game                       Sue
                             3                Access to technology                   Steve
                             4                   "taking care of"                    Philip
                             5                     Managing                          Philip
                             6                     The Creek                         Philip
                             7                  "challenge others"                 Steve/Mark
                             8                  Levels of difficulty               Steve/Anna
                             9                "a player in the game"               Anna/Steve

© ISLS                                                                                                        496
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                     Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

                             10                Gaming platforms                    Mark
                             11             Different game "views"                  Beth
                             12                   Role playing                     Mark
                             13                    Violence                        Philip
                             14             Score, points and awards               Anna
                             15             School subject and class               Steve

There were 15 ideas that were directly relevant to the development of the group's design. The number also
represents the order in which the ideas were suggested. Not all ideas moved the group forward in their design in
the same way. For example, three of the ideas ("taking care of", Managing, and The Creek) occurred in quick
succession; they are closely related and were suggested by the same person (Philip). Violence, however, was
less related to  other ideas and  could almost be considered tangential.  It is possible  that     this was an idea
stimulated by a discussion taking place in one of the other groups. There are many ways in which the ideas
could be rated or classified; however, for the purposes of this analysis all 15 have been assumed to be of equal
importance to the final design. Table 1 also shows the name of the group member who first put forward an idea.
Steve, the facilitator, played an important role during the design process and on more than one occasion he
reflected an idea suggested by one student, helping the others to recognize the contributions of all to the design
process and the final product.
        Reporting the counts of content codes for each person, or for each idea, adds little to the understanding
of the design process. Instead, the content codes were plotted over time, for each participant (all five students
and the facilitator), taking the generation of ideas into account. This is presented in Figure 2.

                         Figure 2: Iterations of the design, and associated conversation

Figure 2 shows the development of ideas during the process of design, for each member of the group, and the
content of discussion. Time (from 0 to 41 minutes) is shown on the x-axis, and each new idea (see Table 1)
corresponds to the number on the y-axis. Where an idea is built on, or developed, the preceding codes are only
repeated if the reference clearly takes the conversation back to an earlier idea. We did this for two reasons: (1)
the  notion  of design assumes  a cumulative and  revised whole; (2)  it was  those moments         where  iterations
emerged that we examined more closely. Each participant has been given a different colour. Circles are the
utterances that include reference to a specific idea, and diamonds are the utterances that have been coded with
content. Each content code was given a numerical value: phatics ­ x.1, tool use ­ x.3, planning ­ x.5, topic ­
x.7, and task x.9. For example, at about 12 minutes, participants had generated ideas to number 4 ("taking care
of"), and the subsequent discussion revolved around the task, and the tool (content codes): Sue was active in this
discussion (black). At about this time, she also mentioned an earlier idea, idea 1 (the original drawing), however
subsequent discussion by the rest of the group was related to the idea of "taking care of" the environment,

© ISLS                                                                                                         497
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                       Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

specifically the creek. In order to explain the patterns observed in Figure 2, the video of the collaboration was
analyzed in detail.
          The collaborative design work analyzed here opens with a longer period of discussion, following on
from the initial idea. This consists of activity and conversation that seeks to organise and orientate the group in
terms of physical space, available tools and the task at hand. It includes discussion about location and centers on
an illustration drawn by Sue and Mark before the official `start' of the group work. Sue starts by making use of
the visual representation of their efforts thus far, she uses words economically but, from the beginning, her
presence can be seen in how she records ideas and scaffolds the group's thinking. There are times when Sue
takes ownership of ideas; however, her influence can be seen predominantly in how she maintains ownership of
the tools and space in which she records ideas and how she returns the group to the objectives of the task. Anna
who seems reluctant to start without adult help precipitates the second phase of the design work. It is apparent in
the recordings that she is engaged at this stage of the collaboration; however, the rest of the group seems not to
hear her suggestions or her questions. During this time, the phrase: `what are we supposed to do?' is used by
many members of the group. It is Anna who approaches the facilitator, Steve, and he responds with a series of
questions that directs the group to value and develop the ideas they have already had. Phrases such as: You are
stealing  all these ideas (which referred to the results of the  earlier  define stage);  What  are  you actually
designing?; There's some ideas (pointing again to the white-wall); It's got to be fun so what is it?; It was your
must have thing that you just drew up so what does it do? (this question was asked of Sue); and What are you
actually designing? Sue continues the discussion with reference to what she has drawn and following further
goal-oriented questioning from Steve, says "It's a computer game". This moves the group to the second phase of
their design.
          The activity that follows includes familiarizing themselves with the iPad and the orientation of its
projected screen, allocating space within the projected iPad screen on the wall, selecting whiteboard markers
and trying them out. It also includes an extended discussion about games and gaming platforms. Knowledge of,
and access to, different digital devices and games stimulates discussion about the design task which leads to
documentation of objectives on the white-wall. It is not until Steve (the facilitator) returns that Philip justifies
their discussions by relating it back to the project. After this, a chain of closely related ideas is put forward that
includes taking care of the creek and managing a game. This `stacking of ideas' (seen in Figure 2 between
minute 14 and minute 16) is led by Philip who suggests several ideas but seldom dominates the subsequent
conversation. The rapid turn-taking in the discourse, starting with Steve at idea number 2, is carried on by the
students, particularly between Philip and  Mark   to idea number   5. At   this  point,  Anna, who   can be seen
observing Beth, Mark and Sue sketching characters on the wall, gains Steve's attention for feedback on their
progress. Steve  continues using the  techniques he  employed   earlier, goal-oriented   questioning and seeding
ideas. He says: Ok, so are you yourself in this game or do you choose a character? Mark answers with: you as a
character in the game and adds the notion of personal challenge.
          The next observable phase in the collaborative design work can be seen in Figure 2, as idea 12 (role
playing) is suggested for the first time, utterances related to the task are further apart, and there is no obvious
pattern to their distribution. As the discussion returns to gaming platforms, role playing and violence, Philip
says Make it a violent game. Mark objects, saying that he doesn't like violence or violent games, and attempts to
get support from other members of the group. During this time, the social interactions are important and threaten
the cohesion of the group. Anna directs negative comments at Mark, and Beth attempts to distract and refocus
the group by embellishing their sketched characters on the wall. This marks the end of the most productive
period of idea generation, all of which occurred in a relatively short amount of time.
          The final phase, during the discussion around idea 13, is marked by the failure of one of the tools.
During this time, the projection of the iPad onto the white-wall ceases to work, although the iPad itself still
works and the entire wall is available for writing on. At this point, members of the group seem distracted by the
other groups also working in The Design Studio, and physically withdraw from the space in which they had
been working. Even when the iPad projection is restored, some members do not return to the shared space.
Mark's absence is clearly visible in Figure 2, from the point where the notion of violence is introduced, which
results in a heated verbal exchange after which he withdraws altogether from participation in idea generation.
During this time he attempts to take ownership of the iPad in order to record ideas, however, Sue retains control.
After trying to help restore the iPad projection to the wall he sits down against the wall - and draws a city near a
river. Philip and Sue work on documenting objectives with some help from Beth and again it is not until Steve
returns that a few more ideas are generated and a conclusion is reached.
          The collaborative design process was divided into four phases, identified through in-depth analysis of
the discourse in combination with the visualization of the content codes and idea generation over time. Phase 1
involved idea 1; Phase 2, ideas 2-10; Phase 3, ideas 11 and 12; and Phase 4, idea 13. In order to determine if
there were discernable patterns to the discussion of content in these phases, Markov transition probabilities were
calculated for each of these phases, and the diagrams can be seen in Figure 3.

© ISLS                                                                                                      498
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                         Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

          Phase 1: orientation and planning                           Phase 2: rapid idea development

             Phase 3: Social interactions                              Phase 4: Technology failure

                    Figure 3: Markov transition diagrams for the four phases of design work

Figure  3 shows   four distinct  patterns of  discussion with regards  to   content,    during the   design task   (see
Thompson & Kelly, 2012 for more on interpreting Markov transition diagrams). In each, the five elements of
the content codes are displayed: phatics (the social interactions), tool (reference to the physical and digital tools
provided), planning, topic (anything that would be seen in the game, for example the creek, hiring workers etc),
and task  (utterances  related to designing  the  game). Links    between  these elements    are  shown   only  if the
probability is greater than 0.25, or if the number of transitions is greater than ten.
         In the Phase 1 transition diagram, there is a clear emphasis on planning and the tools that would be
used. Socially based utterances (phatics) were followed by those connected to either tool use or planning. If
members discussed tool use, they either continued discussing this (0.57) or moved to planning (0.35). Very little
of this discussion was related to either the topic or the task to be performed. This aligns with the in-depth
analysis, which identified this phase as an orientation and planning phase.
         Phase 2 of the design work was described as rapid idea development. The transition diagram above
shows a regular cycle through the elements of content: from planning, to tool use, to topic and then to task, with
a return to planning. In all cases, when students begin to discuss each of these elements, they tend to focus on
that element. The social interactions are not related to any one of these and this supports the in-depth analysis.
This design work was characterized by productive discussion, with few distractions; the group members appear
to be focused on their design work.
         The  in-depth analysis   identified phase 3 as  the  end  of idea  development,     and   a focus  on  social
interactions. The First-Order Markov transition diagram supports this finding. The link from phatics to itself
(53%) shows that group members remained discussing this content. In addition, links from other elements to
phatics (planning  and   task)  shows that   the members    were   distracted from     the previous   cycle  of  ideas
development.  The   link between   planning   and  tool use still exists, but  for very    small  frequencies.  Initial
observations of the design work had led to an assumption that the failure of the iPad was the trigger for the
group dispersal; however, the social interactions may have preceded this.
         The key event in phase 4 was the failure of the projection of the iPad. During this time constructive
work ceases as the group waits. In Figure 3, the transition diagram shows the only link between elements: from
planning  to tool use, presumably   indicative of  problem  solving   related to the    technical issues. This  figure
indicates a lack of connection between elements of the discussion: the links were distributed between so many
different elements that none had a high enough probability or frequency to be displayed.

Discussion and Conclusions
The aim of this paper was to describe the processes of design observed in a group of five students during a
learning by design task. Multimodal analysis has provided insights into relationships between the patterns of the
content of discussion, the generation of ideas, and the phases of design work. One measure of the success of this
group was the organic nature of its designerly behavior. While we only concentrated on the idea generation
stage of design in this analysis, Figure 2 showed that this group returned to ideas raised earlier in the design
work. An important feature of the group's design process was the way in which the participants revisited earlier

© ISLS                                                                                                             499
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                           Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

ideas. This was done naturally, within the processes of conversation, and new ideas were built on the new,
common understanding of the design.
         Steve, the   facilitator, was    an important   element  in   this system;     his goal-oriented  questions
(Puntambekar & Stylianou, 2007) provided students with the opportunity to navigate between the design studied
and  the resource  under construction    (Linn, 1996).   Opportunities for  reflection  were  incorporated  into the
productive phase of idea generation without disturbing the generation of new ideas. Steve's role in connecting
their activity to the task at hand, and his persistent use of goal-directed questioning, is clearly instrumental in
aiding this group to develop their ideas over time. Their freedom to access and talk about gaming systems, with
which they   were  already familiar,  and  the  ease  with which  they could    record, draw  and  build  upon prior
iterations (all with the express aim of designing a tool to connect other students with the project) was well
supported in this environment.
         Students' use of tools was a key part of their idea development and record keeping. Further analysis
(Thompson, Ashe, Wardak, Yeoman & Parisio, accepted), investigated how the tools available in the dedicated
design space effectively supported the collaborative design work of the members of the group. The tools were a
central element of discussion and productive design work (Figure 3). They were an aid in collaboration allowing
for the articulation of the ideas of individuals on the white-wall and in creating a space in which all ideas were
combined in the more permanent record keeping on the iPad. Interestingly, it was the social interactions that
seemed to interrupt the regular pattern of idea generation as was seen in the Markov diagrams.
         The learning outcomes for students participating in this project relate to knowledge about water quality
issues as well as an understanding of the process of design for learning. In the analysis presented, the focus has
been on   the social interactions   and interactions  with  both physical   and digital  tools. However,  the  ideas
concerned with managing the creek occurred early in the design work, and when students returned to these
ideas, they added to them, rather than revising them. Implicit knowledge about the inputs and outputs from the
ecosystem, impacts, and links between elements of the ecosystem was present in the development of their ideas.
Knowledge    about the ecosystem     was  present  in their discourse, and   in their   drawings (Thompson    et al.,
accepted), throughout the collaborative task. The students agreed that the ecosystem in question needed to be
managed in terms of human impact on this system, and that there should be shared use; mostly for urbanization
(most familiar to these students) rather than agriculture or industry. They put themselves in the pictures that they
drew of the creek, and a strong personal connection between the creek and the group members was observed.
There was no demonstration of an understanding of the global/local relationship in the ecosystem, nor specific
reference to possible impacts of decreased water quality.
         By extracting multiple streams of data, visualizing and analyzing the processes of learning, phases of
idea generation, as well as patterns of discourse, were identified. Future research will apply these to the analysis
of the other groups that participated. Comparisons between the groups will then be made using lag sequential
analysis techniques. It is expected that the orientation phase would be common across all groups. One question
to investigate is what moves the group from the orientation phase into design work. In this study, the facilitator
played a significant role. Given that he visited all groups, his role can be further interrogated. A larger question
for this research is what role the interaction between the task, the social interactions, and the coordination of
tool use play in influencing the processes of learning.
         The aim of this paper was to describe the processes of design evident in the interactions between group
members   and  the tools provided    in a learning   by design task. We   have  shown    that students were able  to
articulate an understanding of some (often challenging) ideas about systems. In addition the development of
ideas as they related to the final design were identified and visualized. Through these visualizations, phases in
the design work were identified that corresponded to recognizable patterns in the discourse. Social processes
and interactions with tools were essential to the progression through the design process. The management of
time and materials was identified as a challenge of LBD projects (Vattam and Kolodner, 2008). Part of the
challenge is knowing when to intervene in a group's collaborative design work. Identifying naturally occurring
phases, and the indicators of movement into and out of these phases is essential to managing this process.

References
Bamberger, Y., Cahill, C., Hagerty, J., Short, H., & Krajcik, J. (2010). Learning science by doing design: How
         can it work at the middle school level? Journal of Education, Informatics, and Cybernetics, 2(2), 41-
         46.
Bergmann, R., Kolodner, J., & Plaza, E. (2006). Representation in case-based reasoning. The Knowledge
     Engineering Review, 20(03), 209­213.
Domeshek, E., & Kolodner, J. L. (1994). The design of a tool kit for case-based design aids. Artificial
     intelligence and design  '94 (pp. 109­126). Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic.
Fortus, D., Dershimer, R. C., Krajcik, J., Marx, R. W., & Mamlok-Naaman, R. (2004). Design-based science
         and student learning. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 41(10), 1081-1110.

© ISLS                                                                                                           500
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                  Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

Guzdial, M. (1998). Technological support for project-based learning. Association for Supervision and
    Curriculum Development, 39­42.
Hmelo, C. E., Holton, D. L., & Kolodner, J. L. (2000). Designing to learn about complex systems. The Journal
       of Child Psychology and Psychiatry and Allied Disciplines, 9(3), 247­298.
Kapur, M. (2011). Temporality matters: Advancing a method for analyzing problem-solving processes in a
       computer-supported collaborative environment. International Journal of Computer Supported
       Collaborative Learning, 6(1), 39-56.
Kennedy-Clark, S. & Thompson, K. (accepted). Using multimodal discourse analysis to identify patterns of
       problem solving processes in a computer-supported collaborative environment. In Sudweeks, F. &
       Lim, H. (Eds) Innovative Methods and Technologies for Electronic Discourse Analysis.
Kolodner, J. L., Camp, P. J., Crismond, D., Fasse, B., Gray, J., Holbrook, J., Puntambekar, S., et al. (2003).
    Problem-based learning meets case-based reasoning in the middle-school science classroom: Putting
    learning by design into practice. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 12(4), 495­547.
Limburg, K. E., O'Neill, R. V., Costanza, R., & Farber, S. (2002) Complex systems and valuation. Ecological
       economics, 41, 409-420.
Linn, M. C., & Muilenburg, L. (1996). Creating lifelong science learners: What models form a firm foundation.
       Educational Researcher, 25, 18-24.
Ossimitz, G. (1997) The development of systems thinking skills using system dynamics modeling tools. Retrieved
       6 April 2004, from http://www.uni-klu.ac.at/users/gossimitz/sdyn/gdm_eng.htm
Puntambekar, S., & Goldstein, J. (2007). Effect of visual representation of the conceptual structure of the
    domain on science learning and navigation in a hypertext environment. Journal of Educational
    Multimedia and Hypermedia, 16(4), 429­459.
Puntambekar, S., & Hubscher, R. (2005). Tools for scaffolding students in a complex learning environment:
    What have we gained and what have we missed? Educational Psychologist, 40(1), 1­12.
Puntambekar, S., & Kolodner, J. L. (2005). Toward implementing distributed scaffolding: Helping students
    learn science from design. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 42(2), 185­217.
Puntambekar, S., & Stylianou, A. (2007). Comparing classroom enactments of an inquiry curriculum: Lessons
    learned from two teachers. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 16(1), 81­130.
Reimann, P. (2009). Time is precious: Variable- and event-centred approaches to process analysis in CSCL
       research. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 4, 239-257.
Reimann, P., Frerejan, J. & Thompson, K. (2009). Using process mining to identify models of group decision
       making in chat data. Paper presented at the CSCL Conference, Rhodes, Greece.
Reimann, P. & Thompson, K. (2009). Ecosystem modeling for environmental education: From stocks and flows
       to behaviour and interactions. In Blumschein, P., Hung, W., Jonassen, D. & Strobel, J. (Eds.) Model-
       based approaches to learning: Using systems models and simulations to improve understanding and
       problem solving in complex domains, pp. 111-148. Sense Publishers, Rotterdam.
Sadler, P. M., Coyle, H. P., & Schwartz, M. (2000). Engineering Competitions in the Middle School Classroom:
       Key Elements in Developing Effective Design Challenges. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 9(3), 299-
       327. doi: 10.1207/s15327809jls0903_3
Southavilay, V., Yacef, K., & Calvo, R. A. (2010). Analysis of Collaborative Writing Processes Using Hidden
       Markov Models and Semantic Heuristics. Paper presented at the Proceedings of the Third International
       Workshop on Semantic Aspects in Data Mining 2010, in conjunction with the 10th IEEE International
       Conference on Data Mining (ICDM 2010).
Thompson, K., Ashe, D., Wardak, D., Yeoman, P., & Parisio, M. (accepted). Identification of patterns of tool
       use and sketching practices in a learning by design project. The 10th Int'l Conference on Computer
       Supported Collaborative Learning, Madison, Wisconsin.
Thompson, K., & Kelly, N. (2012). Processes of decision-making with adaptive combinations of wiki and chat
       tools. Paper presented at the The Future of Learning: Proceedings of the 10th International Conference
       of the Learning Sciences (ICLS 2012).
Vattam, S. S., & Kolodner, J. L. (2008). On foundations of technological support for addressing challenges
    facing design-based science learning. Pragmatics & Cognition, 16(2), 406­437.
Wilensky, U. & Reisman,  K. (2006)   Thinking like a wolf, a sheep, or a firefly:       learning biology through
       constructing and testing computational  theories ­ an embodied  modeling         approach. Cognition    and
       Instruction, 24 (2) 171-209

Acknowledgments
This work was funded by the Australian Research Council grant FL100100203. We would like to acknowledge
the intellectual contribution of Peter Goodyear to the ideas developed in this paper, as well as the dedicated
work of the students, teachers, and other experts who participated in this project.

© ISLS                                                                                                         501
