CSCL 2013 Proceedings                   Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

     Factors influencing online collaborative learning: Why some
                             groups take off better than others?
      Andri Ioannou, Maria Mama, Skevi Demetriou, Cyprus University of Technology, P.O. Box 50329
                                               3603 Limassol, Cyprus
                   andri.i.ioannou@cut.ac.cy, mamatimo@cantab.net, Demetriou@Skevi.net

        Abstract: In this work we carried out a case study to understand how some groups "take off"
        better   than others  with   regards   to engaging   in the  collaborative  knowledge     construction
        process   in  a  virtual learning setting.  We   found  that student   facilitation was  an important
        contributor to the process. Instead, the contribution of "lower" quality initial postings can
        jeopardize the process.

Introduction
Consistent with a sociocultural perspective on learning, collaborative learning (CL) is particularly popular in
online, asynchronous courses. Typically supported by asynchronous threaded discussion tools, online learners
engage in social exchange, discussion and collaboration in an effort to advance their knowledge. Computer
supported collaborative learning (CSCL) research has focused on a number of factors influencing the success of
CL in virtual settings. Group composition (in terms of gender, status, culture and expertise), size of group,
nature of the task and task structuring, participants' individual characteristics, the role of the instructor and the
role of tools/interfaces   supporting   the  learning    task,  have all  been   identified  as   variables influencing
collaborative knowledge construction in CSCL settings (e.g., Resta & Laferrière, 2007).
        In this study we attempt to advance the research in online CL by focusing on two factors: student
facilitation and  quality of initial postings.  Prior works    suggest  that the presence    of a student   facilitator in
asynchronous   online    courses drives the  quality  of the   learning process  and the    meaningful construction     of
knowledge within the online community (Aviv, Erlich, Ravid & Geva, 2003; Garrison & Cleveland-Innes,
2005). Yet there are still concerns that low critical thinking and irrelevant contributions take place when the
discussion is guided by peers (Rourke & Anderson, 2002). In terms of quality of contributions, a few studies
have  focused  on  structuring   online discussions   and  evaluation   rubrics to ensure   meaningful  discourse   and
knowledge construction (Gilbert & Dabbagh, 2005). Yet, there seems to be lack of work examining how "good"
and  especially  "bad"    postings   influence the   progression  of    online discussions   and  the  construction     of
knowledge. The present study provides quantitative and qualitative types of evidence on how student facilitation
and  quality  of initial postings  influence   collaborative   knowledge  construction   in  online  discussions. With
reference to these factors, the study provides a perspective on why some groups "take off" better than others
with regards to collaborative knowledge construction in online discussion forums.

Method
The participants were 34 graduate students in two sections of an online "Learning Theories" course, taught over
16 weeks at a public University in Northeast USA. The sample included 79% women (21% men), between 22
and 54 years old (M=37, SD=10.8). Students were randomly assigned in nine groups; seven groups of four
students and two groups of three students.
        Students were tasked to work collaboratively in their groups on a case vignette. Student collaboration
was  carried out virtually, using the threaded discussion forum   of WebCT.     The activity lasted two weeks. To
ensure quality, the case vignette was adopted from a book specialized on the case study method by Dottin and
Weiner (2001). The case presented an ambiguous classroom problem concerning a 12-year old boy, Joe. The
discussion of the case vignette was not intended to promote knowledge acquisition; rather students were to
apply concepts learned in the course and argue for plausible solutions based on their knowledge and
professional experience. Ultimately, students were asked to produce a consensus plan for Joe's teacher,
suggesting a solution to the problem. In order to guide their activity, students were provided with guidelines on
how to approach the analysis of the case vignette (also adapted from Dottin and Weiner (2001)). The discussion
was led by the students themselves. The instructor of the sessions monitored the group discussions, but her
intervention was purposely restrained to structural feedback only (e.g., "You need to base your arguments on
instances from the case and to support those with theory"). During group work, the entire corpus of
collaborative discourse of each group was automatically captured in WebCT's discussion forum.

Data analysis
The analysis was conducted in two levels from (a) coding and counting the group's discourse in order to
understand the general content structure of the discussion, to (b) exploring the collaborators' contributions as

© ISLS                                                                                                                  50
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

they occurred chronologically and re-examining the discourse in depth to constitute evidence for the role of
student facilitation and quality of initial postings in the collaborative knowledge construction process.

Coding and Counting
After reviewing  a number    of coding schemes  of previous  investigations of   the process of    collaborative
knowledge construction (e.g., Aviv et al., 2003; Puntambekar, 2006), we decided to shape our coding scheme on
the basis of the "Interaction Analysis Model" proposed by Gunawardena, Lowe & Anderson (1997), which
conceptualizes the processes of collaborative knowledge construction in virtual environments as a series of
successive phases. The  coding   scheme  was fine-tuned on  the  basis of the  discourse  data of    the     present
investigation (approximately 15%).   Two coders worked   closely together  to  modify  and refine    the      coding
scheme in context and to explicitly decide what aspect of the content constitutes evidence for each coding
category: (1) Sharing/ Adding, (2) Negotiating meaning, (3) Elaborating, (4) Evaluating/testing     of proposed
synthesis, and (5) Consensus/Applying co-constructed knowledge (detailed table can be provided upon request).
        The entire corpus of the collaborative discourse of each group was analyzed using the coding scheme.
The post was taken as the unit of analysis and was categorized with one of the categories for the phases of
collaborative knowledge construction. When in doubt about the phase that should be applied, the contribution
was coded in the lower phase, and in clear cases of two or more applicable phases (usually evident in lengthier
postings), the contribution was coded in the higher phase. Approximately 50% of the discourse was coded by
the two coders simultaneously. The remaining 50% was coded by each coder independently and percentage
agreement was computed to be 89%; disagreements were resolved by discussion between the coders.
        We then calculated frequencies of the coded phases per group as in Table 1. The distribution of codes
in each phase helped us understand the general content structure of the discussion in terms of phases of
collaborative knowledge construction. Table 1 presents the number of codes across phases and groups.

Table 1: Number of codes across phases and groups.
              Phase 1        Phase 2      Phase 3        Phase 4        Phase 5        Total
group1        3              3            2              6              1              15
group2        10             2            5              2              1              20
group3        7              2            2              3              1              15
group4        4              4            3              2              1              14
group5        13             7            6              6              1              33
group6        20             5            19             4              2              50
group7        7              10           13             8              4              42
group8        9              4            7              11             2              33
group9        7              14           3              5              1              30
Total (%)     80 (32%)       51 (20%)     60 (24%)       47 (19%)       14 (6%)        252 (100)%

Chronological Visuals and In-depth Examination of Discourse
Using chronological visuals, we further explored the collaborators' contributions as they occurred
chronologically while re-examining the discourse in depth (beyond aggregate counts of posts) to constitute
evidence for role of two factors -- student facilitation and quality of initial postings ­ in the knowledge
construction process. This analysis was inspired by Hmelo-Silver, Chernobilsky & Nagarajan's (2009)
CORDTRA visualization technique.

                                Figure 1. The chronological visual of Group 5.

© ISLS                                                                                                           51
CSCL 2013 Proceedings            Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

       For each group, we generated an Excel scatter-plot using the groups' coded discourse. See for example
Figure 1 for Group 5 (all other visuals can be provided upon request). The time of the contribution runs at the
top of the visual in chronological order (e.g., 2-weeks duration of the activity). Collaborators and discourse
categories are listed on the right of the visual, while each time-point on the visual represents a collaborator and
his/her contribution in the knowledge construction process. The analysis begins by inspecting all visuals for
patterns. Then, the knowledge construction process is examined in more depth by "zoom in" on the areas of
each diagram where patterns exist and by going back and forth between the visual and the group's discourse.

Results
Considering Table 1 and the visuals of all groups, our attention was drawn to particular groups which appeared
more or less successful. These groups were examined in depth (beyond aggregate counts of posts) in relation to
the factors of interest in this study: student facilitation and quality of initial postings.

Student facilitation
The detailed examination of the groups' discourse, by going back and forth between the visuals and the
discourse, showed that groups with an emerging student facilitator appeared more successful in their
collaboration compared to other groups. Using an empirical, bottom-up approach we identified that student
facilitators possessed core presence in guiding and structuring the discussion toward the final product,
participated frequently often undertaking the summarization of the points and ideas articulated (by themselves
and others), and their contribution was acknowledged by their colleagues. A student facilitator was evident in
two out of the nine groups of the study: Group 5 and Group 8.
       In particular, considering the visuals of Groups 5 and 8 in relation to the visuals of all other groups and
the counts of Table 1, these two groups appear successful in engaging in the collaborative knowledge
construction process for several reasons: 1) there were contributions along all phases of knowledge construction,
2) all group members participated in the discussion, 3) there were not too many contributions (e.g., >40), which
could be suggesting difficulty in coming to a consensus, and 4) there were not too few contributions (e.g., <20),
which could be suggesting limited engagement with the task. The groups' discourse allowed us to understand
the specific activities undertaken by the emerging leader over time, as well as the quality of the contributions in
these groups.
       In both of these groups the student leader (female in both) emerged in the early stages of the
discussion. In Group 5, the leader (Member B) took the initiative to describe the situation and define the
problem making sure she set out common grounds of discussion with the rest of the participants. Upon
interaction with the other group members, she next tried to identify secondary issues and revise the problem
definition. She often (from the beginning until the end) summarized the other students' postings evaluating and
extracting the central ideas that would construct the final argument. Managing time in view of the assignment
deadline was another initiative on her behalf. Overall, her postings were lengthy but not authoritative as her tone
and style was not discouraging to other group members. She clearly expressed her opinion but at the same time
invited others to add to or modify her points. Also, she frequently encouraged and motivated her colleagues to
contribute, for example, "Those are some of the thoughts I had today. Some of Joe's issues might be taken care
of by a change in the classroom learning environment, starting with classroom management. [...] I think [Name]
hit on this too! Great job [Name]". At the end, she indicated her satisfaction from their collaboration and
appreciated the outcome as a successful one. Her role as a leader was reflected in one of the other participants'
posting who, when finalising the group's consensus, said to her: "...Will you take a final look at this and then
post it to the group consensus discussion? I can do this, but I don't want to post without your final `once over'".
       The student who emerged as a leader in the Group 8 (Member B) demonstrated similar facilitation
patterns. She took the initiative to start and direct the discussion, and although this group had a rather late start
in the activity, they worked intensively during week 2, engaged in all phases of the collaborative construction
process and managed to complete the task on time. Her postings, albeit not lengthy, inspired the contribution of
the rest of the participants, for example, "You did a lot of work for all of us on "Readers Workshop" and
"Responsive Classroom". Thanks [Name]!" She frequently integrated the several contributions into one
summary document while leading the discussion under a critical evaluation angle. Also, she often reviewed and
monitored the group's progress. Her colleagues recognized her significant contribution, as shown in comments
such as: "Your hard work really helped me out a lot." She contributed the most up until the end of the
discussion, occasionally giving the impression that she did so trying to meet her colleagues' expectations:
"Ladies, we are almost at the end!!! I am not sure who wrote the closing paragraph, but it pulled things together
well. I added to it and I am posting here again for final comments/edits/revisions."
       In both groups, the emerging student leader often drew from theories in the course textbooks and
readings to initiate discussion in some direction, for example, "Are Joe's nonacademic needs being met?
According to Ormrod (p.486), students are more likely to focus on their schoolwork when their nonacademic
needs have been met." (Group 8 leader). In other cases, the student leader, drew from their experience and, with

© ISLS                                                                                                           52
CSCL 2013 Proceedings             Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

examples from their teaching practice, they indicated how they would respond to the problem described in their
case study activity. In this way, they encouraged the rest of the participants to construct and elaborate on those
examples. For example,
       "Based on my experience, the teachers would benefit from finding out what Joy's interests are. While
       he seems to be ok in math, the teachers of other subjects would do well to find out what other areas of
       knowledge he is confident about. They could use his interests to help spur work in language arts,
       reading, science, social studies etc..." (Group 5 leader).
Last but not least, in Groups 5 and 8 where a leader emerged providing facilitation, there was less confusion
while the discussion naturally progressed through, and reached, all phases of collaborative knowledge
construction. In contrast, Groups 1-4 demonstrated limited engagement in all phases of knowledge construction;
in fact, these groups shared the workload to get the task completed (i.e., cooperation) while collaboration was
limited. On the other hand, Groups 6,7,and 9, although engaged in the process, they experienced difficulty
summarizing their views in cohesive arguments ­ a task undertaken but the emerging student facilitator in
Groups 5 and 8. This finding further constituted empirical evidence of successful collaboration in Groups 5 and
8 enabled by the facilitating role of the emerging leaders.

Initial postings of low quality
Our detailed examination of the groups' discourse suggested that the contribution of "lower quality" postings in
early stages of the discussion can jeopardize the collaborative knowledge construction process. This kind of
behavior was evident in two groups (out of 9) of the study, particularly Group 2 and Group 3. In both of these
groups a participant started their initial ideas (Phase 1 statements) in bulleted form. Then, this formatting was
adopted and continued by other participants and for the vast majority of the contributions. In general, the
postings in bulleted form were undeveloped statements which did not seem to encourage further discussion, thus
we can fairly characterize those as "lower quality" postings. Overall, Groups 2 and 3 were less engaged in the
collaborative knowledge construction processes compared to all other groups, as evident both in the counts of
Table 1 and the visuals. This constitutes evidence that postings of low quality contributed in the early stages of
the discussion can jeopardize the progress of collaborative knowledge construction. Unlike Groups 2 and 3, all
other groups presented initial postings of better quality in the sense that these postings were well-developed and
communicated ideas in a narrative and meaningful way.

                                        Conclusion
The study provides a perspective on why some groups "take off" better than others with regards to collaborative
knowledge construction in online discussion forums. In this work, we found that student facilitation was an
important contributor to the process. Instead, the contribution of "lower" quality initial postings can jeopardize
the process. A discussion of these findings in relation to previous research as well as directions for future
research are included in an extended version of this manuscript (please contact the authors for a copy of the long
manuscript). Our findings, although tentative and demanding replication, can inform both the instruction and
design of online discussions and group activities aiming to promote collaborative knowledge construction.

References
Aviv, R., Erlich, Z., Ravid, G. & Geva, A. (2003). Network analysis of knowledge construction in asynchronous
       learning networks. Journal of Asynchronous Learning Networks, 7(3), 1-23.
Dottin, E. & Weiner, M. (2001). Enhancing effective thinking and problem solving for preservice teacher
       education candidates and inservice professionals. London: University Press of America.
Garrison, D. R. & Cleveland-Innes, M. (2005). Facilitating Cognitive Presence in Online Learning: Interaction
       Is Not Enough. American Journal of Distance Education, 19(3), 133-148.
Gilbert, P., & Dabbagh, N. (2005). How to structure online discussions for meaningful discourse: A case study.
       British Journal of Educational Technology, 36 (1), 5-18.
Gunawardena, C. N., Lowe, C. A. & Anderson, T. (1997). Analysis of a global online debate and the
       development of an interaction analysis model for examining social construction of knowledge in
       computer conferencing. Journal of Educational Computing Research, 17(4), 397-431.
Hmelo-Silver, C., Chernobilsky, E. & Nagarajan, A. (2009). Two sides of the coin: Multiple perspectives on
       collaborative knowledge construction in online problem-based learning. Investigating Classroom
       Interaction: Methodologies in Action. Boston: Sense Publishers,
Puntambekar, S. (2006). Analyzing collaborative interactions: Divergence, shared understanding and
       construction of knowledge. Computers & Education, 47(3), 332-351.
Resta, P. & Laferrière, T. (2007). Technology in support of collaborative learning. Educational Psychology
       Review, 19(1), 65-83.
Rourke, L. & Anderson, T. (2002). Using peers teams to lead online discussions. Journal of Interactive Media
       in Education, URL: http://www-jime.open.ac.uk/article/2002-1/80(accesed October 16, 2012).

© ISLS                                                                                                            53
