CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                            Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

          Individualistic appropriation as a primary mechanism of
                  collaborative conceptual change: a case study
                                                             
      Michael Tscholl, University of Central Florida, 12461 Research Parkway, Orlando, FL 32826, USA,
                                                mtscholl@cs.ucl.ac.uk
     John Dowell, University College London, Malet Place, WC1E 6BT London, UK. jdowell@cs.ucl.ac.uk

         Abstract: Collaborative learning with cases and problems is characterized by the contribution
         of disparate knowledge and varying interpretations. The way in which this public knowledge
         is exploited individually to construct a conceptualization of the problem is examined here. The
         paper  presents   a microanalysis  of  a collaborative  case-centered   learning  dialogue   between
         three learners where a novel conceptualization is constructed re-using selected surface and
         structural elements contained in a prior conceptualization. How the novel conceptualization is
         constructed   is  shown    by  tracing surface   and  structural   knowledge   in the  sequence   of
         contributions and by identifying the point-of-view adopted by the learners. We argue that a
         mechanism of individualistic appropriation accounts for this construction, and this mechanism
         may   be  central   in collaborative   learning. This  entails   a revision of   the  notion  of  co-
         construction in collaborative learning.

Introduction
In collaborative problem- or case-based learning, a divergence of views on how to conceptualize and frame the
problem or case is a common occurrence. Groups' discussions are characterized by the effort to identify the
right way to understand the problem, a process that may then produce the conceptual change we usually regard
as learning. Through the sequence of discursive exchanges, different viewpoints on a problem will change and
so also will the way in which problem aspects are conceptualized.
         A fundamental research issue concerns how a change in conceptualization is achieved within a group
and whether the change results from an individual developing it, or whether the group develops it jointly. An
individual may   put   forward   a  view of   the case or    problem  that  may  become    the  basis for  the groups'
conceptualization,  or   a different viewpoint    may  be  proposed   becoming   the  new   basis. In  other  words,  a
conceptualization may evolve through transforming a prior conceptualization, or it may be created de novo, in
part with  selected elements    of  surface and   structural  knowledge   contained  in  prior conceptualizations.  By
implication, effective   collaborative  problem-based     learning may     not  depend  on  one  person   internalizing
another's view; their own learning may develop through incorporating elements of the views put forward by
others, possibly then resulting in the advancing of alternative conceptualizations, which may then be recognized
as correct (given a specific task context) and adopted by others.
         This paper is a case study of a discussion between three medical students working in a virtual learning
system (featuring a chat tool and a means to navigate the learning material) to interpret a case of alleged medical
negligence concerning a patient's consent. The students were tasked to interpret the case within given concepts
of medical law, interpreting the facts of the case and relating them through consideration of those concepts.
Individual viewpoints are central to our analysis and by identifying the viewpoints of learners' contributions, we
describe how knowledge deployed within a conceptualization is taken up and re-used to support a different
conceptualization. In this way, the development of conceptualizations as well as the change between them can
be captured.
         The analysis adopted the perspective of problem structuring and its corollaries of story abstraction and
concept-fact bindings to interpret the interactive nature of the students' activities. This allows us to trace the
introduction of  facts   and relational  knowledge    (in support  of one    or another  viewpoint)   and  then,   more
importantly, to trace how facts and relational knowledge are taken up subsequently within a different viewpoint
resulting in a different structure of the case. By adopting this perspective, we can show what a learner does with
the knowledge being shared with them and how the reuse of knowledge relates to the development of the
abstract representation of the case.
         Through    this  analysis,  we  show   that the  development   of   an abstract   representation  of  the case
conforming to the set learning goals ­ namely the structuring of the case in relation to domain knowledge ­
results from  an  individual    appropriating selected  knowledge    elements   and  the restructuring  of knowledge
conveyed in prior contributions.

© ISLS                                                                                                             502
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                             Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

Iterative development of representations
Joint construction of knowledge is deemed to lie at the heart of collaborative learning and is a complex and
multi-dimensional phenomenon (Hausmann, Chi & Roy, 2004). An influential model treats joint construction as
the process   of conceptualizing    the problem     within a shared  problem     space  (Rochelle,  1992).   Within    this
problem space a more or less virtual representation of the problem is produced and iteratively improved through
successive contributions made by    different people.   The  group converges    on a set of shared meanings and     shared
view of the problem and problem solution by gradually aligning their views. Conceptual change, according to
this model, results from the tendency of convergence: in the effort to be communicative and collaborative,
peers' cognitive responses are gradually aligned resulting in a shared representation of the problem.
          The  prime   attraction of  the    shared  representation  model    is the  explanation   it  affords    of how
conceptualization of the problem develops within the group with each group member contributing conceptually.
The group produces a shared representation of the problem, albeit incomplete and flawed, and continues to
refine it collectively. The conceptualization evolves as different meanings for concepts and different ways of
structuring the problem converge on a common meaning and structure.

Individual representations
However,   the   development  of  a  shared   problem    representation  is not  intrinsic to  collaborative  knowledge
construction, and learners' individual construction of representations is at least equally plausible. For example,
Miyake   &  Shirouzu   (2002)   argue   that whilst  collaborative  learning  from   problem   solving    may seemingly
correspond with a `one voice' interpretation, close inspection of a group dialogue reveals that each person is
instead  using   the others as    "stepping  stones"   to  enable  them    to elaborate    a distinctive, individualistic
representation of the problem. Peers within a group provide a vital monitoring role for each other, allowing
them to develop their own individual representations of the problem (Shirozou, Miyake & Masukawa, 2002).
This individualistic approach allows that people can develop conceptualizations through integrating different
considerations about the problem features and the relevant underlying concepts; however the conceptualizations
remain essentially personal and re-interpretation occurs within the person.
          The individualist model of collaborative problem-based learning supports a characteristically different
explanation of how conceptual change occurs wherein each individual is seen to generate and modify their own
conceptualization of the problem but influenced by others' conceptualizations. One way in which this influence
may work is that a person internalizes and adapts the conceptualization offered by one of their peers in the
group. Alternatively, the conceptualization is created wholly de novo by the individual but likely incorporating
elements of the conceptualizations offered by the peers.

Interaction
The individualist model sees interaction within the group as having a fundamentally different role of supporting
the learners  in developing   their own   perspectives,    engendering,  for  example,   more   thorough    checking   and
modifying of individual understandings (e.g. Miyake, 2007). In this view, individuals' construction of their own
knowledge is a consequence of being challenged and critiqued (e.g. Glachan & Light, 1982) rather than a result
of individuals building on each other's knowledge. In interactive situations learners are seen to readily produce
explanations  from   which  they  themselves     benefit  most; this `self-explanation   effect',  (Chi  et  al., 1994)  is
naturally consistent  with  the individualist    model.  More   generally,  for  the individualist model     the  effect of
learners being in a collaborative situation is primarily pragmatic: the situation engenders specific roles (the
monitor,  the  task-doer; the  explainer,    the listener) that in  turn result  in  re-elaboration of    an individual's
knowledge,    and learners  may   change     their understanding   independently     on the  alternative  understandings
proposed by someone else (e.g. Schwarz, Biezuner & Neuman, 2000).
          Central to research on interaction is the question of the mutual dependency of learners' activities and
the level of the content, i.e. knowledge deployed in the groups' cognitive environment. In CSCL research,
various concepts have been proposed to capture `interactivity' in order to articulate claims about the role of
interaction in learning (e.g. Fischer & Mandl, 2005). The concept of uptake (Suthers, 2006) is specifically
intended to capture not only the pragmatic aspects of an interaction, but also the way in which the content of
learners' contributions are related, and hence possibly dependent. Uptake describes how learners move within a
shared problem space, each one adding, modifying, elaborating or combining knowledge and understanding of
the problem at hand and influencing each other by the continuous refinement of that problem space. However,
radical changes in conceptualization during a group learning session may be difficult to capture without also
analyzing the point of view or perspective learners currently work within. These perspectives may not only be
held and maintained by an individual, but may also be at the heart of changes in conceptualization that often
represent the most advanced forms of collaborative learning. By identifying the point of view or perspectives of
individual learners   we  can   pinpoint  the    mechanisms  through    which    such   changes are  engendered.      Such
perspectives are visible in the way in which a case or problem is structured, that is, in the way in which facts are

© ISLS                                                                                                                503
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                         Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

interpreted and related to each other, forming an often hierarchical multi-level abstract structure whose `peak' is
the `point' or `story' of the case. The notions of conceptualization and structure, and the processes of structuring
and concept-fact binding are thus central in our analysis, and will be introduced now.

Structures, structuring and conceptual change
In general, problems or cases (in this paper we use the terms interchangeably) consist of surface features and
structural features. The surface features are the concrete aspects of the problem, both given and implied, and can
include agents, objects, actions and events. For example, in the case of medical negligence used in the case
study that follows, a surface feature is the low level of patient risk associated with the medical procedure. A
problem also has a structure that represents its point or story. The structure is an abstraction that binds the
surface aspects of the particular problem to the domain concepts. For example, in the medical case the structure
is the causal relationship between the injury suffered by the patient in the operation and the failure to inform the
patient of the risk associated with the medical procedure (i.e., if the patient had known about the risks, would
they have consented to the operation). The question of the surgeon's liability turns on this point.
        To conceptualize a problem is to develop a representation of the structure of a problem. It requires a
person to have knowledge of the domain from which the appropriate concepts can be drawn to produce a correct
structure. In the medical negligence case, to produce a correct structure the learners need to already know that
the law requires one to show that harm to a patient was caused by the actions of a doctor, not simply that the
doctor's actions were deficient.

Method
The first  analysis identified the argumentation    structure of the  dialogue. Utterances  were    categorized   into
claims, counter-claims, confirmations and elaborations. This gave us an overview of the overall dynamic of the
discussion as well as insight into the individual perspectives adopted by the students.
        A second and more important analysis we employed is verbal analysis (Chi, 1997) that focused on the
content of  the chat  messages.  This  analysis assumes   that specific  terms  represent a learner's view     of the
problem, and that the cognitive structural representation of a problem can be uncovered by analyzing the use of
relational terms (such  as `because',  `but',  etc.). To capture  the relations  between  contributions,  a further
analysis, based the earlier verbal analysis, identified topical relationships between parts of or the complete
contribution. So, for example, we checked whether a structural relation evident in a contribution was mentioned
in a subsequent one; or whether contributions mentioned the same fact of the case. Based on this analysis,
speculations about  the relations  of earlier utterances on   subsequent ones   were made,  therefore  giving   us  a
picture of the interactivity between the learners.

The study
The learning setting
The setting for this study was a purpose built distributed and collaborative virtual learning environment. The
students were remote from each other and all their communication was mediated by the system through a chat
tool. The chat window can display 30 lines of text at one time, allowing the most recent exchanges to be
reviewed. The user interface also contains a menu that allows users to select the content of a display window
containing the case text and the background to the core notions of medical negligence. The system recorded all
text-communication and the student's use of the hyperlinks. The study lasted about 20 minutes.
        A group of three undergraduate medical students participated in the study. The students were given five
minutes to read a short summary of the lecture on medical negligence they had attended. The students were then
presented with the description of the case and were asked to explain the judge's verdict.

The case
The students discussed the `Chester case', a case of negligent liability. The text given to the students read:
  "Miss    Chester  suffered from  chronic back    pain  and  consented  to neurological  surgery.  After the
  surgery, she had extensive motor and sensory impairment. The kind of surgery done, it was accepted,
  carried some unavoidable risks and a one to two per cent chance of serious complications.      It was also
  accepted that a patient such as Miss Chester should be informed of those risks.
  The extent of this warning was disputed. The doctor claimed she had been warned adequately. Miss
  Chester countered that her fears about being `crippled' were brushed aside and she had been told that
  the operation was merely a routine procedure. She went on to claim that if she had known about these
  risks she would not have agreed so easily to surgery without giving it more thought and/or seeking a
  second opinion.
  Additional information: There was evidence of her aversion to surgery ­ judged unlikely to be so
  reduced in three days, if she had been adequately informed of the risks."

© ISLS                                                                                                            504
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                                     Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

Analysis results

Introduction
We will begin the analysis of the dialogue by describing the views taken by each of the three students ­ Erin,
Claire and Susan (not their real names) ­ because the dynamic between the different views is central to our
claim for the reuse of knowledge.
        The essential dynamic is simply described as follows: Erin proposes a judgment of the case based on
its conceptualization in terms of informed consent. Susan, while initially accepting and contributing to that
conceptualization, changes, at the end of the first half of the discussion, radically her view of the case, and
correctly applies the concepts and conceptual relations pertinent for negligent liability. Claire contributes more
significantly than Susan to Erin's conceptualization, but analyses it critically, and by doing so, furnishes Susan
with structural knowledge upon which Susan then builds her new conceptualization.

Erin and Claire
Erin opens the discussion by introducing the concept of informed consent to conceptualize the case (figure 1,
line 77). As described earlier, this conceptualization relies on ethical principles (primarily the principle of non-
paternalism, i.e. the prohibition to limit a person's autonomy or liberty even if it is thought to be for their own
good; the requirement of informed consent derives from this principle) and is complementary to the `legal view'
that the students should adopt. She concomitantly judges the surgeon's behavior by appeal to this view.

     77       Erin: I think the doctor has failed to achieve appropriate consent           conceptualization (judgment)

     78       Claire: the risk was small 1-2%                                              countering 77
     79       Susan: he got consent, just not an informed one                              elaborating 77
     80       Claire: he must have had the consent                                         countering 77
     81       Claire: informed but not well enough informed                                countering 79

                                Figure 1. Students' initial argumentations within the
                                            concept of `informed consent'
Erin's view is therefore not incorrect, but rather misplaced. Claire attempts to counter the severity of that view
arguing that that `the risk was small' (figure 1, line 78), and that what has been told the patient suffices that the
consent obtained is an informed one. It is important to point out that this argument is essentially incorrect
because the requirement of informed consent stipulates that the patient needs to be informed independently of
any other consideration.

     82       Susan: even risk of death from GA is small, but patients have to be          countering 78, confirming 77
              told all the same
     83       Erin: exactly he didn't fulfill the criteria of legal consent. i.e. the      confirming 77
              patient should understand the risks involved be able to weigh then
              in a balance and recall them.
     84       Claire: but if she had been told the risks and heard that there was          countering 82
              only a 1-2% chance that it would go wrong, she might have
              dismissed it thinking that it probably wouldn't happen to her
     85       Susan: do  you    think that the patient should be     told of every
              possible risk?
     86       Erin: but there is evidence of her aversion to surgery                       countering 84

                  Figure 2. Claire's countering of the severity of the lack of information. It
                 introduces the relation between the knowledge of the risk and the patient's
                              decision, within the perspective of informed consent.

        Erin continues to maintain that informed consent was not obtained (figure 2, line 83); while Susan
confirms the absolute requirement to inform a patient (principle of non-paternalism; line 82, figure 2). Claire
counters these absolute stances by reiterating that the risk was so small, that even a fully informed consent
wouldn't have changed the patient's decision (figure 2, line 84). We view the introduction of this relationship as
an  essential  stepping-stone    towards    the  switch   in  perspective             and  the  development   of  the    correct
conceptualization (see section on Susan, below). Through this argument, Claire introduces, for the first time in
the dialogue, a relation between the knowledge about the risk and the patient's decision, albeit this relation is
`deployed' within the ethical perspective and in order to counter Erin's insistence on the principle of non-

© ISLS                                                                                                                     505
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                                   Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

paternalism. Claire's thinking in relation to the `smallness' of the risk is evident in line 92 (figure 3), giving us
proof of Claire's working within the ethical perspective.
        The introduction of this relation (a structural knowledge) is crucial for the discussion, and indeed this
relation is a core relation of the structure of the case within a conceptualization centered on negligent liability.
Indeed, the plaintiff (Mrs. Chester) will have to convince the court or jury that if she had been fully aware of the
risk, she would have not consented to the surgery. Through this, a relation of causality or co-causality between
the surgeon's action and the harm is established.

Susan
It is Susan who reuses the relation between the knowledge of the risk and the patient's behavior, to propose the
novel (and correct) conceptualization of the case based on the concept of negligent liability (figure 3, line 90)
        While not expressing the novel conceptualization as a question (the question to be answered in court),
Susan's utterance displays the correct relations between the facts of the case in terms of negligent liability.
Susan's reference to both aspects (knowledge of the risk and patient's decision) in utterance 90 is evidence that
she had generated her new conceptualization on the basis of aspects that had become the main focus of the
discussion. Susan's accomplishment is to isolate the aspects used earlier to support a different view, and insert
them into a new structure.
        90       Susan: so had she known of the risks, she would have                   (new) conceptualization
                 continued to suffer from chronic back pain
        91       Erin: that would be up to her
        92       Claire: patients should be told all the risks, but some risks are      countering 89
                 so small that there's no point emphasizing them too much
                 otherwise you'll just end up worrying the patient (probably
                 unnecessarily)
                Figure 3. Susan's different (and correct) conceptualization (line 90): the correct relation
                          between the `knowledge about the risk' and the patients' decision.
Claire
Claire switches between the views established by her peers. She initially embraces Erin's view, but remains
critical of it. Claire's contributions are mostly counter-claims to Erin's conceptualization, but occur within the
view of informed consent.    They are shown here in context.
        Claire's first contribution (line 78, figure 1) counters the judgment entailed by Erin's use of the concept
of informed consent. Claire's use of the `smallness of the risk' is unclear in 78, but is reiterated and becomes
clear in 84 (figure 2). Claire's position on the case, reiterated and evident also in 92 (figure 3), is the following:
she accepts  that the   surgeon  has violated    the patient's right  to  information,      but  proposes to    include, in an
eventual judgment, mitigating circumstances. Specifically, she argues that since the risk is so small, there was
no need to acquire informed consent.
        It   is crucial for  our  interpretation   to  understand    that    Claire,    despite  her  proposal   to take  into
consideration the special and mitigating circumstances, views the case in terms of the concept of informed
consent, not the concept of negligent liability. Claire, as Erin, views the case as representing an issue of patients'
rights and professional obligations, not an issue of responsibility and compensation for damage caused.
        Later however, Claire internalizes the new conceptualization put forward by Susan in utterance 90.
Claire's contribution in 98 (figure 4) is clear evidence for this internalization: indeed this is the question that
will be answered in court. This is in contrast to Erin who continues to maintain her point-of-view (figure 4, line
97) and still   contributes  to the  conceptualization   offered    by Susan        (and  later Erin), thus remaining     well
interactive.
        93       Susan: she had a fear of being crippled, had an aversion to
                 surgery, the risk of impairment from the surgery was small
        94       Erin: and then she wouldn't be complaining now as she would
                 have fully consented to the surgery and understood the risks
        95       Susan: it seems to me that the doctor was trying his best to get
                 her to have the operation
        96       Susan: true
        97       Erin: but at the end of the day it is not the doctors right to decide  countering 95
                 whether she should have surgery it is her decision
        98       Claire: do you really think that she would have refused the
                 operation even if she had known the risks?

      Figure 4. The last exchanges. Erin continues to view the case within the ethical perspective; while
        Erin changes to the perspective of negligent liability producing (in 98) the question that will be
                                                   answered in court

© ISLS                                                                                                                    506
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                             Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

Reinterpretation of facts
Further evidence of the different perspectives and that a new (and correct) structure has been created by Susan,
derives from the role and relevance given to an apparently negligible fact: that the surgeon was aware of the
patient's aversion to surgery.
          Erin had emphasized that fact to claim, `it was even more important to fully inform the patient' (figure
2, line 86). The fact, therefore, acquires some relevance in her conceptualization. However, within the new
`negligent  liability'   conceptualization,  this   fact is differently  explained.  The     surgeon's  withholding  of
information is seen now as evidence for his caring attitude towards his patient (Susan, figure 4, line 95) rather
than evidence for his professional deficiency. It can clearly be both, albeit in a civil court where only the
question on the causal relation between an action and harm is discussed, it is not relevant. It is important to point
out that it is Susan giving a new role and relevance to this fact: it is her who completes the binding of the facts
within the new structure.

Discussion
Two perspectives on the Chester case are evident in the dialogue: one based on ethical principles and one based
on the legal concept of negligent liability. Each is a valid way of understanding the case, but the task the
students  were   set demands     to apply  the legal   perspective. Specifically, they need   to consider  whether  the
surgeon's withholding of a more extensive warning had a causal or `causally contributing' effect to the damage
sustained by the patient.
          The two perspectives do overlap: both reference explicitly the failure to fully inform the patient about
the risks of the surgery. It is correct, as Erin states in #77 and continues to maintain throughout the discussion,
that the clinician failed to obtain informed consent from Ms Chester and therefore violated her right to be
informed. However, the ethical perspective is not sufficient to identify the causal relation that is at the core of
cases of negligent liability.
          Our  interest  in  the discussion    lies in the  conceptualizations that  are    constructed within the  two
perspectives, which enable us to show how knowledge constructed and made relevant within one perspective is
taken up   within    a different    perspective. We    have  identified these  conceptualizations    by   analyzing the
interpretations the students give to aspects, and, more specifically, the role and relevance they assign to the
aspects. Erin proposes the first conceptualization of the case, embedded within the ethical perspective. Within it,
the absence   of adequate    warning   is uniquely   sufficient to  propose a `judgment'    on the  surgeon's  behavior
because it violates the patient's right to information and, more generally, it violates the ethical principles of non-
paternalism and autonomy. Most other aspects of the case have no relevance in this conceptualization. Later,
Erin gives some relevance to the aspect `aversion to surgery' by pointing out that, given Ms Chester's aversion,
it is all the more important to inform her. Erin's interpretation of this fact is a further indication for her framing
of the case within an ethical perspective; in a sense, she is clearly focused on providing a judgment of the
surgeon's behavior in relation to ethical principles ("he failed (...)"). His knowledge about the patient's aversion
is, for Erin, a further indication for a general ethical failure.
          Claire accepts Erin's perspective on the case, but analyzes it critically by checking whether a specific
concept ­ the concept of informed consent ­ of the ethical perspective is applicable to the case. She points out
that since the risk was so small, informed consent was not needed. She mentions the `smallness' of the risk, the
aspect that according to her trumps Ms Chester's right to be informed, as a fact to counter Erin's quite severe
indictment of the surgeon. The discussion revolves, as a consequence, on the significance of the `size' of the
risk, which is made relevant and becomes the focus for all students' contributions. In this way, they remain
interactive and collaborative (Trognon, 1993; Barron, 2000), and indeed Claire, in #84, works on from this fact
to propose a relationship between the size of the risk and the patient's decision. It is important to point out that
the relation between the `size of the risk' and the patient's decision is deployed into the group's cognitive
environment to counter Erin's `evidence' (the absence of adequate warning); it is an attempt to lessen the impact
of Erin's `evidence' on the judgment. The relation is hence deployed within the ethical perspective, which by
itself is, at this stage of the discussion, not questioned.
          But it is this relation between the `size' of the risk and the patient's decision that provides the basis for
Susan's re-conceptualization of the case. As we have shown, Susan constructs the different conceptualization
within the perspective of negligent liability. She isolates the relation between the extent of the warning and the
patient's decision from Claire's earlier relation between the smallness of the risk and the extent of the warning
and the patient's decision, and so correctly identifies the core question of the case: whether being fully informed
about the risk would have made the patient decide to not to undergo the surgery. She then also interprets the
other aspects on the basis of this structure, as indeed the new conceptualization assigns different roles and
relevance to the aspects. The `smallness' of the risk is irrelevant within this structure, except in relation to the
patients' decision   (in the  ethical perspective   it was  discussed as being    central); another fact, the surgeon's
knowledge about the patient's aversion to surgery, while not being crucial, is given an interpretation that is
opposite to the one Erin gave it within the ethical view: rather than strengthening the view of the surgeon as

© ISLS                                                                                                              507
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                          Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

having failed, Susan points out that he may have withheld some information on the basis of his professional
opinion that surgery was the best option available to the patient; he is, in this sense, a caring doctor.
         Susan's novel conceptualization is only gradually taken up and developed. However, while Claire at
the end accepts the new conceptualization, and indeed poses the question that will have to be answered in court
(figure 4, line 98), Erin continues to persist on the ethical view.
         By tracing the introduction and subsequent take-up of surface and structural knowledge (the causal
relation) we show that the construction of a new (and, given the task demand, correct) conceptualization builds
upon   knowledge     elements   introduced   previously   (cf.  Trognon,   1993).   We    argue  that   Susan's    new
conceptualization selectively exploits structural and surface elements of the earlier conceptualization, and that
Susan remains interactive when creating the new conceptualization.
         To what degree then is Susan's construction of the conceptualization a co-construction? Theberge-
Rafal (1996) describes co-construction as the phenomenon where utterances by different speakers represent a
complete  idea   or  where   a  contribution  extends  a  previous   contribution.  Co-construction   is  a  mark   for
interactivity, and, in Barron's (2000) analysis, of successful coordination. Co-construction may however also
indicate jointly produced novel ideas (e.g. McGregor & Chi (2002)); whether they are produced as a result of
collaboration or are joint articulation of pre-existing ideas, is clearly difficult to establish. However, if co-
construction were defined as the joint construction of a complete idea, then the dialogue between Susan, Claire
and Erin would not count as an example of it. It is more the case that the learners take up one another's
contributions, modifying the content and developing new ideas from them (Suthers, 2006).
         Roschelle's (1992) notion of joint construction is also relevant for the interpretation of the students'
discussion. He defines joint construction and, by extension, collaborative learning as the mechanism by which a
new   conceptualization   is generated   on  the basis   of a  peers' partial conceptualization.   The    phenomenon
described in this paper calls for a refinement of this definition. Roschelle's definition hinges on the notion of
partial conceptualization. On the surface, Claire's conceptualization cannot be called a partial conceptualization
of Susan's because it is embedded within a different perspective. However, we might only decide that Claire's
conceptualization is indeed partial if we know what interpretation Susan gave it. Susan interpreted Claire's
contribution in terms of negligent liability, and completed this partial structure. Moreover Claire's contribution
becomes a partial conceptualization because Susan interpreted it in this way. Which is the mechanism within
which collaborative learning occurs: a student gives meaning to information written in a text or knowledge
introduced into the group's cognitive environment, which may then be taken up and given a different meaning
by her peers.
         It is important to discuss also the possible impact of the virtual environment of the discussion. It is
likely that the availability of prior deliberations in the chat window (it displays about 8 messages from all
learners) has made it possible to revisit those prior deliberations, and facilitated their reuse in the construction of
the novel conceptualization. Face-to-face conversations are typically more strongly constrained by adjacency
with the strict ordering of utterances organized ­ in addition to content relevance ­ by non-verbal cues and rules
of turn-taking. Though `far' references are not uncommon, they represent a significant effort on the part of the
speaker to close a current thread, while needing to justify the opening of a new one. In a computer-supported
learning environment many conversational rules do not apply and typed messages are more persistently present
than spoken ones, allowing learners re-visits of prior contributions and interpretations less constrained by the
currently agreed perspective.

Conclusions
As recognized by many in CSCL, it is essential that the basic notion of interactivity ­ namely that an action is at
least partially  influenced  by  a prior  action ­  remains   the focus of  collaborative    learning research. More
specifically, it is important to adopt frameworks that enable us to capture the determination of one peer's action
in relation  to  another peer's  action. Individualistic accounts   allow, in this  respect, quite under-determined
actions: what knowledge is constructed when being, for example, criticized, is under-determined and indeed
depends very strongly on an individual's own knowledge. The study of collaborative learning should therefore
include a strong focus on what knowledge is constructed and how that new knowledge is specifically related to
knowledge in the group's environment.
         We have adopted a framework for studying collaboration that is focused on this analysis, as well as
allowing an   influence  of  individualistic processing.  Our  analysis illustrates how   collaboration   is sustained
through a joint focus on shared information and knowledge (Barron, 2000, 2003) that provides opportunities for
interaction, but  may    also, as  a consequence,   restrict  what  new  knowledge    is  constructed.    The group's
achievement becomes, within this view, quite remarkable. Despite an early focus on a fact that is, at the end, not
relevant within the sought conceptualization and the emphasis on the (ethical) perspective that all 3 students
work within, a novel conceptualization is constructed interactively. Our analytical focus on knowledge elements
and   especially the introduction  and   uptake  of structural knowledge,   leads  to the conclusion   that   this new

© ISLS                                                                                                             508
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                             Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

conceptualization results from an individualistic appropriation of elements (cf. Schwartz, 1995), rather than
progressive shared construction (Rochelle, 1992).
         In  problem-based     learning,   where    microanalyses    are  de rigueur,   case  studies   have    a special
significance. However, a single case study cannot be the basis for a general claim ­ case studies are useful for
illustrating particular processes or mechanisms that may then be the subject of further inquiry, both theoretical
and experimental. This paper is not intended to provide evidence that individualistic appropriation is a key
mechanism for collaborative learning; rather, it is intended to demonstrate the viable application of this concept
to a collaborative learning situation; and also to demonstrate the difficulties of applying a notion of interaction
to a real-world   learning  session  where    that notion   does not take   into account the  positioning   resulting  for
different viewpoints of the learners. But more importantly, the case study illustrates how individual viewpoints
can  be  uncovered     through a   verbal  analysis  and  by  carefully  constructing   the alternative  structures each
viewpoint   entails  (fact interpretations and    relations between  facts). As   such, our  analysis   may  be   seen as
contributing to a much needed and increasingly sought framework for the analysis of conceptual change through
collaboration.

References
Barron, B. (2000). Achieving coordination in collaborative problem-solving groups, Journal of the Learning
         Sciences, 9(4), 403-436.
Barron, B. (2003). When smart groups fail. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 12 (3), 307 ­ 359.
Chi, M. T. H. (1997). Quantifying qualitative analyses of verbal data: A practical guide. The Journal of the
         Learning Sciences, 6(3), 271­315.
Chi, M.   T.  H.,   de Leeuw,   N.,  Chiu,    M.,  & LaVancher,    C.   (1994).  Eliciting  self-explanations   improves
         understanding, Cognitive Science, 18, 439-477.
Doise, W., Mugny, G. & Perret-Clermont, A.-N. (1975). Social Interaction and the Development of Logical
         Operations, European Journal of Social Psychology, 9, 245-247.
Fischer, F., & Mandl, H. (2005). Knowledge Convergence in Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning: The
         Role of External Representation Tools Journal of the Learning Sciences, 14(3), 405-441.
Gick, M. and Holyoak K. (1980). "Analogical Problem Solving." Cognitive Psychology n. 12, pg. 306-55.
Glachan,   M.   & Light,   P.  (1992). Peer   Interaction   and  Learning:   can  two  Wrongs   make    a Right?    In G.
         Butterworth & P. Light (Eds.), Social Cognition: Studies in the Development of Understanding, (pp.
         238-262). Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Hausmann, R. G. M., Chi M. T. H., and Roy M. (2004). Learning From Collaborative Problem Solving: An
         Analysis of Three Hypothesized Mechanisms. Proceedings of the 2004 Cognitive Science Conference.
         Mahweh: NJ: LEA.
Jeong,  H.  &   Chi, M.    (2007). Knowledge      Convergence    and Collaborative    Learning, Instructional     Science,
         35:287­315
McGregor, M. U. and Chi, M. T. H. (2002). Collaborative Interactions: the Process of Joint Production and
         Individual Reuse of Novel Ideas, Proceedings of the 2004 Cognitive Science Conference. Mahweh: NJ:
         Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 2004.
Miyake, N. (2007). Conceptual Change through Collaboration, in Vosniadou, S. (Ed.) International Handbook
         of Conceptual Change, pp. 453-478, Routledge.
Miyake,  N.   and   Shirouzu   H.  (2002). Learning   by    Collaborating   Revisited:  Individualistic Vs. Convergent
         Understanding.     Proceedings    of the  2002   Cognitive  Science     Conference. Hillsdale:   NJ: Lawrence
         Erlbaum Associates.
Roschelle, J. (1992). Learning by Collaborating: Convergent Conceptual Change, The Journal of the Learning
         Sciences, 2 (3), pp. 235-76.
Schwartz, D. L. (1995). "The Emergence of Abstract Representations in Dyad Problem Solving" The Journal of
         the Learning Sciences, vol. 4, no. 3, pg. 321-54.
Shirozou, H. (2010). Collaboration as constructive interaction and the jigsaw method as its enhancer, Workshop
         Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on the Design of Cooperative Systems, International
         Reports on Socio-Informatics, 7(1). International Institute for Socio-Informatics.
Shirouzu,   H., N.   Miyake,    and  H.   Masukawa     (2002)    "Cognitively    Active  Externalisations   for   Situated
         Reflection." Cognitive Science, vol. 26, n. 4, pg. 469-501.
Suthers, D.  D.   (2006).  Technology   affordances   for   intersubjective meaning-making:     A research    agenda   for
         CSCL. International Journal of Computers Supported Collaborative Learning, 1(3), 315-337.
Trognon, A. (1993). How does the process of interaction work when two interlocutors try to resolve a logical
         problem? Cognition and Instruction, 11(3&4), 325-345.

Acknowledgement
         We acknowledge the support of the Economic and Social Research Council, award no. L328 25 3013.

© ISLS                                                                                                               509
