CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                          Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

Experiences of a Newbie Helper in a Free Open Online Mathematics
                                      Help Forum Community
            Carla van de Sande, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, carla.vandesande@asu.edu

          Abstract: Free, open, online help forums are open to the public and allow students to
          anonymously seek homework help from volunteers who have the time, willingness,
          and experience to respond. These forums offer affordable, accessible, and efficient
          help as  a social, public    endeavor.   Some    forums    exhibit a  strong   sense of  virtual
          community,    especially  amongst    well-established     helpers  who are   core participants.
          To investigate how newcomers may enter into such a community, five helpers were
          recruited to participate for eight consecutive weeks in an existing popular forum for
          mathematics homework help covering arithmetic through advanced mathematics. We
          modified a virtual community framework to describe the activity of the newcomer
          helper who made the most progress in moving from peripheral to fuller participation
          in terms of membership, influence, and immersion. This process involved cultivating
          a sense of belonging and building supportive relationships, contributing meaningfully
          and creating a voice, and demonstrating dedication to shared goals.

Introduction
Free, open, online, homework help forums are found on public websites and allow students to anonymously post
problem-specific questions from assignments that are then visible to others. These forums are open in the sense
that, unlike other asynchronous communication tools (such as course forums or discussion boards), access for
students is not restricted to any particular course or institution. Also, instead of hosting discussions based on the
content from a particular course, the forums cover broad school subject areas (such as mathematics, science, and
business) at a range of course levels (from elementary to graduate). These forums are a help-seeking resource
that is currently available to any student who has Internet access.
          Students  from around   the  world  access   these forums   when  they are  in need  of help  completing
assignments or understanding course material outside of the classroom, and this is particularly true for school
subject areas such as mathematics that are homework intensive and require students to construct solutions to
exercises. It is also probably no coincidence that the mathematics forums receive so much traffic given the large
number of students who suffer from "math anxiety" and who approach their studies and math courses with
apprehension, if not downright dread. (See Hembree, 1990 for a meta-analysis of the extensive body of research
on math anxiety). Thus, many sites (e.g., www.mathhelpforum.com and www.freemathhelp.com) that offer help
in arithmetic through higher mathematics have tens of thousands of members, thousands of whom are regularly
active. The net result is a rich set of archived threads that stem from student mathematics homework questions
and contain authentic help-seeking and help-giving discourse. These are some of the reasons why a mathematics
homework help forum was chosen as the focus of this study, although the research presented here is pertinent in
any school subject area covered by help forums.
          The forums belong to a genre of technology-assisted education called `networked learning' (Goodyear
et al., 2005) that emphasizes the social dimension afforded by information and communications technology. The
extent of  the `network'  depends,    in part, on  the  participation structure  that a  given help   forum adopts
(Martinovic, 2005; van de Sande & Leinhardt, 2007). Some forums effectively bound the network by restricting
the set of volunteer helpers to those who are qualified according to some criteria (such as content knowledge or
pedagogical approach). Other forums favor a broader, self-selecting network (which we refer to as Spontaneous
Online Help, or SOH sites) by allowing any member to take up and respond to a student query and contribute to
an ongoing threaded discussion, or thread. What this means is that SOH "tutors" can be anyone with any level
of expertise and favoring any pedagogical approach from anywhere. Furthermore, and paramount to the notion
of community, these SOH helpers can interact with one another in the threads as they collectively help students
with their assignments.
          The helpers (who are generally the core participants) in SOH mathematics forums may exhibit a strong
sense  of virtual  community  if  they identify   with fellow  members,   assume  responsibility  for participation,
negotiate features and practices, and appear comfortable exchanging ideas (van de Sande & Leinhardt, 2007). In
such sites, it is common practice for helpers to refer to one another by name, joke and kid around with one
another,  introduce  alternative perspectives  or ways  of   looking at the  problem, engage   in "math talk," and
perform peer review by critiquing or correcting mistakes and errors in others' contributions (van de Sande,
2008). Broadly speaking, the helpers in forums with these dynamics might be considered as members of a
community of practice, as conceptualized by Wenger (1998) and Lave and Wenger (2002).

© ISLS                                                                                                         510
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                             Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

        The    objective  of  this   study is to   explore  the enculturation    of newcomer      helpers into   an SOH
mathematics help forum that already has a tightly knit group of well-established helpers. In other words, we are
exploring how newcomers learn to become accepted into the community, or "members of the gang." Adopting
the lingo of contemporary youth particularly with regard to participation in a given Internet activity, we refer to
these newcomer     helpers    as "newbies."   Using   a modified   framework     that  conceptualizes   sense  of  virtual
community, the major question addressed is: What are the characteristics of a newcomer helper who is on an
"inbound trajectory" from peripheral to full participation (Wenger, 1998, 100-101) as a helper in such a forum?

Theoretical Framework
A community is chiefly characterized by relational interactions or social ties that draw people together (Heller,
1989). The    connections  between    members    of a  community   need   not  be   based  on physical   proximity  (e.g.,
neighborhoods or classrooms), but can be forged between people anywhere who share interests, hobbies, or
ideas. The Internet, in particular, supports such relational communities by mitigating the distance between
people who wish to connect and interact with one another.
        The notion of a virtual community is a diverse, dynamic, and emergent construct, building largely on
our understanding of physical community. According to Fernback and Thompson (1995), a virtual community
consists of a set of social relationships created in cyberspace through repeated contact within some boundary.
Balasubramanian    and  Mahajan    (2001)   specify a   set of virtual community     requisites:  (1) an  aggregation  of
people, (2) rational members, (3) interaction in cyberspace without physical collocation, (4) a process of social
exchange, and (5) a shared objective, property/identity, or interest. Preece (1999) emphasizes the relational
aspects of a virtual community, such as the presence of mutual support and shared emotional connections.
Despite their different emphases, all of these notions of virtual community involve relationships of various
kinds  (e.g., help services,  interest groups,   etc.)  and degrees   (ranging   from  casual  to formal)   that exist in
Cyberspace.
        Like     physical communities,     virtual  communities    can  be   more   or  less  tightly knit.  Community
researchers refer to the affective bonds that characterize closely woven communities as "sense of community,"
and  recognize   that the presence    of sense   of community      increases member     satisfaction, commitment,    and
involvement.     Based on McMillan & Chavaz's (1986) theoretically based and empirically supported descriptive
sense of community framework, Koh & Kim (2003-4) propose three dimensions that characterize a sense of
virtual community: (1) membership ­ people experience feelings of belonging to the community, (2) influence ­
people feel that they have a voice in the community, and (3) immersion ­ people are dedicated to spending time
within the community. Meaningful antecedents include leaders' enthusiasm (commitment to maintaining and
sustaining community) and enjoyability (pleasurable engagement in community activities). In this paper, we
apply a modified version of this framework to the activity of a newbie helper on a particular online mathematics
help  forum   to characterize    what it means   to move    from   the periphery    to fuller participation in   a virtual
community.

Methods
We chose a forum with a strong sense of virtual community (van de Sande & Leinhardt, 2007) that already has
several well-established helpers as core participants and tolerates a variety of pedagogical tactics (ranging from
providing solutions to scaffolding moves). As a first step, we elected to use qualitative methods because the
exploratory research involves an emergent phenomenon (e.g., forum helper enculturation), and is geared toward
gaining in-depth information that is difficult to quantify (e.g., group membership) (Strauss & Corbin, 1990).
        Five recruited helpers were asked to participate in an online mathematics SOH forum for at least 10
hours  weekly    (scheduling   flexible) for  eight consecutive    weeks   and   were   compensated    $10/hour.    These
(admittedly   somewhat    arbitrary)  conditions were   intended   to support a  level  of commitment     that would   be
sufficient for   participants to  become   acquainted   with   the logistics  of forum    participation  and   potentially
experience a sense of virtual community.

Site Description
Started in 2002 by an enterprising high school sophomore, www.freemathhelp.com (FMH) has attracted over
17,000 members to date, who have contributed upwards of 140,000 posts to more than 34,000 threads. The math
help message board is split into individual) forums covering mathematics from the elementary level (arithmetic)
up through university (post-calculus), and also includes forums for discussing administrative issues (such as any
problems encountered or suggestions for improvement) and "math odds and ends" (puzzles, clever math jokes,
trivia, etc.). FMH is an SOH site, so that any registered member can act as a helper. The FMH helpers who
volunteer information about themselves as part of their member profile are self-reportedly (retired) educators,
professionals, and (advanced) students, who have a passion for wanting to share their expertise and help others.
In contrast   to some  other  mathematics     help  forums,  there is  no single    community    advocated   pedagogical
approach prescribing what it means to "help" and how this should be accomplished, although the dominant

© ISLS                                                                                                               511
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                        Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

perspective is that it is better practice to scaffold students by asking them questions or giving hints rather than to
provide answers or worked solutions. (See van de Sande 2010, 2011 for discussion of a mathematics homework
help forum that favors one particular theory of learning.) Instead, on FMH, participating helpers can choose
whether and how to respond to any given student query or ongoing thread ­ and neither these decisions nor the
quality of their contributions affect a helper's status on the forum. Instead of having a reputation system (in
which status on the forum depends on others' ratings), members (whether they ask questions, answer them, or
both) achieve status on the forum according to the number of distinct threads to which they have contributed:
new (0-49), junior (50-249), full (250-999), senior (1000-2499), elite (more than 2500). The established helpers
on this site convey a strong sense of virtual community (van de Sande & Leinhardt, 2007).

Participants
The five participants in the larger study all had considerable mathematical expertise and experience helping
(undergraduate)   students solve  exercises face-to-face, but  were newbies  in online   help forum   participation.
Participants were recruited through advertisement, and selected on the basis of enthusiasm, commitment to the
study, and life experience. In particular, an effort was made to recruit young adults who were currently students
themselves, as well as adults with career experience. Two of the participants were upperclassmen undergraduate
engineering majors (young adults), two were graduate engineering master's students close to completion of their
degrees (young adults), and one was a former instructor (adult) with an engineering degree who had recently (6
months previously) immigrated to the United States from Mexico. This last participant was a newbie to the
forum in two additional ways: language (English was his second language) and culture (his experiences as a
student and instructor took place in Mexico). At the time of the study, the two undergraduate students were also
employed part-time by the engineering help center on the campus of a large university in the southwest.

Data
Four sources of data were collected: archived forum threads or logs, interviews, journal entries, and private
messages. The primary data source consisted of the logs of participants' threads during their eight contiguous
weeks as helpers. In addition, each participant was interviewed twice, once prior to participation, and, again
following  the eight weeks  of   participation.  These interviews  were recorded  and transcribed,   and addressed
content knowledge,   experience   as helpers/tutors, pedagogical   views, comparisons  of  face-to-face  vs. online
help, and perceptions of the activity, including suggestions for improvement. To further coordinate the content
of forum threads with participants' reflections and intentions, participants were asked to keep journals during
the study recording their thoughts, scratch work, and any significant events or encounters. Finally, some of the
participants engaged in private messaging with students, which is a forum option. Although not all of these
messages were kept (due to lack of foresight on the researchers' part), those that were provide a source of
behind the scenes data that is normally not accessible to forum observers.

Results
In this paper, we focus our attention on JuicyBurger who, of all the study participants, appeared to make the
most progress in moving from peripheral to fuller participation. Although he did not contribute to the largest
number of threads nor have the largest number of posts, his activity over the eight weeks was consistent with
sharing in a   sense of  virtual community   according    to the three dimensions  in the  Koh   &   Kim  (2003-4)
framework: membership, influence, and immersion. Figure 1 contains our hypothesized schematic depiction of
how these dimensions were related to characteristics of Juicy Burger's activity on the forum. We suggest that
conforming to the actions of others and affirming the contributions of others are markers of membership, that
challenging others demonstrates perception of influence in the community and, conversely, that being either
challenged or affirmed by others demonstrates that the community is seeking to influence the member, and,
finally, that when a member indicates that s/he is actively participating in the joint effort of other members and
is also engaging in extracurricular activities that this signals immersion in the virtual community.

Membership
Members    in  a virtual community    feel  connected  with  other members   and   enjoy a feeling   of  belonging,
somewhat akin to being a part of a family or a group of close friends. This is true of the established FMH
helpers, and evident in the appearance of their contributions, as well as in the ways in which they joke around,
tease one another, and compliment one another on clever or novel ways of approaching a problem (van de
Sande & Leinhardt, 2007). Although the predominant (and perhaps sole) form of interaction amongst most
FMH  helpers   is on-line, there  is nevertheless  a strong  sense of  camaraderie and   respect for  other  subject
enthusiasts who are seriously engaged in this grassroots effort to band together and help students.

© ISLS                                                                                                         512
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                         Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

   Figure 1. Schematic of relationship between characteristics of newbie helper activity and sense of virtual
                                                   community.

        In his forum participation, JuicyBurger consistently communicated a desire to conform or blend in with
other helpers, both in the way he presented his contributions and in the way he interacted with others. First,
during his first week on the forum, he adopted the preferred method of posting mathematical expressions. Using
horizontal notation can make it cumbersome to communicate mathematical ideas, and many of the established
helpers are  proficient at using   LaTeX  (a   typesetting system   designed for the  production of technical  and
scientific documentation) to format their contributions. (Students, on the other hand, appear to favor horizontal
notation, perhaps due to their more peripheral participation in the community.) During his first week on the
forum, JuicyBurger asked for advice on how to embed math in his posts, took the advice of the senior member
who responded, and subsequently used LaTeX to create well-formatted contributions, some of which included
quite complicated expressions. In the post-interview, JuicyBurger explained how he was able to quickly "learn"
LaTeX by finding and copying (cutting and pasting) examples from experienced helpers' threads and then
revising the code for his purpose.
        In addition to making his posts look like those of established helpers, JuicyBurger was friendly and
congenial, bantering with other helpers, as well as recognizing and affirming others' contributions. Table 1
contains excerpts from JuicyBurger's logs in which he demonstrated solidarity with other helpers by voicing
agreement, paying compliments, and supporting their efforts. Notice that in all of these examples, JuicyBurger
personalized the  interaction   by  explicitly naming  the   helper  whose   contribution he was    affirming. By
conforming to the habits of established helpers and affirming others' contributions, JuicyBurger signaled to the
established helpers that he wished to share membership in their virtual community.

Table 1: Excerpts in which JuicyBurger affirmed and supported contributions made by established helpers.

                         Context                            Affirmation
 JuicyBurger   and    mmm4444bot       (Elite  Member)      `I am with mmm4444bot on this one...' (post 18 in
 were   collectively working    with  student  who   was    thread)
 trying  to  graph a    parabola in  an online  system.
 (posts 1-17)

 BigGlenntheHeavy       (Full Member)   pointed  out  to    `BigGlenntheHeavy is correct... You only need to
 student  who  is  taking  limit   of function  that the    divide  the  coefficients  of  the   highest  order

© ISLS                                                                                                         513
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                                Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

 lower order terms `become superfluous.' (post 2 in             term...'(post 3 in thread)
 thread)
 JuicyBurger informed student who was seeking `an               `Ah hah! That does make it much simpler. Thanks
 easier method' for finding arc length, `I'm sorry to           galactus.' (post 5 in thread)
 inform you that this is the only way to do it!' and
 suggested that `the only easier way would be to use
 your    calculator  to integrate   for   you.'  (post   2 in
 thread)

 Galactus (Elite Member) then sketched a method in
 which    the  integral    is  framed     in  terms  of    the
 independent      variable instead,  with    the result  that
 `the integral is easier.'   (post 4 in thread)
 mmm4444bot         provided      student  with    rules   for  `Now   use   the rule   that mmm4444bot      posted  for
 logarithmic sums and differences (post 2 in thread)            adding  logs  and    you  should   find your    answer.'
                                                                (post3 in thread)

Influence
Members of a virtual community feel influential if their contributions are taken up, reviewed by, and responded
to by others. In terms of taking up ideas, established FMH helpers often work collectively with a student by
continuing a dialogue established by another helper, adding to one another's ideas, and pointing out alternative
solutions (van de Sande, 2008).      Because of the nature of the forum (as a help service), reviews often involve
challenging,  and   sometimes     correcting,   others'  posts  or self-correcting,  which    has been  referred  to  as   a
"Wikipedia-like" quality (van de Sande & Leinhardt, 2007) because it represents a collaborative constructive
activity with  a  quest  for   accuracy.  Accordingly,     established FMH    helpers   may   have occasional   spats that
involve challenging the accuracy of one another's mathematics, disagreeing with mathematical approaches (e.g.,
whether a certain method is necessary or elegant), and criticizing pedagogical tactics (such as providing the
student with a worked solution). Positive mutual influence on others in the community is demonstrated when
criticism and contributions are responded to in an affirmative manner, worked through, and resolved.

Having Contributions Affirmed
JuicyBurger's contributions did not go unrecognized by the established helpers. Table 2 contains excerpts from
JuicyBurger's logs in which other helpers affirmed his contributions by crediting him by name for correct
contributions, taking up and adding onto his helper moves, and supporting his mathematics. The play on words
that mmm4444bot (Elite Member) used when referring to one of JuicyBurger's contributions (row two) is
further evidence of how other members of the community facilitated his shift to fuller participation.

Table 2. Excerpts in which JuicyBurger's contributions were affirmed and supported by established helpers.

 Context                                                        Affirmed Contribution
 JuicyBurger was working with a student to identify             mmm4444bot       (Elite   Member):     `JuicyBurger   is
 key    features  in order     to graph   a  parabola.   The    correct. There is symmetry about the vertical line x
 student   questioned      his help,  and     mmm4444bot        = -1.' (post 5 in thread)
 picked up the thread. (posts 1-4 in thread)
 JuicyBurger provided a hint to student that, in order          mmm4444bot       (Elite Member):     `I'll contribute a
 to find the center and radius of a given circle, the           little free sauce, to the juicy burger below. [quoted
 formula    should    be   converted      to the   `standard    hint   given by   JuicyBurger]    by   completing    the
 equation' (x-h)^2 + (y-k)^2 = r^2        (post 3 in thread)    square in x and y.' (post 4 in thread) [the bold text
                                                                was added onto JuicyBurger's contribution]
 JuicyBurger was helping student but questioned the             galactus (Elite Member): `You're [JuicyBurger] on
 accuracy      of   his    own    response:     `Now     you    the right track. This is basic relativity. ...' (post 3 in
 have...[derived     expression]   What   is  this equal   to?  thread)
 Hmmm this doesn't seem right.' (post 2 in thread)

Having Contributions Challenged
Of course, not all of JuicyBurger's contributions deserved, and therefore received, affirmation; his contributions
were also  reviewed     and    challenged    when  they    contained errors.  However,    as  reported  in  his interview,
JuicyBurger generally took his time framing his contributions (for example, by working through solutions on
scratch  paper before   publishing   hints   and   suggestions), and,  perhaps   for this reason,  did  not receive  many
challenges. One of the earlier challenges to JuicyBurger's contributions came in his first week on the forum

© ISLS                                                                                                                514
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                           Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

from mmm4444bot (Elite Member) when he incorrectly took the square root of an expression: `Juicy Burger
forgot that the square root of (x+6)^2 is not x+6. It's the absolute value of x+6.' JuicyBurger responded in a
manner and with a tone consistent with forum practice; he (sheepishly) acknowledged his mistake (`Yes I forgot
the +/- [confused emoticon]') and edited his earlier post to correct the error.

Challenging Others' Contributions
In addition to having his own ideas taken up and challenged, JuicyBurger made efforts to create a voice on the
forum by challenging others' contributions, even those of high status members.       As is generally FMH practice,
he was usually polite (by forum standards which appear to have a higher tolerance for sarcasm and impertinence
than face-to-face communications) when he questioned others' contributions. For instance, when galactus (Elite
Member) incorrectly parameterized two planes, JuicyBurger simply provided the correct solution for the student
(who had also questioned galactus' response), noting the nature and location of the error: `This should give you:
z = t ­ 1 (not z = -t +1) [which is how galactus had erred].' Galactus responded with    an  apology and an edit of
his previous response: `Sorry, that was a typo. I fixed my foolish error. Thanks. Goes to show you, one little
negative sugn [sic] misplaced and it's all kaput. [smiling emoticon]' This exchange occurred in the first week
following JuicyBurger's forum debut, and shows how members can influence one another through constructive
critique as they work collectively to provide correct mathematical help for the students.
        JuicyBurger also confronted an established member whom he felt interfered with a dialogue he was
trying to establish with a student. The student had requested help finding the area between two curves, and
JuicyBurger suggested    that the student start by finding the   points at   which  the curves intersected. Fifteen
minutes later, BigGlenntheHeavy (Full Member) essentially provided the solution to the problem by posting the
resulting integrals (which contained the intersection points) together with the final numerical answer, 937/6.
JuicyBurger responded within minutes by chastising BigGlenntheHeavy, as shown in Figure 2.

                            Figure 2. JuicyBurger challenges established FMH helper.

In reply, BigGlenntheHeavy defended his actions, perhaps under the impression that JuicyBurger was referring
to his giving away the final numerical answer: `JuicyBurger: It is setting up the problem that requires skill, as
the answer then is academic.' Later in the exchange, mmm4444bot (Elite Member) championed JuicyBurger: `I
think that it is obvious that Juicy Burger was not thinking 937/6 when writing "expect the answers". If you
claim that setting up the integrals requires the greater skill, big guy, then why aren't you helping to guide the
original poster through that process versus spoon-feeding' [italics in the original]. This mentoring move shows
how   JuicyBurger's voice   was validated  from  an  influential member    of   the community.   In the interview,
JuicyBurger spoke of this incident, reporting that it contributed to his confidence amongst the `old guys who
control it [the forum].'
        Members who share a sense of virtual community exercise influence within the community. In a help
forum, this plays out in challenging others' contributions to order to have an influence on the content or material
that the students are receiving. Conversely, if a member is influential in the community, then other members pay
attention to her/his contributions so that they do not go unnoticed or ignored. Other members may indicate that a
member is influential by heeding her/his contributions and responding with either challenges or affirmation.

Immersion
Members are immersed in a virtual community if they are dedicated (or even perhaps addicted) to the activity
and spend large amounts of time engaged in interaction.  Although we cannot determine the amount of time per
se that established FMH helpers spend crafting and publishing responses, their activity level as measured by
number  of contributions   demonstrates   behavior along these   lines  that is  consistent with immersion   in the
community. It is worth noting that JuicyBurger, with his 96 posts in 48 threads over the course of the study,
ranked just under these established FMH helpers during that time period.

© ISLS                                                                                                          515
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                          Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

         However, there are other ways, aside from time spent participating and number of contributions, which
signal immersion in a virtual community. These may include demonstrating concern by taking seriously the
joint efforts of community members, and signaling interest by participating in extra-curricular activities. In
other words, the interest with which a member participates may also be used as part of the index for immersion.

Joint effort
Helpers in an online forum elect how many times they participate in a given thread. Having contributed to a
thread, a helper may choose to return to that thread and contribute further, or may choose not to return. In FMH,
well-established helpers generally return to threads multiple times, especially if they are involved in an ongoing
dialogue with the student or others. This activity demonstrates that helpers have a sense that helping does not
consist of a single contribution but rather a process in which they are actively involved.
         JuicyBurger appeared to share this view of helping. Instead of participating just one single time in a
given thread (as was more the case with other participants in our study), JuicyBurger returned to 46% of the
threads in which he was helping a student. In the interview he reported that he set the forum notification system
to inform him when there was further activity in one of the threads in which he was participating so that he
might consider whether he could (or should) contribute more.     This behavior demonstrates a sense of concern,
and perhaps responsibility, for the outcome of his contributions to the community that mimicked the activity
patterns of well-established helpers.
         Along these same lines, JuicyBurger also allowed students to private message him (an option for forum
members), and responded when asked specifically to help them. For instance, one student sent the following
private message: `sorry, my first part of the question was cut-off, I had asked you to help me, cause the other
night you did help me, and someone else is trying to help, but I'm so lost. [smile emoticon]' We see here that
JuicyBurger identified with the community effort through responding outside of the forum archives.

Extracurricular activity
Aside from the quantity, consistency, and thoughtfulness of the help they provide, the immersion of FMH
helpers in  this community  is evident   from   their lively participation  in extra-curricular activities, such as
contributing ideas to the administrative forum and posing and solving math puzzles in the `math odds and ends'
forum. Not only do the established members care about sustaining and improving the quality of FMH, they also
appear to greatly enjoy matching wits with other subject enthusiasts and tackling challenging problems.
         JuicyBurger participated in three threads in the `math odds and ends' forum during the study. Although
he  did not initiate any puzzles  and  riddles, he challenged    others' contributions, contributed  his ideas   for
solutions, and spent time engaging in deep thought. The most notable example of this was in a `math odds and
ends' thread involving finding the volume of a drilled sphere. JuicyBurger first challenged the framing of the
puzzle (`Actually, you do need to know more information. You need to at least know the radius of the sphere.'),
but then retracted his challenge just minutes later (`Actually, I think I may be mistaken (=D) I'm still working it
out...'). Although JuicyBurger continued working on this puzzle for the next few days, he did not post further in
the thread; another  forum member,     however,  did  contribute a solution.   A week after  JuicyBurger    had last
posted, BigGlenntheHeavy    (Full Member)    published   a   calculus-based solution to the  puzzle, directing   his
remarks specifically to JuicyBurger: `Juicy Burger, in regards to mmm4444bot.'s [sic] poser, if we observe the
great circle of a sphere...[solution to puzzle] Note: The volume is independent of R [the radius of the sphere].'
The genuineness of the thought that JuicyBurger put into this puzzle was evident in his reply: `BigGlenn: Yes I
realized this after I posted the statement about it being a large sphere with a large cylinder cut out, or a small
sphere with a small radius cylinder. I thought about it a bit more (tempted to google it the entire time) and
decided that the question had to make sense, otherwise it would not be riddle. So if the question made sense, it
must not depend on the radius, which was when I came up with 36pi. I haven't posted merely because others
have already answered it in the in between time whilst I was thinking about it...' We see here that JuicyBurger
forewent the easier path (Internet search) in favor of thinking through the problem himself and immersing
himself in the type of activity that other forum helpers enjoy. In the interview, JuicyBurger described this
problem as `cool,' noting that he had learned some mathematics from this particular interaction.
         We are not claiming here that JuicyBurger became fully immersed in forum participation; indeed, he
ended his participation after the eight-week period. This outcome is not surprising, though, since he was a full-
time student. Also, he and the other participants were recruited and paid, which undoubtedly affected their
attitude towards the activity. Many of the established FMH helpers have remained members for several years.
On the other hand, we are suggesting that JuicyBurger's behavior during his eight week stint was consistent
with becoming immersed in this community, and that this process manifested itself in a variety of ways (aside
from simply time spent participating on the forum). Immersion can be marked by active engagement in the joint
community effort and by demonstrating enthusiasm for interests shared by other members.

Discussion

© ISLS                                                                                                          516
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                         Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

Free, open,   online, help forums   represent  the movement    to democratize   education     through  technological
innovation (Larreamendy-Joerns & Leinhardt, 2006), as well as the increasing relevance of social networks in
learning and instruction (Goodyear et al., 2005). The forums provide students around the world with affordable
(free), efficient, and accessible help when and where they need it. Students who might not otherwise have access
to resources outside of the classroom have the opportunity to ask questions of more experienced others.      At the
same time, the forums are a unique location where helpers, who traditionally operate individually and privately,
can practice alongside others within a community. When the existing set of core established helpers form a
closely-knit social group, newcomers, who are necessary for the growth and sustainability of the endeavor, must
be able to ease their way into the community in order to become core participants. This paper addressed how a
newbie helper navigated a trajectory from peripheral to fuller participation in a mathematics help forum with a
strong sense of virtual community, learning how to work alongside established members as they helped students
learn. Sheer volume of contributions was not sufficient. Another helper in our study posted more to the forum
than JuicyBurger and yet did not make comparable inroads into the community. Instead, this process involved
cultivating a sense of belonging and building supportive relationships with others (membership), contributing
meaningfully  and creating   a voice  (influence), and  demonstrating    dedication  to  the shared purpose  of  the
community (immersion). This paper is a first step at establishing a framework for what it means for newbies to
join in a sense of virtual homework help forum community. Our long-term goal is to be able to scaffold this
experience so that people can more easily join, and thereby help sustain, these communities.

References
Balasubramanian, S. & Mahajan, V. (2001). The economic leverage of the virtual community. International
        Journal of Electronic Commerce, 5(3), 103-138.
Fernback,  J. &  Thompson,     B.  (1995).  Virtual   communities:   Abort,   retry, failure?  Computer    Mediated
        Communication        and  the     American     Collectivity.  Available      at  www.rheingold.com/texts/
        techpolitix/VCcivil.html
Goodyear, P., Jones, C., Asensio, M., Hodgson, V., & Steeples, C. (2005). Networked Learning in Higher
        Education: Students' Expectations and Experiences. Higher Education, 50 (3), 473-508.
Heller, K. (1989). Return to community. American Journal of Community Psychology, 17(1), 1-15.
Hembree,  R.   (1990).   The  nature, effects, and  relief  of mathematics    anxiety.   Journal   for  Research in
        Mathematics Education, 21, 31-46.
Koh, J. & Kim, Y-G. (2003-4). Sense of virtual community: A conceptual framework and empirical validation.
        International Journal of Electronic Commerce, 8(2), 75-93.
Larreamendy-Joerns,    J. and  G. Leinhardt    (2006). Going   the   distance with   online   education. Review  of
        Educational Research, 76(4), 567-605.
Lave, J. &Wenger, E. (2002). Legitimate peripheral participation in communities of practice. In M. R. Lea & K.
        Nicoll  (eds.), Distributed  learning: social  and cultural  approaches to   practice, pp.  56-63. London:
        Routledge-Falmer.
Martinovic, D. (2005). Characteristics of asynchronous online mathematics help environments: Do they provide
        conditions for learning? Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence in
        Education, Workshop 6, pp. 32-38, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
McMillan, D. W. & Chavaz, D. M. (1986). Sense of community: A definition and theory. Journal of Community
        Psychology, 14(1), 6-23.
Preece, J. (1999). Empathic communities: Balancing emotional and factual communication. Interacting with
        Computers, 12, 63-77.
Strauss, A., & Corbin, J. (1990). Basics of qualitative research: Grounded theory procedures and techniques.
        London: Sage.
van de Sande, C.  (2008). Open, online, calculus help forums: Learning about and from a public conversation.
        (Unpublished doctoral dissertation). University of Pittsburgh, PA.
van de Sande, C. (2010, June). Free, open, online, mathematics help forums: The good, the bad, and the ugly. In
        K.  Gomez,    L.  Lyons,  &   J. Radinsky  (Eds.), Learning   in the  Disciplines:   Proceedings of the  9th
        International Conference of the Learning Sciences, pp. 643-650, Chicago, IL: International Society of
        the Learning Sciences.
van de Sande, C. (2011) How are students' problems being solved? The quality of worked solutions on a
        popular, open, online, mathematics help forum. In Spada, H., Stahl, G., Miyake, N., Law, N. (Eds.)
        Connecting     Computer-Supported      Collaborative   Learning   to  Policy    and   Practice:  CSCL2011
        Conference Proceedings. International Society of the Learning Sciences, pp. 280-287.
van de Sande, C. and G. Leinhardt (2007). Online tutoring in the Calculus: Beyond the limit of the limit.
        Éducation et Didactique, 1(2), 115-154.
Wenger. E. (1998). Communities of practice: learning, meaning and identity. New York:         Cambridge University
        Press.

© ISLS                                                                                                          517
