CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                        Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

                  Multidimensional Teacher Behavior in CSCL (1)
                  Anouschka van Leeuwen, Jeroen Janssen, Gijsbert Erkens, Mieke Brekelmans
                      Utrecht University, Heidelberglaan 1, 3584CS Utrecht, the Netherlands
            A.vanLeeuwen@uu.nl, J.J.H.M.Janssen@uu.nl, G.Erkens@uu.nl, M.Brekelmans@uu.nl

         Abstract: Situated in the field of computer-supported collaborative learning, the aim of this
         study is to present a multi-dimensional approach for the examination of teacher behavior. Two
         dimensions were used for coding: focus (what the intervention is aimed at) and means (how
         the  teacher intervenes). Teacher behavior   was  studied  for a period of   several weeks.  Our
         results indicate that both  focus and  means  changed   as  time  progressed,  and   that type of
         interventions varied between groups. Characterizing teacher behavior as a particular type, as
         done in other research, is therefore refuted. Conclusions that hold for the whole of the studied
         period are that number of teacher interventions was related to amount of student activity, and
         that the teacher  focused  more on  task  content than group   collaboration. In the  discussion
         suggestions are given for teacher supporting tools.

Introduction
Computer-supported collaborative learning (CSCL) combines collaborative learning with the use of information
and communication technologies. There is a broad range of types of supporting tools specifically aimed at
helping students carry out the learning task (Soller, Martinez, Jermann, & Muehlenbrock, 2005). In settings in
which these tools are used, there often is no mention of the presence of a teacher, i.e., the students seemingly
work on their assignment independently.
         However, recently there has been a growing interest in the role of the teacher during CSCL. This has
led to the development of supporting tools not only for students, but also for the teacher guiding the students
(see for example the Argunaut project; Asterhan & Schwarz, 2010). These tools could deliver information that
enables teachers to better carry out their tasks, for example about group progress or collaborative processes
(McLaren, Scheuer, & Miksátko, 2010).
         To develop and test the effectiveness of supporting tools for teachers, there is a need to know what kind
of behavior teachers employ, and what kind of behavior is effective. Many researchers have aimed at first
studying   which  behavior teachers   during CSCL    display  without   any supporting   tools  present  (Azevedo,
Cromley, Winters, Moos, & Greene, 2005; Greiffenhagen, 2012; De Smet, Van Keer, & Valcke, 2008). What
appears from these studies is that teachers face a very complex task (Volman, 2005). The present study aims to
contribute to this knowledge base by using a multi-dimensional conceptualization of teacher activities, and by
studying the variation in teacher activities between lessons and between groups.

Complexity of a Teacher's Task in CSCL
There are several reasons why the teacher's task of guiding students' learning in a CSCL environment is so
complex. First of all, comparable to face-to-face collaborative situations, teachers deal with several types of
synchronicity. Not only do they guide several groups' activities at the same time, they also have to focus on
both  task content and  collaboration between   students.  Furthermore,   differences between  groups   require the
teacher to adapt his guidance to the groups' needs (Chiu, 2004). There are also complicating factors that are
unique to CSCL. Teachers are offered information not only about the learning result but also about the learning
process: teachers are able to follow discussions between students, and in some digital environments teachers are
given information   about  students'  progress. It may  be   easier for a teacher to   monitor  students'  learning
processes when given this extra information. On the other hand, having access to such amounts of information
could also cause an information overload for the teacher (Van Diggelen, Janssen, & Overdijk, 2008).

Analyzing Teacher Interventions among Multiple Dimensions
As was mentioned in the introduction, many researchers have aimed at studying natural teacher behavior in
CSCL. The content of teacher interventions is often studied using a one-dimensional conceptualization. When
the content of teacher interventions is analyzed, it is almost always the case that each intervention is assigned to
one particular category. That is, one dimension is used to categorize teacher interventions, and the categories
within the dimension are mutually exclusive. In contrast, it could be argued that each intervention can be studied
from multiple angles. In other words, each intervention can be categorized among multiple dimensions.
         The content of a teacher's intervention both has a focus and a means. For example, when a teacher tells
a group of students to "Start by reading the assignment", the focus is on the regulation of cognitive activities,
while the means is an instruction. A similar difference between the `what' (focus) and `how' (means) of teacher
interventions was also noticed in the literature about teacher regulation of face-to-face collaboration in a review
study about scaffolding by Van de Pol, Beishuizen, and Volman (2010). Why is such a distinction useful? Van

© ISLS                                                                                                          518
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                             Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

de Pol et al. (2010) suggest that   "this distinction [..] enables us to look more precisely at interactions and results
in more nuanced descriptions of teacher­student interactions" (p. 276).
          Very few    studies  on CSCL   employ    such    a two  dimensional    analysis   for the content   of  teacher
interventions. Typically, the methodologies used are similar to either focus or means. Some studies approach the
focus of teacher interventions, i.e. what the teacher's intervention is aimed at. Lund (2004) for example includes
the categories `Social', `Managerial', and `Pedagogical'. It is generally considered important for teachers to
focus  on  students'  cognitive (task-related)  activities   as well  as social  activities within  a  group (Kreijns  et
al.,2003). Other studies approach the means of teacher interventions, i.e. how the teacher intervenes. Consider
the study   by Greiffenhagen    (2012),  in which   the    categories `Making     announcements',      `Reminding',   and
`Suggesting'   are used.  Van   de  Pol et  al. (2010) listed   the  categories  of  means   that  are  most  commonly
identified: feeding back, hints, instructing, explaining, modeling, and questioning.

Change between Lessons and Variation between Groups
The research on teacher interventions described so far has a one-dimensional character in the sense that one
aspect of the teacher's task is analyzed (either focus or means). Another characteristic of these studies is that
results are often presented on an aggregated level. That is, conclusions are drawn about teacher interventions at
a general   level. Some   researchers   aim to   characterize   particular teacher   `types'  or  `moderation    profiles'
(Asterhan, 2011). For example, Mazzolini and Maddison (2003) distinguish between a dominating `sage on the
stage' and a less pervasive `guide on the side', based on summaries of teacher interventions taken as a whole.
          It should be kept in mind that in CSCL environments students often work on a complex assignment that
takes multiple lessons to complete. Such tasks contain multiple phases during which students perform different
kinds  of  activities (Erkens, Jaspers, Prangsma,   &  Kanselaar,     2005).  It is therefore   likely that not  only the
students' behavior, but also the type of teacher's interventions change as the number of sessions progresses
(Onrubia & Engel, 2012). This importance of time scales and temporality has recently received great attention
in CSCL literature, leading to a movement that calls for a temporal analysis of interaction data. It is emphasized
that "temporality matters" (Kapur, 2011; Reimann, 2009), both on a small scale in patterns of turn-taking within
interaction and on a larger scale as change or variation between sessions or lessons. As Kapur (2011) notes, "By
aggregating counts over time, information about temporal variation is lost" (p. 41). Too little is known yet about
the change in teacher interventions between lessons and the variation of teacher interventions between groups.

Aim of this Study  
Two methods have been pointed out that could contribute to a better understanding of the complex task teachers
face when they guide students' learning in a computer-supported collaborative learning environment. The first
method is to analyze the content of teacher interventions on multiple dimensions: both focus and means. The
second method is to analyze teacher interventions taking into account change between lessons and variation
between groups. This study aims to bring together these two methods. A case study is presented in which the
interventions by one teacher, spread over multiple weeks of activity, are analyzed. The aim is to contribute to
the conceptualization    of teacher  interventions during    CSCL,    and  to contribute    empirically  to  the existing
literature on  the  characteristics and  dynamics   of  teacher   interventions   in  CSCL.     The following    research
questions have been formulated:
          RQ1 Which interventions, in terms of focus and means, does the teacher use?
          RQ2 How do teacher interventions, in terms of focus and means, change between lessons and vary
between groups while students work on the assignment?

Method
Participants
One secondary education history male teacher (age 43, with 15 years teaching experience), and 21 students (age
M = 15, SD = 0.6) were involved in the study, who were all enrolled in the third year of the pre-university
education track. Students were assigned by the teacher into groups of three students (7 groups).

CSCL Environment  
Students and teacher made use of the CSCL environment called Virtual Collaborative Research Institute (VCRI,
see for example Janssen et al., 2007). It was used in a synchronous, co-located setting. All students had their
own computer. The assignment involved exploring the topic by reading historical sources in the Sources-tool.
Students could discuss the information through the synchronous Chat-tool. Students used the Debate-tool to
construct a shared diagram of their arguments. Students used the Cowriter, a shared text processor, to write their
texts.
          An alternative interface of the VCRI-program was available for the teacher, which allowed him to
monitor the online discussions of the students in the Chat-tool in real-time and send messages in order to answer
students' questions. Teachers can examine the texts students are writing in the Cowriter or the diagrams they are

© ISLS                                                                                                                519
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                       Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

making in the Debate-tool. The teacher intervened by sending messages through the Chat-tool. The program
offered the teacher some basic statistical information about students' activities in VCRI's tools (e.g., the number
of keystrokes per student). Figure 1 shows the teacher interface.

         Figure 1. An example of the configuration of the VCRI teacher interface. In this case, the teacher has
           opened student activity statistics (upper left) and the Chat-tool for three of the groups.

Assignment
Students collaborated on a group task about the Cold War. It was an open-ended group task that focused on
reading, comprehending, and synthesizing historical sources. The assignment was split into four parts, each
resulting in an argumentative text written by the groups of students. The first two parts asked students to reflect
on the consequences of World War II and the events during the Cold War. The third part required students to
summarize their arguments in a graphical representation in the Debate-tool. This resulted in part four, a final
text on why and how the Cold War ended. The class worked with VCRI for 8 lessons of 50 minutes.

Analysis of Teacher Interventions  
Each of the teacher's interventions (messages) were coded along two dimensions: focus and means. The codes
for focus (Table 1) are based on the distinction between cognitive and social activities, which are the two
categories generally considered important for teachers to support students' learning process (Salmon, 2000).
These two categories are further split into the object and the meta (regulative) level (Molenaar et al., 2011).
Codes for means were derived from the review study by Van de Pol et al (2010). Their categories feeding back,
hints, instructing, explaining, and questioning were used, and the category questioning was further expanded by
adding diagnosing and prompting. Diagnosing denotes questions that are aimed at checking students' progress.
Prompting denotes questions that are meant to help or activate students.
        Two independent coders both coded a random sample of about 100 chat messages. Cohen's  for focus
was .77, for means it was .76. After establishing the interrater reliability of the coding procedure, all messages
sent by the teacher were analyzed.

Table 1: Coding scheme for the focus of interventions.

 Focus                         Definiton                                                   Example
 Cognitive activities (Cog)    Utterances about task content                               "SU means Sovjet
                                                                                           Union"
 Regulation of Cognitive       Utterances about planning of the task / time management     "Start reading the
 activities (RegCog)           Utterances about task strategies                            sources"
 Social activities (Soc)       Utterances that contribute to the mood within a group or    "Come on, let's get
                               the class or express emotions                               to work"
 Regulation of Social          Utterances about the collaboration process / about          "Divide the tasks
 activities (RegSoc)           strategies for collaboration                                among your group"
 Other                         Remaining utterances

© ISLS                                                                                                      520
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                         Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

Results
Overall Results
During the 8 lessons the teacher and students worked in VCRI, the teacher sent 391 interventions. Of these 391
interventions, 192 (49.1%) were reactions to student questions. The teacher used the system 6 times between
lessons to read student contributions in the Cowriter tool. In every lesson the teacher checked the statistics right
at the start of the lesson, and on average another 4 times during the remainder of the lesson.
            Table 2 summarizes the focus and means of the teacher's interventions for all lessons taken together.
The means used most often are Explaining (25.2%), Feedback (22.7%), and Diagnosing (20.1%). The focus of
interventions was most on cognitive activities (41.8%), closely followed by focus on the regulation of cognitive
activities  (39.6%).  Relatively few  interventions were   focused  on (regulation of) social   activities (together
making up 15.1% of interventions).

Table 2: Focus (columns) and     means (rows) of all 397  teacher interventions taken together, in percentages.

                     Cog       RegCog      Soc     RegSoc       Other     Total
    Questioning       0.3        0.0       0.8     0.0          0.0          1.0
    Diagnosing        3.3      15.1        0.5     0.5          0.8         20.1
    Prompting        11.3        0.0       0.0     1.0          0.0         12.3
    Hinting           3.3        4.5       0.0     1.3          0.0          9.1
    Explaining       16.1        6.1       0.0     1.0          2.0         25.2
    Instructing       0.3        4.0       0.0     0.8          0.0          5.0
    Feedback          7.1        9.6       4.0     1.8          0.3         22.7
    Other             0.3        0.3       3.5     0.0          0.5          4.5
    Total            41.8      39.6        8.8     6.3          3.5       100.0
  
            Some  groups  were more   active than others. It appeared  that the higher student  activity,  the more
teacher interventions to the group. Analysis of the individual lessons showed there was indeed a significant
relationship between the number of student messages and the number of teacher interventions, r = .38, p (one-
tailed) < .01.

Change between Lessons and Variation between Groups  
Figure 2 and 3 display the focus and means of teacher interventions for each of the 8 lessons that students
worked on the assignment.

                    Figure 2. Focus of teacher interventions in percentages, displayed per lesson.

            In line with the overall results, the focus is mostly on (regulation of) cognitive activities. However, the
relative  frequencies  fluctuate for  each lesson.  For  example,  there is a strong predominance     of   focus   on
regulation of cognitive activities during the middle part. A relatively small portion of teacher interventions
focused on (regulation of) social activities. These categories score low throughout all lessons. The variation
between groups for these categories is relatively high. For example, the coefficient of variation for focus on
regulation of social activities in lesson 3 is 1.3 where the corresponding score in Figure 2 is 5%. This means that
the standard deviation was relatively high and that the teacher focused on regulation of social activities only in
selected groups. The same can be said for the focus on regulation of social activities in later lessons (5 and 6).

© ISLS                                                                                                          521
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                          Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

         As for the means (Figure 3), the most occurring categories found in the overall results (Explaining,
Feedback, Diagnosing) are not predominant when viewing each lesson separately. For example, the relative
frequency of Explaining is especially low during the middle part, and the relative frequency of Feedback is quite
low at the beginning. The other way around it is apparent that categories that score relatively low overall, like
Instructing (5% of total), occur relatively often during some lessons. For example, Instructing reaching 20%
during the middle part (lesson 6). It thus seems there is a change in the type of interventions as time progresses.

                                                                                                                   
                   Figure 3. Means of teacher interventions in percentages, displayed per lesson.

         Below, some examples of teacher-student interaction are given to illustrate the change between lessons
and the variation between groups.

Example Lesson 1: Explaining  
At  the start of   working  with  VCRI,  there is a  peak  of  Explaining  (Figure  3). The  focus   of the teacher's
interventions is equally distributed among cognitive activities and the regulation of cognitive activities (Figure
2). In  the first lessons lesson,  the teacher explains how    to start working    and he  also explains some   basic
concepts that students need throughout the assignment. There are also some explanations that deal with the
program itself.

Example Lesson 3: Prompting  
Next, a period follows in which there is more focus on cognitive activities (Figure 2). The teacher uses more
open forms of interventions, such as Prompting (Figure 3). In Table 3, the students are discussing the results of
the Second World War. Instead of giving away the answer, the teacher responds by posting counter questions.

Table 3: Example of teacher interventions during lesson 3.

 User           Message                                                       Focus                      Means
 Student 3      I can't find any reports on damage to the US after WOII
 Teacher        If you can't  find it, maybe   there isn't any?  Where   did  Cognitive activities       Prompting
                they fight?
 Student 3      the pacific?
 Teacher        What does that mean?                                          Cognitive activities       Prompting

Example Lesson 5: Diagnosing   
In  lesson  5 there is a  peak in  focus on  Regulation    of cognitive activities (Figure 2)   as well as  a peak    in
Diagnosing and Feedback (Figure 3). Looking at the chat protocols, there are two things that the teacher is
paying attention to. First of all, he is checking how the groups are doing in terms of progress on the assignment
and instructing them to move on to the next part. Secondly, in one of the small groups, it appears there is a
collaborative problem (Table 4). One student has been absent for a few lessons and has contributed less to
finishing the assignment. The teacher does not think this is a valid reason for lagging on the assignment and tells
the students to improve their collaboration.

© ISLS                                                                                                           522
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                         Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

Table 4: Example of teacher interventions during lesson 5.

User         Message                                                         Focus                  Means
Teacher      Have you finished part 2?                                       Regulation of          Diagnosing
                                                                             cognitive activities
Student 2    no, because sally has been absent the last two lessons
Teacher      You are perfectly able to finish the assignment without her,    Regulation of          Feedback
             I think                                                         social activities
Student 3    She has written something I don't understand
Teacher      You're working as a team, so everyone is responsible for        Regulation of          Feedback
             the assignment                                                  social activities

Example Lesson 7: Cognitive Activities  
After the dip in focus on cognitive activities, the final lessons show an increase in focus on this area again
(Figure 2). The means used in lesson 7 are varied (Figure 3). The chat protocols show that during lesson 7, there
is again more time spent on the content of the task. Students start the final part of the assignment, which also
accounts for the increase in Explaining.

Discussion
It was argued that an adequate description of teacher interventions during CSCL warrants a multi-dimensional
and temporal analysis. In this study, focus and means of teacher interventions were analyzed and compared
between lessons and between groups.

Focus  
The results show that overall, the focus was mostly on (regulation of) cognitive activities. Within the individual
lessons, this dominance was also visible. However, the relative frequencies fluctuated for each lesson. The
number   of  teacher interventions focusing  on (regulation   of) social activities was    much  lower,  reaching a
maximum     percentage of about   15%. There   was little change  between    lessons,  but large variation between
groups. The results from other studies do not uniformly fit with our findings. Asterhan (2011) for example
found no instance of social support at all, only interventions aimed at (regulation of) cognitive activities. De
Smet et al. (2008) on the other hand found comparable low frequencies for focus on social activities, which
increased at the end of the studied period. This contradicts our finding of low variability between lessons.
         Many  researchers   have  pointed out the importance     of social activities within  collaborating groups
(Kreijns et al., 2003; Salmon, 2000). From our data it appears that the need to focus on social activities may
have been small. A possible explanation for this is that in contrast to distant learning and asynchronous settings,
the students in this study already knew each other very well. Therefore, the teacher only intervened when this
was absolutely necessary. However, it could be argued that even when there are no apparent problems, it is
important that a teacher focuses on the social processes during collaboration and makes students aware of their
individual and group behavior (Phielix, Prins, & Kirschner, 2010).

Means  
The results of this study show that the means most often used were feedback, explaining, and diagnosing. It
must be noted that there was variation between lessons (see Figure 3) and that the general percentages are not an
accurate depiction of this variation. Some time periods showed high percentages of open forms of interventions
(lessons 2 and 3) while in others closed forms were used more often (for example lesson 6).
         Again, it seems the teacher's interventions were group-specific. For example, in the first lessons there
were a lot of explanations. It may have been expected that this was due to getting used to working in a CSCL
setting, but it turned out that not so much the system, but the assignment needed more attention. In the Results
section this was illustrated with  some  examples.  Research   has   shown  that if the  task  materials exert more
control, that is, contain more detailed instructions for carrying out the task, the teacher might need less closed
forms of interventions (Onrubia & Engel, 2012). In this case, the task might have exerted a very low amount of
control, therefore eliciting more explanations from the teacher.
         The change between lessons is consistent with other studies that have studied teacher interventions on
multiple time points (albeit with fewer time points than in this study). Hsieh & Tsai (2012) found that means of
teacher interventions varied during the three sessions students collaborated. However, the three sessions dealt
with separate assignments, not an ongoing assignment like in our study. Gil et al. (2007) divided the data on
teacher interventions in three phases; beginning, middle and end, and found differing distributions of means of
intervening for each of the five teachers that were studied.

© ISLS                                                                                                          523
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                          Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

Implications   
The combination of coding both focus and means has resulted in a nuanced description of teacher interventions.
Although there were some indications of patterns, the general finding is that this teacher's interventions are
foremost explained by sensitivity to group needs. Generalizations of teacher behavior into `types' (Mazzolini &
Maddison, 2003) or `moderation profiles' (Asterhan, 2011) do not reflect the whole complexity of the teacher's
task. It is clear from our data that the teacher's method of regulation was not the same throughout the whole
timeframe. Instead, it seems the teacher's behavior was context-specific.
          Some suggestions may be made about the type of supporting tools to be developed, based on the results
presented here. The first suggestion would be to support teachers in monitoring the social activities of groups of
students. The   benefits of presenting  visualizations of agreement   and discussion  processes to   students have
already been investigated (Janssen et al., 2007). Studying whether teacher access to such visualizations has an
effect on teacher and student behavior would be an interesting step forwards.
          A further suggestion for supporting tools is based on the high amount of Diagnosing interventions
performed  by   the teacher in the  current study.  Interviews with   teachers have shown  that one   of the  main
difficulties of guiding students during CSCL is keeping track of all information (De Smet, Van Keer, De Wever,
& Valcke, 2009; Van Diggelen et al., 2008). Our results show that the frequency of Diagnosing increased as
time progressed. This may have been due to the fact that in the last part of the assignment, the students started
writing their final essay. It may have been harder for the teacher during this part to monitor the progress within
the groups. This is supported by the fact that 20% of the interventions that the teacher sent to the whole class
simultaneously   were    Diagnosing interventions.  Therefore,  teachers  may   benefit from   tools  that provide
information on the status and quality of written products (Dillenbourg, Järvelä, & Fischer, 2009).

Limitations and Future Directions  
An obvious limitation of this study is that only one teacher's interventions were analyzed. It is important that
more studies are performed within this area, especially ones that have an experimental set-up. On the other
hand, case studies do provide the opportunity to study the subject in great detail, which was exactly the aim of
this study. Furthermore, in this particular article the conceptualization of teacher interventions also played a big
role, which makes the number of participants a less important issue. Another limitation is that although we have
described the complexity of studying the content of teacher interventions, there are many more aspects that play
a role during CSCL. For example, we briefly stated that in our study, 49.1% of teacher interventions were
initiated by a question from a student. Onrubio & Engel (2012) further expand on whether the teacher or the
student initiates the conversation. A challenge for future research is to connect all aspects into a coherent image.

Conclusion   
The ultimate conclusion that emerges from this study is that the teacher displayed a wide range of types of
interventions. Some reasons for this variation were to be expected, such as the peak of explanations and the
focus on regulation of cognitive activities at the start of the assignment, while others were highly group specific,
such as the need to end a fight between students. We argue for studying teacher interventions as a reaction to the
current situation, not as an expression of the teacher's "style". As Schwarz & Asterhan (2011) note, all teacher
interventions are useful "as long as they are attuned to the needs of the group and its individual members at that
time" (p. 436).
          The starting point of this study was the premise that combining focus and means would lead to a more
nuanced view of teacher interventions (Van de Pol et al., 2010) and the complex task that teachers face during
CSCL. Each of the dimensions on its own indicated clear differences between lessons and between groups, but
taken together a broader perspective emerged that pointed to several points of interest in the data.
          It is important that a clear picture is obtained of the complexity of a teacher's task to regulate students'
learning  during CSCL,    not only  for theoretical purposes,  but also for practical reasons. Ultimately,  CSCL
environments may be designed that not only support students, but also the teacher. By summarizing student
activity, for example, the teacher's task of Diagnosing could become easier (Dillenbourg, Järvelä, & Fischer,
2009). Gaining a complete view of what a teacher does by using appropriate methods of analysis, is the first step
towards this goal.

Endnotes
(1) An extended version of this paper was published as: Van Leeuwen, A., Janssen, J., Erkens, G., & Brekelmans, M. (2013).
   Teacher interventions in a synchronous, co-located CSCL setting: analyzing focus, means, and temporality. Computers
   in Human Behavior, 29(4), 1377-1386. doi:10.1016/j.chb.2013.01.028

References
Asterhan, C. (2011). Assessing e-moderation behavior from synchronous discussion protocols with a multi-
          dimensional methodology. Computers in Human Behavior, 27(1), 449-458.

© ISLS                                                                                                        524
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                         Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

Asterhan, C., & Schwarz, B. (2010). Online moderation of synchronous e-argumentation. International Journal
        of CSCL, 5, 259-282.
Azevedo, R., Cromley, J. G., Winters, F. I., Moos, D. C., & Greene, J. A. (2005). Adaptive human scaffolding
        facilitates adolescents' self-regulated learning with hypermedia. Instructional Science, 33, 381-412.
Chiu, M.M.    (2004). Adapting    teacher interventions  to student needs  during  cooperative learning: how   to
        improve student problem solving and time on-task. American Ed Research Journal, 41(2), 365-399.
De Smet, M., Van Keer, H., Valcke, M. (2008). Blending asynchronous discussion groups and peer tutoring in
        higher  education:   An   exploratory study of  online peer tutoring  behavior. Computers   & Education,
        50(1), 207-223.
De Smet, M., Van Keer, H., De Wever, B., & Valcke, M. (2009). Studying thought processes of online peer
        tutors through stimulated-recall interviews. Higher Education, 59(5), 645-661.
Dillenbourg,  P., Järvelä,   S., &  Fischer,  F. (2009). The   Evolution   of Research   on Computer-Supported
        Collaborative Learning: From Design to Orchestration. In N. Balacheff, S. Ludvigsen, T. de Jong, A.
        Lazonder, S. Barnes (Eds.), Technology enhanced learning: Principles and products (pp. 3-19).
Erkens, G., Jaspers, J., Prangsma, M., & Kanselaar, G. (2005). Coordination processes in computer supported
        collaborative writing. Computers in Human Behavior, 21(3), 463­486.
Gil, J., Schwarz, B. B., & Asterhan, C. (2007). Intuitive moderation styles and beliefs of teachers in CSCLbased
        argumentation.    In C.A.   Chinn,   G.  Erkens  &  S.  Puntambekar   (Eds.), Mice,  minds   and society.
        Proceedings of the CSCL Conference (p. 219-228). International Society of the Learning Sciences, Inc.
Greiffenhagen, C. (2012). Making rounds: The routine work of the teacher during collaborative learning with
        computers. International Journal of CSCL, 7(1), 11-42.
Hsieh, Y. & Tsai, C. (2012). The effect of moderator's facilitative strategies on online synchronous discussions.
        Computers in Human Behavior, 28(5), 1708-1716.
Janssen, J., Erkens, G., & Kanselaar, G. (2007). Visualization of agreement and discussion processes during
        computer-supported collaborative learning. Computers in Human Behavior, 23, 1105-1125.
Kapur, M. (2011). Temporality matters: Advancing a method for analyzing problem-solving processes in a
        computer-supported collaborative environment. International Journal of CSCL, 6(1), 39-56.
Kreijns, K., Kirschner, P. A., & Jochems, W. (2003). Identifying the pitfalls for social interaction in computer-
        supported collaborative learning environments. Computers in Human Behavior, 19, 335-353.
Lund, K. (2004). Human support in CSCL: What, for whom and by whom? In J.W. Strijbos, P.A. Kirschner,
        R.L. Martens, & P. Dillenbourg (Eds.). What we know about CSCL and implementing it in higher
        education (Vol. 3, pp. 167­198). Norwell, MA: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Mazzolini, M., & Maddison, S. (2003). Sage, guide or ghost? the effect of instructor intervention on student
        participation in online discussion forums. Computers & Education, 40, 237-253.
McLaren, B. M., Scheuer, O., & Miksátko, J. (2010). Supporting Collaborative Learning and E-Discussions
        Using Artificial Intelligence Techniques. International Journal of AI in Education, 20, 1-46.
Molenaar, I., van Boxtel, C. & Sleegers, P. J. C. (2011). Metacognitive scaffolding in an innovative learning
        arrangement. Instructional Science, 39, 785-803.
Onrubia, J., & Engel, A. (2012). The role of teacher assistance on the effects of a macro-script in collaborative
        writing tasks. International Journal of CSCL, 7(1), 161­186.
Phielix, C., Prins, F. J., & Kirschner, P. A. (2010). Awareness of group performance in a CSCL environment:
        Effects of peer feedback and reflection. Computers in Human Behavior, 26, 151-161.
Reimann, P. (2009). Time is precious: Variable- and event-centred approaches to process analysis in CSCL
        research. International Journal of CSCL, 4(3), 239­257.
Salmon, G. (2000). E-moderating. The key to teaching and learning online. London: Kogan Page.
Schwarz, B., & Asterhan, C. (2011). E-Moderation of Synchronous Discussions in Educational Settings: A
        Nascent Practice. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 20(3), 395-442.
Soller, A., Martinez, A., Jermann, P., and Muehlenbrock, M. (2005). From mirroring to guiding: A review of
        state of  the art  technology  for   supporting  collaborative learning. International Journal   of AI in
        Education, 15, 261­290.
Van de Pol, J., Volman, M., & Beishuizen, J. (2010). Scaffolding in teacher-student interaction: A decade of
        research. Educational Psychology Review, 22, 271-296.
Van Diggelen, W., Janssen, J., & Overdijk, M. (2008). Analysing and presenting interaction data: a teacher,
        student   and researcher   perspective.  ICLS'08  Proceedings   of the   8th international conference  on
        International conference for the learning sciences - Volume 3.
Volman, M. (2005). A variety of roles for a new type of teacher: Educational technology and the teaching
        profession. Teaching and Teacher Education, 21, 15-31.

© ISLS                                                                                                       525
