CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                       Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

  Embedding Participatory Design into Designs for Learning: An
                       Untapped Interdisciplinary Resource?
 Elizabeth Bonsignore, June Ahn, Tamara Clegg, Mona Leigh Guha, Jason C. Yip, Allison Druin (Discussant)
  University of Maryland, Human-Computer Interaction Lab, 2117 Hornbake Bldg, College Park, MD 20742
 Juan Pablo Hourcade, Dept. of Computer Science, University of Iowa, 14 MacLean Hall Iowa City, IA 52242
          ebonsign@umd.edu, juneahn@umd.edu, tclegg@umd.edu, mona@cs.umd.edu, juanpablo-
                    hourcade@uiowa.edu, jasonyip@umd.edu, allisond@umiacs.umd.edu

        Abstract: Given the rapid evolution of social networks and online communities, interest in
        participatory cultures--online and offline social spaces with low barriers to entry and support
        for creating and sharing knowledge--is increasing. Design-based research (DBR) that invites
        children to share in the process of designing the technologies that support their learning is a
        natural extension of this participatory cultures movement. In this symposium, we establish a
        rationale for using Participatory Design   (PD)   techniques  that can  inform and  enrich  the
        process of designing technologies that support collaborative learning. We provide empirical
        examples from our own research of the ways in which PD can be incorporated into learner-
        centered  technology  designs.  Our experiences    demonstrate   that  PD  is not only   a  key
        contributor in the design of learning technologies themselves, it can also be valuable resource
        that sheds light on the learning processes of the children who use them.

Introduction
Participatory Design (PD) is an array of theories, practices, and research methods whose core philosophy is to
include end-users as active participants in the technology design process (Muller, 2008; Schuler & Namioka,
1993). Our symposium's integrating theme is the notion that PD can be a valuable resource for researchers
engaged in design-based research (Hoadley, 2002) throughout the learning sciences: one that may enrich the
process of designing technologies that support collaborative, socially constructed learning, and also benefit the
learners who participate in their design. Yet, a review of current research across the learning sciences reveals
that PD is a largely untapped resource in design-based research (DBR) studies. A handful of researchers across
the learning sciences and human-computer interaction (HCI) have been engaged in design-based approaches
that closely resemble each other in that they invite the children being studied to be partners throughout the
iterative design process (e.g, Ahn, Gubbels, Kim & Wu, 2012; Barab, Thomas, Dodge, Carteaux & Tuzun,
2005). Although these pockets of potential exist, we have not yet enjoyed cross-pollination among these parallel
research tracks. Our symposium is a first step in building a deeper dialogue among researchers in CSCL and
HCI that can lead to an integrated, interdisciplinary research agenda that incorporates PD into broader DBR
frameworks. In particular, we focus on the potential benefits of enlisting children as full partners with adult
researchers and designers, throughout the design process of a learning program or system. Our goals are to
explore 1) why PD methods hold such promise to augment existing DBR approaches, and 2) how PD techniques
can be integrated into DBR projects.

Background
PD grew out of the Scandinavian trade union democracy movement of the 1970s, where its initial contextual
focus was the workplace, with the goal of giving union workers a greater voice in the design of computers that
they were required to use (Bødker, Ehn, Sjögren, & Sundblad, 2000). The primary motivation for PD is the
democratic ideal that the people who are affected by a decision or event should be given the opportunity to
influence it. A key corollary is that the goal of technology design is not to "automate the skills of human
workers," but "to give workers better tools for doing their jobs" (Schuler & Namioka, 1993, p. xi). PD is
sometimes used synonymously with the term, co-design (cooperative/collaborative design); however, co-design
emphasizes a  more  in-depth, and often  equal, partnership  between   designer  and  end-user, and enlists   user
participation at earlier stages in the design process (Bødker et al., 2000; Walsh, Foss, Yip, & Druin, 2013).
        While PD was created initially in a sociopolitical context, its use has been extended to many other user
populations, such as children (Druin, 1999, 2002), individuals with disabilities (Frauenberger, Good, & Keay-
Bright, 2011), and older adults (Ellis & Kurniawan, 2000). As the diversity of user populations engaged in PD
has grown, its methodologies have also been extended to design-based research contexts outside the workplace,
such as urban planning  and   policy (Friedman  et al., 2008), social media   (Hagen  & Robertson,  2010),     and
education (Barab et al., 2005). In general, PD approaches such as Contextual Inquiry (Holtzblatt & Jones, 1993)
evolved from working with adults during technology design processes. Similarly, Cooperative Inquiry adapts
and extends PD techniques; however, the users who partner with design researchers in Cooperative Inquiry are
children, not adults (Druin, 1999, 2002; Guha, Druin, & Fails, 2013).

© ISLS                                                                                                        549
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                           Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

         In PD projects that develop technology for children, children can assume various roles, usually at
specific points in the design process (Druin, 2002). For example, a child can evaluate a system as a user and
tester (e.g., near or just after  design completion),    or as  an informant  (e.g., early in  the design  cycle). In
Cooperative Inquiry, however, children act as full partners with adult designers throughout the design process
(Druin, 2002). Child designers, typically between the ages of 7-11, are actively involved in technology design
from conception to completion, sharing ideas and evaluations equally with the adult members of the team.
Likewise, adults play active roles throughout the process by first helping child designers generate and articulate
ideas and then synthesizing those ideas into manageable designs. Cooperative Inquiry enriches PD research with
techniques that enable teams of children and adults to share ideas in ways that maximize idea elaboration yet
minimize differences in age, ability, and communication styles (Druin, 1999). For example, "Bags-of-Stuff" is a
Cooperative Inquiry technique in which art supplies are used by intergenerational design teams to build low-
tech prototypes  of   the technologies   they envision   (Walsh  et al., 2013). Because    of  Cooperative Inquiry's
emphasis  on   equal  partnership, it is often  referred to  as co-design.  However,   it  is important to note that
Cooperative Inquiry is a specific co-design method whose distinction is its focus on child design partners. All of
the learning design projects presented in this symposium were informed by Cooperative Inquiry approaches.

Participatory Approaches in the design of Learning Environments
In many ways, the user-centered core of PD approaches is closely related to the ideals underpinning learner-
centered theories and methods developed in the CSCL research community. Both are founded on the principle
that their target populations (end-users and learners) are best served when they are given a high degree of
agency in the process under investigation (technology design or learning). Each embodies the participatory
cultures movement, emphasizing the cultivation of knowledge communities in which content and expertise are
co-created (Jenkins Clinton, Purushotma, Robinson, & Weigel, 2006). Still, few CSCL studies seem to have
integrated PD techniques (Barab et al., 2005). Existing studies also enlist learners in limited design roles (e.g.,
informant and tester), rather than the full spectrum of PD roles available--especially that of equal partner.
Others  focus  on  how    adult educators,  not child  learners, can  be  co-opted   into  the design process  (e.g.,
Hernandez-Leo et al., 2006).
         Even the limited research that has employed PD promotes the value of such techniques for learning.
For example, Stanton, Neale, and Bayon (2002) combined the educational goal of learning collaboration skills
with the PD philosophy of giving children as much control as possible during their extended development work
with KidPad, a drawing application adapted for use with multiple mice and tangible interfaces (Druin, Stewart,
Proft, Bederson, & Hollan, 1997). KidPad enjoyed sustained successful use in primary schools in the United
Kingdom for at least three years (Stanton et al., 2002). Quest Atlantis (QA), a multi-user virtual environment
(MUVE) developed by Barab et al. (2005) to better understand the role of online community and games in
supporting    academic    content learning,   combined   elements   from   methodological     approaches  in critical
ethnography, participatory action research, and PD to develop a "critical design" philosophy (Barab, Dodge,
Thomas, Jackson, & Tuzun, 2007). The QA research team attributed their success to their cultivation of "rich
relationships with [children] we came to regard not simply as `participants' but as `collaborators'" (Barab et al.,
2007, p. 280), which also resulted in a collaborative interface that was effective in supporting academic goals.
More recently, PD-like approaches with adult educators have shown promise in fostering the design of novel
participatory assessment systems (Itow & Hickey, 2012).
         The collaborative and cognitive benefits of design thinking have also been touted in learning contexts.
Research in game-based learning, game design, and e-textiles design has demonstrated the problem-solving
expertise and increased agency that children can derive from their active participation in these projects (Kafai,
1996; Kafai, Fields, & Searle, 2012; Squire, 2011). Design thinking is an integral element of these approaches,
just as design thinking is promoted in Cooperative Inquiry approaches. This wealth of evidence in the learning
sciences begs the question, why limit the approach to game design or physical computing? Why not include
learners in the process of designing technologies they are using to learn, as well?
         Perhaps one of the obstacles to building more convergent paths across the respective disciplines is
related to the paradox of informed participation: individuals cannot really be informed unless they participate;
yet they cannot really participate unless they are informed (Eden, 2002). For CSCL research, this challenge is
reflected in the question, how can learners actively and effectively design technologies for concepts that they
have not yet learned? PD research faces a similar conundrum: in a rapidly evolving, increasingly ubiquitous
technological landscape, how can users contribute to ideation and concept development for contexts-in-use that
they have not yet experienced? These parallel, but nearly equivalent challenges serve to underscore the potential
value of increasing collaboration and cross-pollination across CSCL and HCI.

Complimentary Perspectives: Embedding PD into Designs for Learning
         The presentations included in this symposium offer different lenses for considering PD approaches in
learning contexts. Our first presentation explores the potential cognitive and social benefits that PD techniques

© ISLS                                                                                                          550
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                              Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

hold for the child designers who engage in them. Our next two presentations review the ways in which PD
techniques enhanced collaborative technologies that promote digital literacies (e.g., multimedia, storytelling)
and STEM      learning.  Our  fourth   presentation addresses     the tension  between   content  expertise  and  design
expertise, offering a comparison of PD results from children experienced in design with children learning in
STEM   environments.     Our    final presentation  explores    opportunities  and challenges   facing CSCL     and HCI
researchers who seek to include learners with special needs, such as those with autistic spectrum disorder, in the
design process.
          From  a   theoretical perspective,  our  exploratory    studies  reveal that PD   techniques   can be both  an
effective means     for improving     technology  designs,   and  a valuable   resource  in DBR     frameworks.  From  a
practical perspective, we demonstrate various PD approaches we took that may inform future DBR studies
across CSCL and HCI that seek to incorporate PD into their methodologies (e.g., Guha, Druin, & Fails, 2013).

Presentation 1: The Cognitive and Social Experiences of Children Involved in PD
Mona Leigh Guha
Over the  past  several   years,  researchers  and  designers    across academia     and industry   have partnered  with
children to design new technologies (Gibson, Newall, & Gregor, 2003; Takach & Varnhagen, 2002). While
many studies have explored the effects that co-design with children has on the resulting technology, few have
investigated the impact of co-design participation on the child designers themselves. Specifically, there has been
little documentation on the impact that becoming an equal partner in co-design with adults may have on the
participating child  designers.   Much    of the  literature regarding  children's   involvement  in technology   design
includes only incidental mentions of the potential benefits to child design partners. Formal studies focusing on
the child design partner's experiences are scarce. My study represents an initial foray into discovering if there
are indeed specific social and cognitive experiences available to child design partners (Guha, 2010).
          First, I will introduce co-design with children as a set of PD techniques that involve children as equal
partners throughout the technology design process, from conception to completion. I will include a discussion of
various co-design techniques, including the points during the design process in which they may be used most
effectively. Next, I will describe a qualitative case study that explored the social and cognitive experiences of
children involved in co-design with adults. The children who participated in the study were members of an
intergenerational   team  of adult    researchers and child     designers, known   collectively  as Kidsteam,   from the
Human-Computer Interaction Lab (HCIL). In this case study, I followed eight child design partners over the
course of a year, collecting data such as observational notes and artifacts, as well as interviews with the children
and their parents. The data was inductively coded into categories to arrive at a model of the social and cognitive
experiences of child design partners. In particular, the child design partners had experiences in the cognitive
domain  in   skills and  content, in  the social  domain     in relationships, enjoyment,   and  confidence,  and in the
overlapping social and cognitive domains of communication and collaboration (Guha, 2010). I will detail the
conceptual framework that describes these social and cognitive experiences of child design partners, and also
propose opportunities for future collaborative, interdisciplinary work among HCI and CSCL researchers.
          Children across a range of ages, not just 7-11 year olds, can be included successfully in the co-design
process. At the HCIL over the past decade, we have found that even very young children (4-5 years old) have
life experiences that they can draw upon to contribute to a learning technology design process, given flexible
design techniques and equal footing with their adult design partners (Guha et al., 2004). At the other end of the
childhood age spectrum, we have also found ways to use co-design with pre-teens (Knudzton et al., 2003) and
teenagers (Yip, Foss, & Guha, 2012). Each of these co-design efforts shows promise for their incorporation into
the design process for learning technologies as well.

Presentation 2 ­ Participatory Design, Mobile Storytelling, and New Media Literacies
Elizabeth Bonsignore
I will relate the impact of PD in the development of an online digital library for children, the International
Children's Digital Library (ICDL), and a mobile storytelling application (StoryKit). The two projects highlight
the ways in which PD processes resulted in collaborative, creative technologies that were highly intuitive and
engaging for children. Their intuitive, child-friendly features prompted their international proliferation not only
in family/social contexts, but also in a variety of learning contexts.
          The ICDL (childrenslibrary.org) is a freely available, online collection of children's literature from
around the world. The ICDL collection includes over 4500 books in 61 languages, representing 65 countries.
Over 6.5 million children and adults from 228 countries have visited the ICDL since its official launch in
November 2002, with an average of 100,000 visitors logged per month. The design goals for the ICDL were to
inspire intercultural awareness in children (ages 3-13) by providing broad online access to an international
collection of children's literature; to create new technologies that were age appropriate and engaging; and to
expand existing PD methods by involving children in the design process (Druin, 2005). The HCIL's Kidsteam
engaged   in  iterative design   cycles  from  2000-2005,     testing the  viability of  various search/browse/reading

© ISLS                                                                                                               551
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                            Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

interfaces (Druin, 2005; Hutchinson, Druin, & Bederson, 2006). Kidsteam's co-design approaches offered rich
insights into how children want to browse and search for books (and information in general), and how they
prefer to read digital texts. For example, co-design efforts with Kidsteam confirmed that children prefer to
search for books in ways that reflect their physical, image-based features (e.g., colors on the cover) or affective
elements (e.g., a "happy" or "sad" book), which resulted in an innovative and popular search interface as well as
new metadata categories for library cataloguers to consider (Druin, 2005). I will also share the ways in which
the ICDL design has been shown to increase children's motivation to read, expand the variety of books they
choose, and support their interest in exploring different cultures (Druin, Weeks, Massey, & Bederson, 2007).
         One of the design findings from the ICDL project was that children not only wanted to read beautiful
books from around the world; they also wanted to create and share their own stories. Furthermore, they wanted
to be able to carry and share their stories with them in the same "mobile" ways that they used print books: in the
lap of a grandfather, or on a bus with a friend. StoryKit is a mobile application (app) that enables the creation of
multimedia stories on iOS devices. Within StoryKit's integrated interface, children can create original stories, or
modify sample ICDL stories, using their own photos, drawings, text, and audio. StoryKit authors can also share
their stories with friends and family via the Internet. Like the ICDL, an intergenerational design team of adults
and children (ages 7-77) designed StoryKit. Since its launch in the Apple iTunes App Store in September 2009,
StoryKit   has been   used  over 2 million   times  by  over   385,000  distinct users in  175  countries    and in  40
languages/dialects. I will show how the design features that were implemented as a result of the co-design
process with Kidsteam resulted in an intuitive, integrated interface whose use has skyrocketed in classrooms
around the world. For example, almost 60% of shared stories have been created in formal education settings
(i.e., school). The audio tool that is integrated into StoryKit's interface as a result of Kidsteam design sessions
has also proven very effective in supporting children in early primary grades (ages 5-7) by allowing them to tell
their stories with confidence orally, even as they are learning to read and write (Bonsignore, Quinn, Druin, &
Bederson, in press). Moreover, educators have found that the saving and sharing process, which creates a digital
artifact of their primary and elementary level writers' progress in literacy activities (ages 6-8), has also helped
them to scaffold their efforts in the art of reflection and revision (Bonsignore et al., in press).

Presentation 3 ­ Participatory Design and Social Media for STEM Learning
June Ahn
I will describe the role of PD in two projects that explore the development of social media platforms for youths
and STEM learning. The two cases will highlight how PD yielded new insights about both 1) the design of more
engaging   and sociable    CSCL  platforms,  and  2) the  learning process of    children themselves   as it relates to
aspects of STEM education. In these projects, children and youths engaged in participatory STEM learning
practices as they co-designed technologies with the research team. I argue that PD is not only salient for the
actual design of technology tools, but is also a valuable contributor to broader DBR frameworks in the learning
sciences. Researchers using PD can not only learn about better design techniques, but also glean insight into the
learning processes of children that can then be more tightly integrated into the design process.
         The   first case, Sci-dentity, is an   NSF  funded  Cyberlearning  project  that  engages   urban,  inner-city
youths in science fiction storytelling using diverse digital media, as a means for enhancing their identification
with STEM ideas. A major component of the project is the design of a social media platform (sci-dentity.org)
where youths can share, comment on, and remix their stories. We used PD techniques with two groups: the
HCIL's Kidsteam and the middle school students who were themselves a part of the program. I will outline how
Kidsteam provided deep insight into the learning process required when children attempt the complex activity of
writing  science-infused   narratives.  Kidsteam   child  design partners  were   particularly  insightful   about   the
potential obstacles children face when attempting such a complex literacy practice, and their insights led to the
direct design of particular social media features on the Sci-dentity.org site, such as the "Brain," which became a
shared repository of science knowledge that authors could use as inspirations for their stories. In our design
work with middle school adolescents (tweens), we gained deeper insight into the controversial issue of remix
practices. Their concerns about remix directly resulted in the redesign of remix functionality in the social media
platform. The students in this project simultaneously learned about remix behavior while actively designing
their technological environment in ways that reflected their values. We found that: "Working from a youth
perspective allows one to recognize the underlying mechanisms for sharing, credit, and permission, and design
these functions in ways that align with the perspective of youths" (Ahn, Subramaniam, et al., 2012, p. 7).
         For the second case, I will outline the development of SINQ, a social media platform that leverages
features seen in popular sites such as Instagram and Reddit, in ways that promote collaborative learning of
Scientific INQuiry    (Ahn,  Gubbels,   et al., 2012). In this project, we embarked    on   a series  of  development
"sprints" that involved programming work by the research team coupled with co-design sessions with Kidsteam.
The design narrative of this experience sheds light on how specific PD techniques in each of the development
sprints allowed us to 1) glean insight into how children acquire scientific inquiry skills and dispositions in their
everyday thinking, and incorporate these learning processes into the design of SINQ; and 2) observe the ways in

© ISLS                                                                                                             552
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                           Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

which children interact with media, and online communities, in ways that helped us create a more engaging,
usable, and sociable CSCL tool. Each of our development sprints could also be conceptualized as cycles of DBR
in the learning sciences. Our experience creating SINQ illuminates how children and youths can act as both
learners who critically reflect on their STEM learning practices and co-designers who provide direct design
recommendations to the developers of the social media platforms used in these projects.

Presentation 4 ­ Design Expertise and Content Expertise: Complementary Perspectives in
the Design of Technologies for Science Learning
Tamara Clegg and Jason Yip
Our  project  originates from  learning  sciences    research aimed    at helping learners  to see  themselves   more
scientifically by facilitating their engagement in personally meaningful science experiences. We approached this
goal by designing a life-relevant learning (LRL) environment that 1) engages children in science in a context
relevant to their everyday lives (cooking) and 2) helps them begin to use science to achieve their own personal
goals. This LRL environment, Kitchen Chemistry (KC), engages elementary and middle school children in
scientific inquiry through making and perfecting dishes. We draw upon technology to support and scaffold
learners' scientific inquiry as they cook.
         In previous work, we found that the learning environment helped children begin to engage more deeply
in science and to identify themselves scientifically. We also found that the technology we used supported the
cognitive  aspects  of   learners' experiences,     but not  their  personally meaningful    aspects. Consequently,
technology use needed to be prompted and heavily supported by facilitators (Clegg, Gardner, & Kolodner,
2011). To enhance the potential for technologies that are used in LRL environments to contribute to learners'
personally meaningful    experiences,  we   have    used  Cooperative   Inquiry-based   PD   techniques  to re-design
technology support for LRL. We began these efforts by using StoryKit, a technology that had been designed
through Cooperative    Inquiry with   Kidsteam.     We  found that  learners were   highly  engaged when    they used
StoryKit, and that the app supported their scientific inquiry processes (Clegg et al., 2012) and decision-making
practices (Yip, Clegg, et al., 2012) quite naturally. We are currently extending StoryKit's affordances to design
new mobile technologies that specifically scaffold learners' scientific inquiry in their daily lives. We remain
committed to taking PD approaches to address the challenge of engaging learners in the design of learning
technologies as they are still learning the concepts and practices the technology is aimed at supporting.
         We will also discuss our efforts in addressing this challenge with two different co-design teams whose
goal was to re-design early iterations of KC technology. Specifically, we will outline the results from two case
studies of design sessions with members from Kidsteam and participants of two different iterations of KC (Yip,
Clegg, et al., in press). Kidsteam children are well versed in many co-design techniques and consistently work
together with adults each week (Druin, 1999). In contrast, KC children are experts in the learning context and
subject domain     knowledge.  KC     learners become      specialists in  developing   food science  investigations,
integrating cooking and observation techniques, and using technology for collaborative learning. Because we
are developing technology for learning environments, it was important for us to design with children who had
expertise in co-design and the subtle contextual knowledge of KC. We explored three research questions on co-
designing learning technologies with children: 1) What are the affordances and constraints of designing learning
technologies with children who have subject expertise; 2) with children who have design expertise? and 3) How
can the results of designing with the two groups be combined to inform design practice that involves either
group? (Yip et al., in press). We advocate that comparing two sets of co-designers allows for triangulation and
insight into complementary design ideas that can be optimized for the design of learning technologies.

Presentation 5 ­ Enhancing the Social Skills of Children with Autism Spectrum Disorders
with Multitouch Applications and Activities, supported by Participatory Design
Juan Pablo Hourcade
Children in the autism spectrum have been gaining a greater amount of attention recently, in great part due to
increasing rates of  diagnosis  (CDC,    2012).     Early diagnosis and   therapy   can make   a significant positive
difference in improving children's social skills. However, even a majority of those who receive early diagnosis
and treatment do not grow up to live independently as adults (Eaves & Ho, 2008; Howlin, Goode, Hutton &
Rutter, 2004). This means that in addition to emphasizing early diagnosis, there is a need to develop new
interventions that can improve the likelihood that children diagnosed with autism will grow up with the skills
necessary  to live independently.   I will  outline  my   research  team's  efforts to  add to our  understanding  of
interventions that can support this special, under-represented population, highlighting the ways in which PD
techniques enhanced our design activities and outcomes.
         When the first multi-touch tablets became commercially available in the summer of 2009, we saw an
opportunity to provide a novel intervention to children in the autism spectrum. While children in the spectrum
vary significantly in  their needs   and   ability, in  our experience,   most of   them have  a  strong affinity for
computers. This may be due to the predictability of computers and the ability to control them, something that

© ISLS                                                                                                            553
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                            Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

does not occur with face-to-face interactions. We saw the potential for multi-touch technologies to provide the
ability for children to engage in face-to-face interactions while doing something they enjoy.
          As we began to consider how to proceed, we contacted local parent support groups, observed children,
and also visited with a local group of adults with Asperger's syndrome. As we engaged with these groups we
developed   a  set of principles   that guided   our work,    which we    refer to as APPS:   Access,  Participation,
Personalization, and Sustainability. In terms of access, we emphasized designing and working on technologies
that become widely accessible, given the important and immediate needs of the community. We engaged with
all stakeholders   including the   children,  their  parents, teachers, and  special  education staff. In   terms of
personalization, we addressed the high variability in this population by designing several simple, open-ended
apps together with activities that could be conducted with them. The combination of apps and activities gave us
a lot of flexibility in personalizing what children experienced, and made it more likely we could find an activity
and app that could work for a specific set of children (Hourcade, Bullock-Rest, & Hansen, 2012). Finally, to
support the sustainability of the project, we made all the code open source and activity guides freely available
online (openautismsoftware.org) to ensure others could pick up the project and expand it on their own.
          We used a variety of techniques to engage the children in PD activities. Children who could speak
without much trouble were able to participate in the same type of activities in which typically developing
children participate. If anything, they were less likely to hold back criticism. We had to be more creative with
lower-functioning children who spoke little or did not speak at all. To get feedback from them about apps or
design ideas, we had to use picture cards, or simply write "yes" and "no" on sticky notes and ask them to point
at one of them when asking them whether they liked a particular aspect of an activity or app. We also learned
that some of the children really disliked changes in the user interface if they had gotten used to an earlier
version. In one case it caused a great deal of frustration in a child, so we recommend that interaction designers
in similar situations keep previous versions of apps handy (Hourcade et al., 2012).
          We have conducted an evaluation of the impact of the apps and activities on children's behavior, and
found in a recent study that children had more verbal and physical interactions when using the apps than when
conducting  similar  activities without  apps   (Hourcade,  Williams,   Miller, Huebner, &   Liang, 2013).  We  also
found some of the apps led to more supportive comments from children than other apps or activities without
apps. Our experiences point to the feasibility and value of engaging all stakeholders including children with
autism in PD activities, as well as the positive effects of our particular approach to engaging children in face-to-
face activities to improve their social skills.

Significance
The aim of our symposium is to advance the practice of DBR across multiple disciplines through collaborative
investigations into PD techniques that enhance the design of learning technologies as well as benefit the learners
who participate in their design. The integrative nature of our goal is significant to the conference theme of
"learning across levels of space, time, and scale," precisely because it seeks to reduce disciplinary boundaries
and amplify commonalities across design methods. Each of the studies detailed here offers a metaphorical grain
of sand that, taken together, builds a worldview demonstrating the potential for PD techniques to shape future
learner-centered systems. From the outset, CSCL has been an interdisciplinary field. Deepening the dialogue
between HCI and CSCL researchers who are using participatory approaches in learning contexts can only serve
to strengthen CSCL's interdisciplinary tradition.

References
Ahn,  J., Gubbels,  M., Kim,    J. & Wu,   J.   (2012). SINQ:  Scientific INQuiry   learning using  social media. In
          Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI EA 2012), Austin, TX (pp. 2081 ­
          2086). NY, USA: ACM.
Ahn, J., Subramaniam, M., Fleischmann, K. R., Waugh, A., Walsh, G., & Druin, A. (2012). Youth identities as
          remixers in an online community of storytellers: Attitudes, strategies, and values. Proceedings of the
          American Society for Information Science and Technology, 49(1), 1­10.
Barab, S., Thomas, M., Dodge, T., Carteaux, R., & Tuzun, H. (2005). Making learning fun: Quest Atlantis, a
          game without guns. Educational Technology Research and Development, 53(1), 86­107.
Barab, S., Dodge, T., Thomas, M. K., Jackson, C., & Tuzun, H. (2007). Our designs and the social agendas they
          carry. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 16(2), 263­305.
Bødker, S., Ehn, P., Sjögren, D., & Sundblad, Y. (2000). Co-operative Design - perspectives on 20 years with
          "the Scandinavian  IT    Design  Model."   In  Proceedings    NordiCHI   2000, Stockholm,   Sweden,  1­9.
          Retrieved from: http://cid.nada.kth.se/pdf/cid_104.pdf
Bonsignore, E., Quinn, A. J., Druin, A., & Bederson, B. B. (in press). Sharing stories in the wild: a mobile
          storytelling case study. Transactions of Computer-Human Interaction (ToCHI).

© ISLS                                                                                                          554
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                            Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

Centers for  Disease   Control  and  Prevention     (CDC).  (2012,  March   29).  CDC      -  Division of  Birth   Defects,
        National    Center  on   Birth  Defects  and   Developmental      Disabilities -   Data  and   Statistics, Autism
        Spectrum Disorders. Retrieved from http://www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/autism/data.html
Clegg,  T., Bonsignore,    E., Yip, J., Gelderblom,     H., Kuhn,   A., Valenstein,    T.,   Lewittes, B., et al.  (2012).
        Technology     for  promoting   scientific   practice and   personal  meaning      in life-relevant learning.   In
        Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children (IDC 2012),
        Bremen, Germany, (pp. 152-161). NY, USA: ACM.
Clegg, T. L., Gardner, C. M. & Kolodner, J. L. (2011). Technology for supporting learners in out-of-school
        learning    environments. (2011).    In H.   Spada,   G.   Stahl, N.  Miyake,      N. Law   (Eds.),   Connecting
        Computer-Supported       Collaborative      Learning  to   Policy  and  Practice:     CSCL     2011   Conference
        Proceedings, Vol. 1 (pp. 248-255). International Society of the Learning Sciences.
Druin, A., Stewart, J., Proft, D., Bederson, B., & Hollan, J. (1997). KidPad: a design collaboration between
        children, technologists, and educators. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human factors in
        Computing Systems (CHI `97), Atlanta, GA (pp. 463­470). NY, USA: ACM.
Druin, A. (1999). Cooperative inquiry: developing new technologies for children with children. In Proceedings
        of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI                   '99), Pittsburgh, PA, (pp.
        592­599). NY, USA: ACM.
Druin, A. (2002). The role of children in the design of new technology. Behaviour & Information Technology,
        21(1), 1­25.
Druin,  A.  (2005). What   children  can  teach  us:   developing  digital  libraries  for children  with   children. The
        Library Quarterly, 75(1), 20­41.
Druin, A., Weeks, A., Massey, S., & Bederson, B. B. (2007). Children's interests and concerns when using the
        international children's digital library: a four-country case study. In Proceedings of the 7th ACM/IEEE-
        CS Joint Conference on Digital libraries (JCDL '07), Vancouver, BC (pp. 167­176). NY, USA: ACM.
Eaves, L.C. & Ho, H.H. (2008). Young adult outcome of autism spectrum disorders. Journal of Autism and
        Developmental Disorders, 38(4). 739­47.
Eden, H. (2002). Getting in on the (inter)action: exploring affordances for collaborative learning in a context of
        informed participation. In G. Stahl (Ed.), Proceedings of the Conference on Computer Support for
        Collaborative Learning: Foundations for a CSCL Community (CSCL '02) (pp. 399­407). International
        Society of the Learning Sciences.
Ellis, R. D., & Kurniawan, S. H. (2000). Increasing the Usability of Online Information for Older Users: A Case
        Study in Participatory Design. International Journal of Human-Computer Interaction, 12(2), 263­276.
Frauenberger, C., Good, J., & Keay-Bright, W. (2011). Designing technology for children with special needs:
        bridging perspectives through participatory design. CoDesign, 7(1), 1­28.
Friedman, B., Borning, A., Davis, J. L., Gill, B. T., Kahn Jr., P. H., Kriplean, T., & Lin, P. (2008). Laying the
        foundations    for public participation  and   value  advocacy:    interaction design   for a  large-scale  urban
        simulation. In Proceedings 2008 International Conference on Digital Government Research (pp. 305-
        314). Montreal, Canada: Digital Government Society of North America.
Gibson, L., Newall, F., & Gregor, P. (2003). Developing a web authoring tool that promotes accessibility in
        children's designs. In Proceedings of the 2003 Conference on Interaction Design and Children (IDC
        '03), Preston, England (pp. 23­30). NY, USA: ACM.
Guha, M. L. (2010). Understanding the social and cognitive experiences of children involved in technology
        design processes (3443561). University of Maryland, College Park. ProQuest Dissertations & Theses
        (PQDT). (855814381).
Guha,  M.   L., Druin, A.,  Chipman,    G.,  Fails, J. A.,  Simms,  S., &   Farber,   A.  (2004). Mixing    ideas:  a new
        technique for working with young children as design partners. In Proceedings of the 2004 Conference
        on Interaction Design and Children (IDC '04), College Park, Maryland (pp. 35­42). NY, USA: ACM.
Guha, M.L., Druin, A., and Fails, J. (2013). Cooperative Inquiry revisited: Reflections of the past and guidelines
        for  the  future of intergenerational   co-design.    International Journal    of  Child-Computer     Interaction,
        1(1), 14 ­ 23.
Hagen, P., & Robertson, T.       (2010). Social  technologies:     challenges and   opportunities   for participation.  In
        Proceedings of the 11th Biennial Participatory Design Conference, (pp. 31-40). NY, USA: ACM.
Hernandez-Leo, D., Villasclaras-Frenandez, E. D., Asensio-Perez, J. I., Dimitriadis, Y., Jorrin-Abellan, I. M.,
        Ruiz-Requies, I., & Rubia-Avi, B. (2006). COLLAGE: A collaborative Learning Design editor based
        on patterns. Educational Technology & Society, 9(1), 58­71.
Hoadley, C. P. (2002). Creating context: design-based research in creating and understanding. In G. Stahl (Ed.),
        Proceedings of the Conference on Computer Support for Collaborative Learning: Foundations for a
        CSCL     Community     (CSCL   '02), Boulder,   CO    (pp. 453-462).  International    Society  of  the  Learning
        Sciences.

© ISLS                                                                                                                555
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                           Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

Holtzblatt, K., & Jones, S. (1993). Contextual Inquiry: A Participatory Technique for System Design. In D.
        Schuler & A. Namioka (Eds.), Participatory design: principles and practices (pp. 177­210). Hillsdale,
        NJ, USA: Erlbaum.
Hourcade, J.P., Bullock-Rest, N.E., & Hansen, T.E. (2012). Multitouch tablet applications and activities to
        enhance   the   social skills of    children with autism spectrum    disorders. Personal   and  Ubiquitous
        Computing, 16(2), 157-168.
Hourcade, J.P., Williams, S.R., Miller, E.A., Huebner, K.E., & Liang, L.J. (2013). Evaluation of tablet apps to
        encourage social interaction in children with autism spectrum disorders. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI
        Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. NY, USA: ACM.
Hutchinson, H. B., Bederson, B. B., & Druin, A. (2006). The evolution of the international children's digital
        library searching and browsing interface. In Proceedings of the 2006 Conference on Interaction Design
        and Children (IDC '06), Tampere, Finland (pp. 105­112). NY, USA: ACM.
Howlin, P., Goode, S., Hutton, J., & Rutter, M. (2004). Adult outcome for children with autism. Journal of
        Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 45(2), 212­29.
Itow, R. C., & Hickey, D. T. (2012). Design-Based Implementation of Spreadable Educational Practices within
        the Participatory Learning and Assessment Network (PLAnet). In J. van Aalst, K. Thompson, M.J.
        Jacobson, and P. Reimann, (Eds.), Proceedings of the 10th International Conference of the Learning
        Sciences (ICLS 2012), Vol. 2 (pp. 553-554). International Society of the Learning Sciences.
Jenkins, H., Clinton, K., Purushotma, R., Robinson, A. J., & Weigel, M. (2006). Confronting the challenges of
        participatory culture: media education for the 21st century. Chicago, IL: MacArthur Foundation.
Kafai, Y.   B.  (1996). Learning    design   by  making   games.    In  Yasmin  B.  Kafai  &   M.  Resnick   (Eds.),
        Constructionism in practice: designing, thinking and learning in a digital world (pp. 71­96). Mahwah,
        NJ: Erlbaum.
Kafai, Y. B., Fields, D. A., & Searle, K. A. (2012). Making Technology Visible: Connecting the Learning of
        Crafts, Circuitry and Coding in Youth e-Textile Designs. In J. van Aalst, K. Thompson, M.J. Jacobson,
        and P. Reimann, (Eds.), Proceedings of the 10th International Conference of the Learning Sciences
        (ICLS 2012), Vol. 1 (pp. 188-195). International Society of the Learning Sciences.
Knudtzon,   K., Druin,  A.,  Kaplan,    N., Summers,    K., Chisik, Y.,  Kulkarni,  R., et al. (2003).  Starting an
        intergenerational technology design team: a case study. In Proceedings of the 2003 Conference on
        Interaction Design and Children (IDC `03), Preston, England (pp. 51­58). NY, USA: ACM.
Muller, M. (2008). Participatory Design: The Third Space in HCI. In A. Sears & J. Jacko (Eds.), The human-
        computer interaction handbook (2nd ed., pp. 1061­1082). NY, USA: Taylor & Francis.
Schuler, D., & Namioka, A. (1993). Participatory Design: Principles and Practices. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Squire, K. (2011). Video Games and Learning: Teaching and Participatory Culture in the Digital Age. NY,
        USA: Teachers College Press.
Stanton, D., Neale, H., & Bayon, V. (2002). Interfaces to support children's co-present collaboration: multiple
        mice and tangible technologies. In G. Stahl (Ed.), Proceedings of the Conference on Computer Support
        for Collaborative Learning: Foundations for a CSCL Community (CSCL '02), Boulder, CO (pp. 342­
        351). International Society of the Learning Sciences.
Takach, B. S., & Varnhagen, C. (2002). Partnering with children to develop an interactive encyclopedia. In M.
        M.  Bekker,    P. Markopoulos,      &  M.    Kersten-Tsikalkina (Eds.), Proceedings    of the  International
        Workshop "Interaction Design and Children", Eindhoven, The Netherlands (pp. 129­137). Shaker.
Walsh,  G., Foss,  E.,  Yip,   J., Druin,   A. (2013).  FACIT   PD:    Framework   for  Analysis   and Creation  of
        Intergenerational Techniques for Participatory Design. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on
        Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI 2013), Paris, France. NY, USA: ACM.
Yip, J.C., Clegg, T.L., Bonsignore, E., Gelderblom, H., Lewites, B., Guha, M.L., & Druin, A. (2012). Kitchen
        Chemistry: Supporting learners' decisions in science. In J. van Aalst, K. Thompson, M.J. Jacobson, and
        P. Reimann, (Eds.), Proceedings of the 10th International Conference of the Learning Sciences (ICLS
        2012), Vol. 1 (pp. 103 ­ 110). International Society of the Learning Sciences.
Yip, J. C., Clegg, T. L., Bonsignore, E., Gelderblom, H., Rhodes, E., & Druin, A. (in press). Brownies or Bags-
        of-Stuff?  Domain      Expertise  in  Cooperative   Inquiry with  Children. In   Proceedings   of the 12th
        International Conference on Interaction Design and Children (IDC 2013). NY, USA: ACM.
Yip, J.C., Foss, E., & Guha, M.L. (2012). Co-designing with adolescents. Paper presented at the Designing
        Interactive Technology      for  Teens  Workshop,    NordiCHI,   Copenhagen,    Denmark.   Retrieved  from:
        http://www.chici.org/ditt2012/papers.html

Acknowledgments
For each of the studies described in our presentations, we thank the participants, their parents, and the local
school communities that partnered with us. For the work undertaken at the HCIL, we also thank Kidsteam child
and adult designers who have successfully co-designed a host of novel technologies over the past decade.

© ISLS                                                                                                        556
