CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                          Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

     Mass Collaboration ­ an Emerging Field for CSCL Research

                                                    Organizer
    Ulrike Cress, Knowledge Media Research Center (KMRC), 72076 Tuebingen, Schleichstr. 6, Germany,
                                              u.cress@iwm-kmrc.de

                                                    Presenters
                  Brigid Barron, School of Education, Stanford University, barronbj@stanford.edu
         Gerhard Fischer, Center for Lifelong Learning and Design, University of Colorado, Boulder,
                                              gerhard@colorado.edu
     Ulrike Cress, Iassen Halatchliyski, Aileen Oeberst; Knowledge Construction Lab, KMRC, Tuebingen
             Email: u.cress@iwm-kmrc.de, i.halatchlyiski@iwm-kmrc.de, a.oeberst@iwm-kmrc.de
     Andrea Forte, College of Information Science and Technology, Drexel University, aforte@drexel.edu
                             Mitchel Resnick, Media Lab, MIT, mres@media.mit.edu

                                                    Discussant
                                         Allan Collins, collins@bbn.com

         Abstract: Mass collaboration is a present-day Internet practice with far-reaching implications
         for education   and for  a knowledge   society  in general.   The  goal of this  symposium     is to
         establish the concept of mass collaboration as a relevant topic in CSCL by presenting related
         research conducted with multifaceted perspectives from different labs. Several presentations
         will provide insight into the current approaches to the complex and large-scale phenomenon.
         They will address a range of theories and methodologies to identify and approach the major
         aspects of learning and knowledge development in the informal context of the present-day
         social   web. The  presenters  will ground the    analyses of mass   collaboration  processes   and
         outcomes    on  a  variety of   examples   of effective    Web   2.0 settings  and   technological
         environments. The anticipated discussion will map out what unique insights can be gained
         from studying this form of collaboration compared to more formalized small-scale settings, as
         well as possible directions for future research in the area.

Introduction
Whereas in former times collaboration was mostly bound to smaller groups, the Internet tools of today provide
various possibilities for the collaboration of masses of users. There is an almost unlimited variety of online
communities where users share personal stories, experiences, or anything that can be expressed digitally. In
wikis thousands of users collaboratively gather and organize knowledge. With social tagging systems users
annotate and  share  online  resources. The   participants in  such communities   are  not   just a mass   of learning
individuals or passive consumers; they actively produce meaningful content and act as "prosumers" (O'Reilly,
2006; Tapscott & Williams, 2006). Most importantly, their activity develops outside the formal educational
system (National Research Council, 2009).
         The symposium will demonstrate the relevance of mass collaboration for CSCL research by bringing
together the latest theoretical and empirical endeavors in this research area. It is organized by the Knowledge
Construction  Lab   at  the KMRC,    Tuebingen,    where   the Co-Evolution   Model    of Individual    Learning  and
Collaborative Knowledge Building (Cress & Kimmerle, 2008) serves as a systemic framework for describing
and analyzing mass collaboration. The symposium presents results from this line of research together with
relevant work being done in other institutes. Together the presentations want to open a dialogue about those
aspects of mass collaboration that have potential for education and learning and are thus of interest for the
learning sciences (Cress, in press; Cress & Fischer, subm.; Fischer, 2011). The discussion will build on the
symposium on long-tail learning at the CSCL conference in 2009 (Brown & Adler, 2008; Collins, et al 2009)
and will extend    the view   to various forms   of online    interaction when   masses   of people   learn   together,
collaborate and create new knowledge. The presentations will introduce relevant theoretical approaches to the
process of mass collaboration; empirical studies will detail out different analysis methodologies, and examples
of communities    and  Web   2.0 environments   in  formal  and  informal  settings will  ground    the discussion of
practical issues.
         In sum, the aim of the symposium is threefold:
         (1) to establish the concept of mass collaboration as a relevant topic of CSCL
         (2) to present and interconnect existing research on the subject, and
         (3) to give prototypical examples of learning communities and mass collaboration platforms

© ISLS                                                                                                           557
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                           Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

          In the  following we  give  a short  introduction to the   concept of mass    collaboration, providing   the
background for the presentations in the symposium.

CSCL and Mass Collaboration
Since the emergence of CSCL as a research field the predominant approach has been to study small groups of
students in a neatly arranged situation: The students engage in synchronous discourse around a problem-solving
task, and the sequence of their interactions represents a major research interest with regard to meaning making
and learning outcomes. Collaboration has mainly been used in the sense of Roschelle and Teasley, (1995; p. 70)
who defined it as "a coordinated, synchronous activity that is the result of a continued attempt to construct and
maintain a shared conception of a problem". Whereas in its early times CSCL mainly dealt with synchronous
small-group or classroom settings, currently, CSCL research faces a much broader range of real-life situations,
where people take part in decentralized communities, act asynchronously and do not necessarily all come to a
shared conception of a problem. In fact, complex knowledge phenomena involve long periods of time, larger
and changing numbers of people, and fuzzy-structured settings. In this spirit, any human achievement can be
seen as a collaborative accomplishment ­ in terms of dwarves standing on the shoulders of giants. Extending
the view on collaboration beyond small groups leads to a macro approach that considers the complexity of
knowledge development across space, time, and collectives of people. CSCL research is just starting to address
this global level of human learning and knowledge creation (Kafai & Peppler, 2011; Collins et al, 2009). The
increasing number of Web 2.0 communities and tools now bring this perspective to the foreground.

Artifacts as Mediators of Mass Collaboration
The large-scale perspective raises the question of how intersubjective understanding and collaborative activities
of a vast  number   of  people  are coordinated.  Bearing  in mind   that  most of  the participants   cannot interact
directly, an efficient form of coordination is needed. All the more so when the process is collaborative and
fulfills the conditions  that  individuals act consciously  following    a common    direction;   that they   take the
perspective of the other participants into account; and that they contribute by building on the accomplishments
of others. The solution to the coordination problem resides in artifacts that support the collaborative process by
mediating common understanding (Bruner, 1996). Beyond making artifacts accessible for a large number of
people,   social software environments     afford their collaborative creation, revision  and   remixing   in a  mass
collaborative  process.  Collaborative  artifacts represent crystallized   knowledge    that is preserved  from    past
interactive situations and that can be built on in future to produce phenomena like scientific understanding,
social practices or social norms (Engeström & Sannino, 2010; Paavola, Lipponen & Hakkareinen, 2004). An
artifact is a means to an end and at the same time it is a desired product whose creation can even be the main
goal of the collaboration process (see for example Kafai & Resnick, 2000). Theoretical and methodological
approaches to mass collaboration need to be centered around artifacts as major elements in the complex process
across space, time, and collectives of people.

Learning through Mass Collaboration
Whereas    formal  learning   mostly takes  place   organized  in smaller    groups and  classroom     settings, mass
collaboration by definition happens "in the wild", and thus, mainly outside the educational system. Most of the
Web  2.0   communities    that share and   create  knowledge   maintain   an informal   context.  Activities  in these
communities induce individual learningat the same time as they demonstrate collective knowledge creation
(Paavola, Lipponen & Hakkarainen 2004). In order to interact, people have to create or refer to artifacts. In the
process   of artifact construction  and use   people  deepen   their  understanding  and  enhance    their individual
knowledge (Kafai & Resnick, 2000). Thus, learning and knowledge creation in a collaborative setting are one
continuous process of internalization and externalization (Nonaka & Takeuchi, 1995; Vygotsky, 1978).
          During mass collaboration it is obvious that learning occurs not just at the level of individuals, but also
at the community level: A community may enhance its knowledge base, and may deepen its understanding of a
given topic. Through cumulated reciprocal referencing during a discourse some views in the group may become
more pronounced than others. Some ideas stand the test of time, others fade away. This is obvious in the
example of wikis: Some ideas remain in the collaborative text, while others are revised or deleted soon after
they have been contributed. These processes are not just random. They show that a community represents a self-
organized, autopoietic system (Maturana & Varela, 1987). Knowledge development within this system is an
emergent process. It depends on individuals' activities but is not reducible to the knowledge of independent
individuals. The "learning" of a community and the learning of the participating individuals are intertwined and
suggest a systemic understanding of mass collaboration (Cress & Kimmerle, 2008).

© ISLS                                                                                                             558
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                             Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

Mass Collaboration Environments
There are many examples of mass collaboration environments for learning and knowledge creation. Perhaps the
most remarkable example is the online encyclopedia Wikipedia. It offers a unique field for studying large-scale
open-ended   knowledge     processes   from    large amounts      of  data on    the history  of  articles and  authors'
contributions. Wikipedia is a dynamic knowledge artifact of interconnected articles deliberately produced by a
complex   system     of  individual   collaborative   activities.  The   explicit    written  content  mediates  shared
understanding on a specific topic amalgamating perspectives and styles of expression of a multitude of authors
into a coherent exposition. Although Wikipedia is not aimed at developing new knowledge or at providing a
learning environment    for the  contributors,  the  processes    that unfold  there  share  some  essential features  of
scientific and knowledge-building discourse (Forte & Bruckman, 2006; Swarts, 2009). Thus there is a vibrant
field of research concerned with data from Wikipedia, and several presentations in this symposium (those by
Aileen Oeberst, Iassen Halatchlyiski and Andrea Forte) will be concerned with it.
         While Wikipedia has emerged as a self-organized community, a lot of mass collaboration platforms
have been deliberately designed to support learning. One prominent example is the Scratch online community
(presentation by Michael Resnick), where children playfully create visual artifacts like animations, stories, and
games. Learning and knowledge creation are again supported by and organized around user-generated artifacts.
The environment affords users not only the possibility to share and comment on their projects, but also to use
parts of the existing projects to create new ones (Resnick et al., 2009; Brennan, Resnick & Monroy-Hernandez,
2010; Monroy-Hernandez,        2012). Thus,  learning  and knowledge       development   in  the Scratch   community   is
sustained by a culture of remixing of existing content. Analogous to Wikipedia the individual contributions may
be interlinked, revised and rebuilt. Contributors use others' contributions to create new artifacts, which then in
turn represent the basis for future developments.
         The   third  example   of  a mass   collaboration  environment       in this  symposium    is Citizen  Science
(presentation by Brigid Barron). It stands not for one specific technology, but subsumes various projects where
amateurs or nonprofessional scientists participate in scientific activities. Amateurs, for example, collect data or
test natural phenomena. Here it is obvious that their activities lead to new knowledge. The main goal of the
projects is not the learning of the individuals, but the creation of new knowledge by using scientific method.

Presentation 1: Cultures of Participation -- Fundamental Transformations of
Learning, Working, and Collaborating
The first presentation is an introduction to the topic, pointing out the current and societal relevance of mass
collaboration. Gerhard    Fischer,    director of the  Center     for  Lifelong  Learning    and Design    (University of
Colorado, Boulder), explores with mass collaboration in the context of cultures of participation (Fischer, 2011;
Jenkins, 2009). He states that social media enable a shift from consumer cultures, which are specialized in
producing finished artifacts to be consumed passively, to cultures of participation, in which all people are
provided  with  the  means  to  participate  and  to actively  contribute   in  personally   meaningful    problems. The
participatory web supports moving away from a world in which a small number of people create artifacts, define
rules, make decisions concerning many others towards a world in which everyone would be able to actively
participate following their own interests and to make their voices heard. This shift has introduced unique and
fundamental opportunities, challenges, and transformative changes for innovative research in CSCL. Fischer
will explore   in his   presentation  the theoretical  foundations     and  system   developments     for  understanding,
fostering, and supporting cultures of participation. His framework is centered on the following aspects:
·    Meta-design defines and creates social and technical infrastructures for cultures of participation in which
     new forms of collaborative learning and design can arise.
·    Social creativity transcends the individual human mind by making sense of the variety of voices, in order to
     frame and solve complex problems. Shared artifacts enable relevant transdisciplinary collaborations.
·    Rich ecologies of participation will emerge based on by different levels of participation, expertise, interests,
     and motivation.
·    Idiosyncratic interests and unique contributions by self-directed learners will lead to long-tail distributions
     of knowledge.
·    Drawbacks of cultures of participation can be seen in aspects of "do-it-yourself" societies, in fragmented
     cultures in which people live in their own "filter bubbles", and in accumulation of irrelevant information.
         The   framework    is grounded   in a variety  of different    application  contexts  (including:  open source
software, urban planning, assistive technology, energy sustainability, and formal education). The presentation
will include initial design guidelines and explore the implications of these developments for future research and
innovations in technology enhanced learning.

Presentation         2:  The     Co-Evolution          Model          as   a   Theoretical        Framework          for
Describing Mass Collaboration

© ISLS                                                                                                               559
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                             Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

The second presentation will introduce research conducted at the KMRC in Tuebingen. It consists of three parts
with three different presenters: Ulrike Cress will present the Co-Evolution Model of Individual Learning and
Collaborative Knowledge Building as a research framework for describing and analyzing learning processes in
mass collaboration (Cress & Kimmerle, 2008; Kimmerle, Cress & Held, 2010). The model describes individuals
as cognitive systems, who externalize their knowledge by creating artifacts. The community deals with the
individuals' contributions by interlinking, revising or even rejecting them. The community acts as a social
system that deals with the information according to its own rules. Knowledge is an emergent product of this
process. Individual learning takes place when users consume, that is, internalize existing knowledge, adopt the
rules of a community, and participate by contributing artifacts. Thus, on the one hand, a system makes use of an
individual's knowledge to create a collective knowledge base; on the other hand, an individual develops her or
his own knowledge by actively participating in a community. This means that mass collaboration should be
analyzed not only at the level of individuals, but also at the level of the whole community as a social system that
shapes the individual's activities.
        The following two presentations give an example of how the relevant system level processes can be
analyzed. The first study is a qualitative in-depth analysis of a distinctive Wikipedia article, while the second is
a quantitative large-scale analysis basing on thousands of interlinked pages.
        Aileen Oeberst will present a study of the development of the Wikipedia article about the nuclear
power plant in Fukushima during the first nine days after the nuclear disaster on March 11, 2011. She will show
how the rules of the social system Wikipedia guided individual contributions to a topic where--at that time--no
verified knowledge existed. People had to deal with a flood of novel, highly specific and mainly uncertain
incoming information and they had to construction meaning out of different information sources. Many authors
were involved in this process. Their activities and coordination were only mediated by Wikipedia's norms, that
valuable and thus accepted contribution should be verifiable and written from a neutral point of view. This norm
effectively shaped individuals' edits and enabled authors without much domain expertise to construct an article,
which  nuclear   experts judged   to be   of high   quality. These  findings   bring  not the  individuals   as   relevant
contributors but the rules of the knowledge system to the fore. The system's definition of knowledge implicitly
coordinated  the  knowledge   construction   process,   and  shaped   the  activities of its contributors.  In  sum,  the
presentation shows that mass collaboration is much more than sharing and accumulating knowledge across
individuals. It is an emergent process, where the system makes use of individuals to create system-accepted
knowledge.
        Iassen    Halatchliyski   will  present an  approach   to  studying   mass collaboration   that can  encompass
large-scale  and  long-term  characteristics:   the macro    level of  the  phenomenon     (Halatchliyski,   Moskaliuk,
Kimmerle & Cress, 2010). In the example of Wikipedia this macro level can be perceived using the concept of
knowledge    domains  in  analogy    to scientific  fields that  govern   scientific  production.  New     knowledge   is
essentially situated (Lave, 1988) and complies with the specific context of its production. This means that the
characteristics of a knowledge domain are a major factor of the future development of knowledge--not only in
this domain, but also in the adjacent domains. Such influence is expected to stem from the already accumulated
knowledge    base and   from  the   active participants in   the domain.   In  Wikipedia,    this reasoning  raises  two
interrelated questions:  what are   the  important  articles  and  who    are the important   authors   in a knowledge
domain?   Halatchliyski  uses the    term  pivotal  knowledge    referring  to those   Wikipedia   articles  that are an
important   part of the  structure   of a  knowledge    domain,    and thus,   influence  the  future   development   of
knowledge. In this presentation he will show how to identify pivotal knowledge by adapting the concept of a
network to a knowledge base of thousands of interconnected Wikipedia articles.
        The network concept has already been used to describe knowledge organization at different levels such
as the semantic memory of individuals (e.g., Collins & Loftus, 1975), or the meaning-making process within a
group discourse (Stahl, 2006). Using a social network analysis methodology, the complex, system-level patterns
of knowledge creation during mass collaboration are now becoming an accessible focus of CSCL research.

Presentation 3: Large-Scale Collaboration and Cultures of Accountability
The third presentation deals not only with the aspect of production, but also with the aspect of consumption of
knowledge    and  information   provided     in mass  collaboration    environments.     Andrea    Forte   from   Drexel
University's iSchool will talk about the intersection of critical consumption and production of participatory
information resources. She will discuss her research group's ongoing efforts to understand how contributing to
online information resources can not only yield content knowledge, but also expose learners to cultures of
accountability and equip them to engage critically with information sources.
        Research on collaborative environments involves understanding who learns what, when, and how. In
Wikipedia and other wiki systems, collaborative writing supports editors in learning about a wide range of
topics and the characteristics of this learning have been the topic of many studies, including Forte's and others
in this Symposium.    However, there are other kinds of learning taking place as people become socialized in
communities of collaborative authorship.

© ISLS                                                                                                               560
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                           Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

         As the world's largest and most widely accessed collection of reference works, quality is a critical
concern for Wikipedia projects. Each language edition has developed complex policies and social norms that
help contributors  construct  high-quality  artifacts  and that guide  discourse on   the  site (Butler et. al., 2008;
Kriplean et. al., 2007); this has bred a culture of accountability among contributors. Analogously, when asked to
contribute to a public information resource as part of their classwork, high school students report a sense of
responsibility to their potential readership for the quality of their written work (Forte & Bruckman, 2009). Even
when they work individually, this sense of responsibility is manifest in student strategies for citing, organizing
content, and looking for information. Moreover, when they have experience producing information online, some
students begin to leverage these experiences to assess the quality online information resources they use. Forte's
research group    is expanding   this   work   to  better  understand  how    experiences   with  large-scale    online
collaboration affect people's understanding and assessment of online resources both on Wikipedia and in more
specialized collaboratively produced resources like Ancestry.com or Findagrave. Early findings suggest that
experience in contributing to participatory information sources yield sophisticated strategies for engaging with
online sources.

Presentation 4: Learning through Remixing
Mitchel  Resnick   from   the MIT   Media   Lab   will discuss  his group's  research   on mass  collaboration   in the
context  of  Scratch (http://scratch.mit.edu),  an online   community    in which  young    people  (ages   8 and   up)
program interactive stories, games, animations, and simulations ­ and share their creations with one another
online (Resnick et al., 2009). Since the launch of Scratch in 2007, young people around the world have shared
roughly 3 million projects in the online community, adding (on average) two new projects every minute. The
collection of projects is incredibly diverse: interactive newsletters, science simulations, virtual tours, animated
dance contests, interactive tutorials, and many others, all programmed with Scratch's graphical programming
blocks.
         An important aspect of participation in the Scratch online community is the ability to remix other
people's projects. Members of the community not only interact with and comment on one another's projects,
they can also modify, extend, and repurpose the programming code and media elements underlying the projects.
All projects in the Scratch community are covered by Creative Commons Share-Alike license, so community
members are free to build upon the sprites, scripts, images, and sounds of other people's projects. Roughly one-
third of all projects in the Scratch community are remixes of other projects.
         In his presentation, Resnick will analyze and discuss:
·   Different approaches to remixing within the Scratch community
·   What people learn (and don't learn) as they remix one another's projects
·   How ideas spread through the community through remixing
·   Community attitudes towards remixing ­ and factors underlying those attitudes
·   Design strategies for supporting and encouraging a culture of remixing
         Many of the ideas and examples in the presentation will draw upon the research of Andres Monroy-
Hernandez,    who  recently   finished his  PhD   dissertation  focusing on  remixing    in the  Scratch  community
(Monroy-Hernandez, 2012).

Presentation 5: Long-tail Learning and Access to External Resources
Brigid Barron and Caitlin Martin from Stanford University will report findings from a study of a genre of
cyber-enabled massively collaborative activity known as Citizen Science. Citizen Science projects capitalize on
the interest  and efforts of  non-scientist collaborators  who   join forces to contribute   data that  helps  address
problems of concern. Networked technologies have dramatically changed the potential of such projects. With
mobile GPS enabled data collection devices, data contributions can easily be shared. Applications like Google
Maps make it easy to share location based information and online databases allow data contributions to be
reviewed by professional scientists and community members. Our research project was based in the premise that
we  need   to understand   Cyberlearning    as a  human-technical    system  and   that to  advance  design   relevant
knowledge we need to attend to both the social community and the ways that the technology supports learning
within the community. We chose to study a Citizen Science project with a significant focus on education called
Vital Signs. Vital Signs is a citizen science networked system located in the state of Maine, linked statewide to
schools  and  accessible  not  only to  teachers   but  to anyone   who  want   to learn.   Because  the  state  has a
longstanding laptop program started in 2002, all middle school students have access to their own iBook, which
they use at home and at school. Middle school teachers were also provided with laptops, technical assistance,
and professional development.     We will present findings from our research organized to address three main
questions:
1)   What patterns of personalized learning can we identify among a diverse group of teachers/learners who
     vary in prior experiences and community socioeconomic status?

© ISLS                                                                                                              561
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                         Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

2)  When do Vital Signs opportunities sustain engagement beyond the classroom (for example by sparking
    family-based learning activities through a school-based project thereby bridging across formal and informal
    settings)?
3)  How    can  member   contributions   to networked   communities     be mined   and  harvested   for  formative
    assessment data that designers and teachers can use to improve learning processes and outcomes?

Discussant
As discussant Allan Collins will consider the presented projects to elaborate on a number of volatile questions:
Are people becoming smarter and what are they learning by working in a mass collaborative environment?
What are the other gains and losses from participation in such environments? Are people thinking more deeply
about important  matters or  are they  flitting from  topic  to topic in the  shallows  that Nicolas  Carr  (2010)
bemoans? With the anticipated controversial discussion, the symposium will offer an opportunity to reflect on
the direction and forces driving contemporary CSCL research.

References
Brennan,   K., Resnick,  M.,  &  Monroy-Hernandez,      A.   (2010).  Making  projects, making     friends: Online
        community as catalyst for interactive media creation. New Directions for Youth Development, vol. 128,
        pp. 75-83.
Brennan, K. (2009). Scratch-Ed: an online community for Scratch educators. In C. O'Malley, D. Suthers, P.
        Reimann,    A.  Dimitracopoulou     (Eds.), Computer     Supported   Collaborative   Learning    Practices:
        CSCL2009    Conference   Proceedings    (Vol.  II, 76-78). Rhodes,  Greece: International   Society  of the
        Learning Sciences.
Brown,  J. S., &  Adler, R.  P.  (2008). Minds   on   Fire: Open   Education, the Long  Tail,  and  Learning    2.0.
        EDUCAUSE Review, 43(1), 16-32. available at http://www.educause.edu/ir/library/pdf/ERM0811.pdf
Bruner, J. (1996).The Culture of Education,  Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.
Butler, B., Joyce, E., & Pike, J. (2008). Don't look now, but we've created a bureaucracy: the nature and roles of
        policies and rules in Wikipedia. In Proceeding of the twenty-sixth conference on Human Factors in
        Computing Systems (CHI) (pp. 1101­1110). New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2008.
Carr, N. (2010). The Shallows: What the Internet Is Doing to Our Brains. New-York: Norton.
Collins, A., Fischer, G., Barron, B., Liu, C., & Spada, H. (2009). Long-Tail Learning: A Unique Opportunity for
        CSCL?    In C.  O'Malley, D.  Suthers,  P.  Reimann,    A. Dimitracopoulou  (Eds.),  Computer    Supported
        Collaborative   Learning  Practices:    CSCL2009    Conference   Proceedings   (Vol.  II, 22-24).   Rhodes,
        Greece: International Society of the Learning Sciences.
Collins, A. M. & Loftus, E. F. (1975). A spreading-activation theory of semantic processing. Psychological
        Review, 82(6), 407-428.
Cress, U. (in press). Mass collaboration and learning. To appear in R. Luckin, Goodyear, P., Grabowski, B.
        Puntambekaer,    B.  Underwookd,     &   Winters,   N.  (Eds.).  Handbook   on  Design     in Educational
        Computing. Taylor and Francis.
Cress, U. & Fischer, G. (in press). Mass Collaboration with Social Software in TEL. In TEL-Reader.
Cress, U., & Kimmerle, J. (2008). A Systemic and Cognitive view on Collaborative Knowledge Building with
        Wikis.   International   Journal  of    Computer-Supported    Collaborative  Learning,     3(2),  105-122.
        http://www.springerlink.com/content/g509739lp56gk040/fulltext.pdf
Engeström,  Y.,  &  Sannino,  A. (2010).  "Studies  of Expansive    Learning: Foundations,   Findings  and  Future
        Challenges," Educational Research Review, 5(1), 1-24.
Fischer, G. (2011). "Understanding, Fostering, and Supporting Cultures of Participation," ACM Interactions
        XVIII.3 (May + June 2011), pp. 42-53.       http://l3d.cs.colorado.edu/~gerhard/papers/2011/interactions-
        coverstory.pdf
Forte, A. & Bruckman, A. (2006) From Wikipedia to the classroom: exploring online publication and learning.
        Proceedings of the International Conference of the Learning Sciences, Vol 1. Bloomington, IN, pp.
        182-188.
Forte, A. &  Bruckman, A. (2009). Citing, writing and participatory media: wikis as learning environments in
        the high school classroom. International Journal of Learning and Media, 1, 4, 23-44.
Halatchliyski, I., Moskaliuk, J., Kimmerle, J., & Cress, U. (2010). Who integrates the networks of knowledge in
      Wikipedia? Proceedings of the 6th International Symposium on Wikis and Open Collaboration. New
      York: ACM Press.
Jenkins, H. (2009) Confronting the Challenges of Participatory Cultures: Media Education for the 21st
      Century,  MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Kafai, Y. & Resnick, M, (2000). Constructionism in Practice: Designing, Thinking, and Learning in a Digital
        World. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.

© ISLS                                                                                                          562
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                           Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

Kafai, Y. & Peppler, K. (2011). Beyond Small Groups: New Opportunities for Research in Computer-Supported
          Collective  Learning.     Paper  published   in  the   proceedings  of   the  2011    Computer-Supported
          Collaborative Learning (CSCL) Conference.
Kimmerle,   J., Cress, U.,  &    Held, C.  (2010).  The interplay   between  individual  and  collective knowledge:
          Technologies for organisational learning and knowledge building. Knowledge Management Research
          & Practice, 8, 33-44.
Kriplean,  T.,  Beschastnikh,   I., McDonald,   D.W.,  and  Golder,  S.  (2007) Community,    Consensus,    Coercion,
          Control: CS*W or how policy mediates mass participation. in Proc. GROUP: ACM Conference on
          Supporting Group Work.
Lave, J. (1988). Cognition in practice: Mind, mathematics and culture in everyday life (learning in doing).
     Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Maturana, H. R, & Varela, F. J. (1987). The tree of knowledge: The biological roots of human understanding.
     Boston, MA, US: New Science Library/Shambhala Publications.
Monroy-Hernandez,      A. (2012).    Designing  for  Remixing:    Supporting  an   Online   Community    of Amateur
          Creators. PhD dissertation, MIT Media Lab.
National-Research-Council (2009) Learning Science in Informal Environments -- People, Places, and Pursuits,
          National Academy Press, Washington, DC.
Nonaka, I. &    Takeuchi, H. (1995). The knowledge creating company: how Japanese companies create the
          dynamics of innovation. New York: Oxford University Press
O'Reilly,  T.  (2006) What   Is  Web   2.0  - Design   Patterns and  Business Models    for the Next  Generation   of
          Software, available at http://oreilly.com/web2/archive/what-is-web-20.html.
Paavola, S., Lipponen, L. & Hakkarainen, K (2004). Models of Innovative Knowledge Communities and three
          metaphors of learning. Review of Educational Research, 74, 557-576. http://rer.sagepub.com/content
          /74/4/557
Resnick,   M.,  Maloney,    J., Monroy-Hernandez,      A., Rusk,   N.,  Eastmond,   E., Brennan,   K.,   Millner, A.,
          Rosenbaum,   E.,  Silver,   J., Silverman,   B., &    Kafai, Y.  (2009). Scratch:  Programming     for  All.
          Communications of the ACM, vol. 52, no. 11, pp. 60-67.
Roschelle, J. & Teasley, S. (1995). The construction of shared knowledge in collaborative problem solving. In
          O'Malley,   C.E.,  (ed.),   Computer   Supported    Collaborative   Learning    (69-97).  Springer-Verlag,
          Heidelberg. (1995)
Stahl, G. (2006). Group cognition: Computer support for building collaborative knowledge. Cambridge, MA:
          MIT Press.
Swarts, J. (2009),   The  collaborative   construction of  "fact" on   Wikipedia., in Brad  Mehlenbacher;   Aristidis
          Protopsaltis; Ashley Williams & Shaun Slattery, ed., 'SIGDOC', ACM, pp. 281-288 .
Tapscott, D., & Williams, A. D. (2006) Wikinomics: How Mass Collaboration Changes Everything, Portofolio,
          Penguin Group, New York, NY.
Vygotsky, L. (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher psychological processes. Cambridge, MA:
          Harvard University Press.

© ISLS                                                                                                            563
