CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                            Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

             Are CSCL and Learning Sciences research relevant to
                                  large-scale educational reform?
               Nancy Law, University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam Road, Hong Kong. nlaw@hku.hk
            Naomi Miyake, University of Tokyo, Bunkyoku, Tokyo, Japan, nmiyake@p.u-tokyo.ac.jp
      Chee-Kit Looi, National Institute of Education, Nanyang Technological University, 1 Nanyang Walk,
                                     Singapore 637616, cheekit.looi@nie.edu.sg
                           Riina Vuorikari, European Schoolnet, vuorikari@gmail.com
Yves Punie, European Commission Institute for Prospective Technological Studies (IPTS), Inca Garcilaso, s/n
                                  41092 Seville, SPAIN, Yves.PUNIE@ec.europa.eu
Discussant: Marcia Linn, Graduate School of Education, University of California, Berkeley, 4611 Tolman Hall,
                                    CA 94720-1670, USA, mclinn@berkeley.edu

         Abstract: Many scholars have contributed efforts to improve education in schools. A major
         motivation for learning scientists to develop design research as a methodology is to contribute
         to  theory    and  educational    practice   through   rigorous  research  without  avoiding   the
         complexities and messiness in authentic educational settings. There are many examples of
         successful   implementation    of  collaborative, knowledge-construction     oriented  pedagogies
         using   socio-cognitive   and socio-metacognitive      tools in formal  and  informal educational
         settings as well as in teacher professional development. However, there are many challenges
         to  scaling   up  such    innovations beyond   small-scale    implementation,  including  that   of
         developing into "fatal mutations" (Brown, 1992). This symposium provides an opportunity for
         discussion and reflection on the impact that CSCL and Learning Sciences researchers have
         made on large-scale education reform and what, if any, may be done to extend this impact by
         bringing together a set of papers describing some large-scale education innovation initiatives
         in Asia and Europe.

Introduction
Many of the CSCL and Learning Sciences researchers work in Faculties of Education, and they often conduct
their research   in  naturalistic classroom settings  rather  than in   special experimental arrangements.   This is
particularly the  case for researchers  engaged    in design-based    research. There have been   many  advances  in
learning theories and learning technologies in the past two decades resulting from such research (e.g. Sawyer,
2006), but   are these developments    making   impact  on   educational  practice at large? Collins  and Halverson
(2009) arrive at the conclusion that the transformative potential of ICT for education is not likely to have impact
on publicly funded education because of the inherent conservative nature of these schools. Studies of large scale
education reforms and scaling up of innovations have mainly been the concerns of researchers in the field of
educational administration and management (e.g. Fullan, 2008, 2010; Hargreaves and Fink, 2012), and much of
that literature does not pay specific attention to the learning theories or technologies underpinning the changes
involved other than as a contextual variable. Arguably, it is this latter literature that has so far been much more
successful in capturing the attention of school leaders and education policy makers, rather than the work of the
learning scientists.
        Immediately preceding the CSCL 2011 conference in Hong Kong, CITE (the Centre for Information
Technology in Education at the University of Hong Kong) took advantage of this global gathering of to bring
together top learning scientists and policy leaders in a forum on how to restore learning as the core of education
policy concerns, and to make sure fore-running research results on learning will inform policy-making and
impact education (http://backtolearning.cite.hku.hk/). There was agreement at this forum that while there is
much that research on learning has to contribute to the focal concern of current education policy to nurture 21st
century skills in learners, the impact of such research on the practice of education professionals or on the
understanding of the wider community about education is still very limited. This symposium is organized to
explore the following questions:
        (1) How relevant is CSCL and Learning Sciences research to large-scale education reform?
        (2) What unique contributions can research on learning make to the sustainability and scalability of
             ICT-supported learning innovations in schools?
        (3) Are there ways through which the CSCL and Learning Sciences community can increase their
             social and professional impact?
        The   symposium     presenters  have   all engaged   in studies  on the  implementation   and scaling  up of
research-informed    ICT-supported   learning  innovations in   mainstream  school  education  in Asia  and  Europe,
while the discussant has similarly rich experience in the US. They will share with participants their insight on
the above questions based on their work.

© ISLS                                                                                                          572
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                         Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

Paper 1: From e-Learning Pilot Scheme to Scalable e-Learning Innovations:
Wishful thinking or reality?
Nancy Law and Yeung Lee
University of Hong Kong
nlaw@hku.hk, yeunglee@hku.hk

The Hong Kong Education Bureau launched a three-year e-Learning Pilot Scheme in September 2011 with the
aim to identify good models of integrating ICT in the school curriculum to bring about effective interactive
learning, self-directed learning and/or to cater for learner diversity, and to build models of change conducive to
the sustainability and scalability of the innovations piloted. To this end, an evaluation project, both formative
and summative in nature, was commissioned to start when the scheme was launched to identify if the intended
goals were achieved and to summarize the lessons learnt. At the time when the CSCL 2013 Conference takes
place, this scheme would have completed its second year of operation. This paper draws on data collected from
the evaluation study to explore whether, and for what reasons, this e-Learning Pilot Scheme can be a successful
mechanism for system-wide, scalable e-Learning innovations.
         All publicly funded primary and secondary schools were invited in May 2010 to submit innovative e-
Learning project proposals for funding. The goal was to make use of the pilot schools as test beds to help the
Bureau to develop, try out and evaluate when and how e-Learning works best (i.e. using the scheme to build up
knowledge   about successful   e-Learning   pedagogical models)   No    specific learning   theory or  model  of e-
Learning was prioritized nor discouraged--as long as the project was learning focused and student-centered,
and the call did not reference any local or international experiences.
         Another objective of the pilot scheme was to build knowledge about sustaining ICT-enabled learning
innovations. An underpinning project assumption is that engagement and support from the private sector (e.g. e-
Learning resources providers, publishers, learning technology companies and Internet service providers) is of
critical importance in order to evolve a viable business model for e-Learning. Hence all submitted proposals
must  include some  partnership arrangements    with  the private sector,  and   schools  were   also encouraged to
partner with other organizations such as tertiary institutions, NGOs, etc.
         Altogether 21 pilot proposals were selected for funding, involving a total of 61 primary, secondary and
special education needs schools (details from http://edbsdited.fwg.hk/e-Learning/eng/index.php?id=3). Because
of the atheoretical stance taken by the scheme on learning, the pilot projects were selected to achieve maximum
variations in school and curriculum contexts as well as in partnership arrangements. Some of the pilot projects
simply focused on developing graded, self-accessed learning materials while others target the development of
inquiry, collaborations and information literacy skills. Twelve of the projects involve collaboration among two
or more schools while the other nine involve a single school each.
         Due to the lack of a common pedagogical theory underpinning the different pilot projects and the large
diversities in the innovation foci and school contexts, a generic, multilevel framework was developed by the
project evaluation study to conceptualize how ICT-using pedagogical practices contribute to students' learning
outcomes  within  the  bigger  context  of overall pedagogical   practices  found    in schools, which  are in  turn
influenced by the teachers' characteristics as well as school and system level factors. Indicators for each of the
identified contextual factors were developed to chart how these influence (1) the effectiveness of an e-Learning
pilot project in  enhancing   students'  information   literacy and    self-directed learning  skills, and  (2)  the
sustainability and scalability of the innovation. These indicators, both quantitative and qualitative, are derived
from data collected at four levels: classroom, school, project and system levels. Quantitative data are collected
through surveys to principals, ICT coordinators, teachers and students in the pilot schools. Qualitative data
include interviews with different stakeholder groups and documentary records of the pilot projects such as the
project proposals and project annual reports. The most important source of data to shed light on the ICT-using
pedagogical   practice and the associated   students' learning  outcomes   at the    classroom level   was collected
through two instruments, to be submitted by a nominated teacher from each project on one curriculum unit of
their choice: (1) a curriculum design cover sheet to describe the targeted learning outcome(s), the curriculum
activity(ies) designed, the role of technology in the process and how these are connected, and (2) samples of
students' authentic work generated during the course of the curriculum unit that can demonstrate different levels
of outcomes achieved (high, middle and low) in the areas of information literacy and self-directed learning.
These two instruments were developed on the basis of similar instruments used in the Microsoft Innovative
Schools Program, (Shear et al., 2009)).
         End of year 1 evaluation results reveal that most of the curriculum examples submitted by teachers are
largely very traditional and content focused, and the samples of students' work collected generally show little
evidence of information literacy or self-directed learning skills being exercised. For the few cases where such
outcomes were evidenced, some common characteristics the associated e-Learning pedagogical practices were

© ISLS                                                                                                          573
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                             Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

observed: the students had direct access to use ICT for tasks that had some levels of openness, and they had
opportunities to observe the work of peers and to receive feedback.
          While  it is not possible    yet to draw    conclusions  on  the sustainability  and scalability of the  21 e-
Learning pilot projects being evaluated after just one year of operation, we find large diversities in the progress
made in project implementation and the extent to which pedagogical changes were observed in the process.
Only in a few of the pilot projects were rapid cycles of learning and advances in pedagogical designs and ICT
use observed. In all these cases, the projects have built-in organizational infrastructures (e.g. co-planning teams,
peer observations of teaching and debriefing sessions) to facilitate and scaffold interaction, communication and
sharing of ideas among teachers and the leadership team. Changes in practice are most evident in those cases
where there are mechanisms to make adjustments and changes to school and/or classroom routines such as
timetabling, staffing or resource allocation priorities as discussed in Spillane, Parise and Sherer (2011). This
presentation will reflect on the findings, particularly on the apparent lack of progress at the system/policy level
in learning about what constitute the primary pedagogical characteristics of e-Learning practices that foster 21st
century skills or what features of innovation implementation would be conducive to scale and sustainability,
despite the many reform efforts implemented over the past 15 years.

Paper 2: Restoring "how people learn" as the core of educational reform in
Japanese classrooms
Naomi Miyake
University of Tokyo
nmiyake@p.u-tokyo.ac.jp

In Japan, there have been a good number of educational reforms utilizing collaborative learning, based on many
different "theories"   of  how    people   learn.   Some   have   evolved  from   strong  beliefs about  learners' self-
construction  of  "hypotheses"     about   what   they experience,    imagine  and  think, and    to discuss these with
classmates  through    carefully  ordered  series  of  scientific problem  solving, often  by  observing   sequences  of
experiments (Itakura, 1971, Hatano and Inagaki, 1991).       There is also a long history of creating learner-centered
practices, some of which, like the "lesson study" movement (e.g. http://www.wals2011.com/) and the Japanese
Association for the study of Cooperation in Education (http://jasce.jp/indexe.html), have attracted international
attention. Yet these often lack direct conversation with policy makers, which hinder their expansion beyond
certain points in their scale.
          The University of Tokyo launched in 2009 an initiative strongly grounded in the learning sciences to
contribute to this movement of renovating Japanese education with two important strategic orientations.           One is
to bring university research closer to policy makers at the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and
Technology    (MEXT)      and  in boards   of education   throughout   Japan,  so that what  has  been  researched  and
developed in universities would have direct influence on schools.          The other is to base the renovation on the
conversation   between    universities  and   business  sectors,   so that the  needed    educational  reform could   be
supported by the entire society.     To implement this, the Consortium for Renovating Education of the Future
(henceforth CoREF; http://coref.u-tokyo.ac.jp/) was founded at the University of Tokyo, in conjunction with
one city-level board of education and four other leading universities.       This project is one of the rare cases where
learning science research is adopted seriously to guide the renovation in classroom practices using a concrete
framework (Miyake, in press) and with the joint efforts of regional boards of education. This initiative is also
unique in spanning all subject areas taught at all school levels, including vocationally oriented tertiary education
(high school level).    As the administrative leaders at the school and board of education levels as well as the
participating  teachers   are  learning  the  sciences  of how     people  learn, not  in  abstract  forms but  through
implementing them in classrooms, they are also building up the capacity to scale up the initiative by themselves.
Promising outcomes have been observed in the better designed classes in developing students' 21st century
skills: higher levels of learning gains, higher motivation to extend learning outside of school into homes, and a
stronger sense of "learning" among the students.

Relevance of CSCL and learning sciences
CoREF     has started  to work    with  prefectural and  city/town    boards of education,  to develop   learner-centric
teaching curricula using a concrete form of collaborative learning named Constructive Jigsaw                 (Miyake, in
press), based  on   research   findings on   how   people  change   their  concepts (c.f. Vosniadou,   2008;  Sinatra &
Pintrich, 2003), The key focus of the renovation is to change teacher practices from being teacher-centric to
learner-centric, by working collaboratively with teachers to create a new set of curricular that allows learners to
learn in collaborative, knowledge-constructive ways. Another focus is to work with members of the boards of
education from the start to research on ways to support the renovation, and to share experiences with other
boards of education through networked support systems for both novice and experienced teachers.               A further
focus is to enhance the natural adoption of ICT.        The teachers involved in this project are learning quickly to

© ISLS                                                                                                             574
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                                          Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

take advantage of being networked, and are encouraged to identify uses of ICT natural to the learners that would
enhance the quality of learning in the new curricular.
        This  reform  started       in 2000, involving    3 prefectural             boards of  education covering  some 300    high
schools and 18 city/town education boards covering some 80 elementary and middle schools.                          More than 600
teachers have developed some curricula, with some also having changed the main part of their practices into the
new pedagogical form.    The developed curricula cover almost all subject areas in all school types, including
language art, math, science, humanities, English as second language, art, music, as well as some part of special
education.  Encouragement through the project has prompted participating teachers to actively exchange the
teaching plans and teaching materials they developed, localizing them to fit each class context, and to co-
examine the class activities and outcomes.        Because these collaborative efforts take place across different boards
of education, Internet connectivity plays a critical role.

Assessment and Outcomes
The key learning outcomes targeted in this renovation are assessed using three criteria: outcome portability,
dependability and  sustainability      (Miyake,   et al., 2007).  Concretely,              each individual student is assessed   on
whether s/he  is able to (1)        express  their understanding                of the subject matter   through "justification with
acceptance," (2) demonstrate confidence in collaborative knowledge construction, and (3) show increase in
motivation to continue and expand what they have learned, both at the end of each class as well as through
longer periods of half-a-year to two or three years.        Preliminary analyses at the end of the second year show a
very favorable pattern.  Of        the 527  elementary    and 461  middle              school  students surveyed, more  than   85%
considered  the reformed classes        they attended  as   "enjoyable             because  we  understand", and  more  than   78%
preferred their next class to be taught in the reformed fashion.                   For the 1556 high school students surveyed, the
corresponding percentages are 73% and 54%.           The learning outcomes achieved showed a greater variability, but
their sustainability, that is, how well students can remember and reconstruct what they have learnt, hovered
around 80% in cases where this information was made available to us.                        The teachers' reflective comments are
also in favor of this new renovation.       The project has also been identified as an implementable model for senior
professionals to work together with teachers to improve the curricular quality.

Unique Contributions of ICT for Scaling-up and Enhancing Social/Professional Impact
The plan for scaling-up is to form a large community to work with MEXT by networking small networks that
are currently emerging among teachers, schools, and boards of education.                      Each network may consist of about 5
to 10 active members who share common interests and goals.                       A teacher or an education leader could participate
in several networks,  according        to their motivation, needs,              energy and time.  Some networks may enjoy the
power derived from the participation of senior professionals from industries and governments. CoREF has just
started to investigate the possibility of connecting remote learners in very small schools scattered in many parts
of Japan, through remotely operable robots acting as learning classmates and mediators to cloud resources.                      It is
hoped that this network will be research-oriented, with strong learning sciences underpinning, working directly
with practitioners and education policy makers.

Paper 3: Scaling up rapid collaborative practices in Singapore schools
Chee-Kit Looi
National Institute of Education, Nanyang Technological University
cheekit.looi@nie.edu.sg

One  characteristic  of  education  research  in  Singapore  is  the  close  partnerships  between  researchers  and  
practitioner   communities.      The   Singapore   government   has   funded   educational   research   at   the   National  
Institute   of   Education   (NIE)   of   the   Nanyang   Technological   University   (NTU)   over   the   past   decade,  
including   the   setting   up   of   the   Learning   Sciences   Lab   in   2004.   This   support   is   intended   to   not   only  
advance   the   body   of   knowledge   about   designing,   implementing   and   supporting   educational   innovations,  
but  also  to  help  inform  educational  policy  and  practices.    
        Since   2007,   researchers   from   NIE   have   carried   out   a   programme   of   research   introducing   rapid  
collaborative  knowledge  improvement  (RCKI)  practices  using  a  technology  called  GroupScribbles  (GS)  to  
many   schools   in   Singapore   (Looi,   So,   Toh   and   Chen,   2011).   The   first   school   we   worked   with   was   a  
primary   school.   In   the   second   year,   the   research   was   extended   to   two   secondary   schools.   Because   of   the  
success  from  these  research  interventions,  the  Ministry  of  Education  (MOE)  has  worked  with  another  six  
schools  to  bring  in  GS  as  a  "deep"  intervention.  Separately,  other  schools  have  adopted  and  adapted  these  
innovations  on  their  own.  
        Through   the   research   work   with   schools,   109   GS   lesson   plans   have   been   created   in   various  
subjects  (Math,  Science,  English  and  Chinese  language),  and  146  GS  lessons  have  been  enacted,  observed  
and  studied.  The  research  team  has  conducted  numerous  professional  development  sessions  for  teachers.  

© ISLS                                                                                                                         575
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                                          Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

Two  workshops  were  held  during  Jan--Feb  2010,  reaching  out  to  50  teachers  from  more  than  20  schools.  
In   NIE   itself,   which   trains   pre--service   teachers,   the   GS   pedagogy   was   introduced   to   many   cohorts   of   in--
service     teachers   doing       the   leadership   programmes,      and   to   pre--service   teachers   taking    the   core  
Instructional  Technology  modules  over  the  years.  
             Much   CSCL   and   Learning   Sciences   research   have   focused   on   understanding   or   deriving   design  
principles  for  learning,  while  others  are  intervention  studies.  There  is  a  gap  between  such  contextualized  
studies   and   the   imperatives   of   large   scale   education   reform.   One   approach   to   reducing   the   research--
practice  gap  is  to  do  implementation  studies  that  systematically  study  an  intervention  to  understand  the  
conditions   for   successful   implementation.   Penuel,   Fishman   and   Cheng   (2011)  put   forward   a   compelling  
argument  for  a  new  form  of  implementation  research  termed  as  "Design--based  Implementation  Research  
(DBIR)",   which   comprises   four   elements:   (a)   a   focus   on   persistent   problems   of   practice   from   multiple  
stakeholders'   perspectives,   (b)   a   commitment   to   iterative,   collaborative   design,   (c)   a   concern   with  
developing   theory   related   to   both   classroom   learning   and   implementation   through   systematic   inquiry,  
and   (d)   a   concern   with   developing   capacity   for   sustaining   change   at   the   system   level.   In   the   sister  
disciplines   of   medicine   and   public   health,   DBIR   has   a   robust   infrastructure   and   a   clear   focus   on   the  
interdisciplinary  challenge  of  bringing  about  large--scale  improvements  to  complex  systems  (Fixsen  et  al.,  
2005).    
             In  our  reflective  analysis  of  the  GS  intervention  study  in  Singapore  schools,  we  have  incorporated  
elements   of   DBIR,   by   working   closing   with   schools   to   bring   about   the   routine   adoption   of   PCKI   learning  
practices  in  the  classroom.  In  our  role  as  academics,  we  seek  to  identify  and  refine  design  principles  and  
our   theoretical   understanding   through   our   research.   What   have   we   learned   about   design   principles  
through  our  iterative  RCKI  work  in  schools  using  a  DBIR  approach?  Face--to--face  classroom  situations  can  
host   a   broad   variety   of   pedagogical   patterns   involving   student--student   and   student--teacher   interactions  
that  go  beyond  IRE.  However,  the  prevailing  modularity  of  class  periods,  in  chunks  of  between  40  and  90  
minutes,   constraints   the   adoption   of   pedagogical   approaches   whose   characteristic   timescales   are  
measured   in   days   or   months   or   even   years.   Of   particular   interest   to   teachers   and   school   administrators  
are   pedagogical   patterns   that   would   carry   the   burden   of   scaffolding   students   to   learn   content   (e.g.  
science,   mathematics,   language   learning)   as   well   as   enhance   participating   students'   development   of   so--
called  21st  century  skills,  such  as  communication,  collaboration  and  critical  thinking  skills.  RCKI  refers  to  
a   collection   of   evidenced--based   pedagogical   patterns   in   which   the   learners   brainstorm   and   contribute  
ideas,   and   build   on   each   other's   ideas   to   derive   better   ideas.   It   is   a   set   of   design   principles   that   seeks   to  
harness  the  collective  intelligence  of  groups  to  learn  collaboratively  in  a  dynamic  live  setting  (Looi,  Chen  
&  Patton,  2010;  Wen,  Looi  &  Chen,  2012).  
             We  make  the  case  that  some  research  in  the  CSCL  and  learning  sciences  community  must  address  
issues   of   intervention   and   implementation   study   to   understand   the   conditions   for   adaptations   and  
sustainability   of   innovations   in   different   contexts   and   settings   ­   towards   contributing   to   reducing   the  
research--practice      gap         conundrum   in   education.   We   consider      the   complex   interplay   of   multiple  
dimensions   of   education   reforms,   and   approach   our   programme   of   research   from   a   systemic   change  
perspective   that   recognises   the   micro,   meso,   and   macro   levels   of   educational   systems   (Looi,   2011;   Looi,  
So,  Toh,  &  Chen,  2011).    
             Singapore's   Third   Masterplan   of   ICT   in   Education   (mp3)   seeks   to   enrich   and   transform   the  
learning   environments   of   students   and   equip   them   with   the   critical   competencies   and   dispositions   to  
success   in   a   knowledge   economy   (mp3,   2009).   While   mp3   has   an   explicit   focus   on   helping   students  
develop  competencies  for  self--directed  and  collaborative  learning  through  the  effective  use  of  ICT  as  well  
as   become   discerning   and   responsible   ICT   users,   the   policies   are   couched   from   the   perspective   of   policy  
makers.   The   challenge   for   school   principals   and   teachers   is   how   to   implement   technology--enabled  
pedagogies  that  foster  self--directed  and  collaborative  learning.  This  is  where  university  researchers  come  
in   as   meso--level   actors   who   work   with   school   leaders   and   teachers   to   interpret   collaborative   learning  
outcomes  and  processes  in  the  context  of  the  needs  of  a  particular  school.  This  re--contextualization  of  the  
pedagogic   discourse   is   a   "meso--level"   mechanism.   By   approaching   this   pedagogy--driven   reform   at   the  
macro,  meso  and  micro  levels,  we  seek  the  alignment  of  systemic  forces  at  work  to  provide  a  buttress  for  
sustainability.   Thus   we,   as   researchers   working   as   the   meso--level   actors,   help   the   school   practitioners  
understand   and   interpret   policy   imperatives   and   translate   them   into   classroom   teaching   and   learning  
practices  in  ways  that  are  informed  by  research  and  learning  theories.  
             In   many   countries   and   regions,   education   authorities   are   keen   for   their   reform   initiatives   to   be  
well   received   by   various   stakeholders,   namely:   district--level   leaders,   school   leaders,   teachers,   students  
and   their   parents.   Typically,   these   stakeholders   have   different   notions   of   scaling   from   researchers,   such  
as  holding  a  more  top--down  view  of  scaling  and  a  linear  progression  model  of  research  interventions.  The  
learning   sciences   community   can   be   part   of   this   conversation   towards   articulating   different   models   of  

© ISLS                                                                                                                                  576
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                          Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

evidence--based   scaling   that   work   in   different   socio--political--cultural   contexts   and   contributing   towards  
creating  more  existential  examples  of  sustainable  and  scalable  innovations.  

Paper 4: eTwinning: a European Network Community for Teachers to support
cross-border school collaboration
Riina Vuorikari
European Schoolnet
vuorikari@gmail.com

This contribution presents a study into the process of scaling up eTwinning, the community for schools in
Europe   (www.etwinning.net).   By early  2013,  the eTwinning  community         has           attracted more  than 100,000
schools  and close  to 200,000  teachers  from  33   European countries     to  participate           in  international school
collaboration through the use of Information and Communication Technologies (ICT). The initiative is one of
the most successful actions under the European Union's Lifelong Learning Programme in the school sector. The
participation amounts to more than 3% of all primary and secondary teachers who are eligible for participation.
         Core to eTwinning is an online platform that offers participating teachers three types of activities:
         1. Partner finding activities to create cross-border school collaboration projects using ICT;
         2. Various  continuing professional   development (CPD)       activities such            as online  Learning   Events
            (distance courses) with formal certification and some more informal ones such as Online Interest
            Groups and Teachers' Rooms on various topics;
         3. Social networking using tools that include profile pages with personal and professional information.
         In  the beginning, eTwinning     was  supported  through      the Pedagogical               Advisory  Group    (PAG)
comprising experts from teacher training, school inspection and pedagogical research. Its role was to analyse,
reflect and comment on the eTwinning activities, and to develop a theoretical framework to ensure the lasting
pedagogic value of the eTwinning activity in schools. Now in its 9th year of operation, eTwinning has evolved
from simple   school collaboration projects   into more complex   ones     that   impact           not only  on the  level  of
innovative pedagogical practices in the classroom (Galvin, 2009) and students' involvement (Wastiau et al.,
2011), but also impinge on institutional factors and the organisational climate of the whole school (Vuorikari,
2013). eTwinning also provide many CPD opportunities to teachers through formal and informal upskilling
activities, and through teacher participation in networks (Vuorikari et al., 2011, Vuorikari et al., 2012). Similar
results were reported in a large external study on the impact of eTwinning (European Commission, 2013).
         To complement the above-mentioned qualitative studies on eTwinning practices and their impact, a
number of longitudinal studies using data extracted from the platform have also been conducted. The eTwinning
Analytics framework was created on the basis of OECD's indices for teachers' co-operation (OECD, 2009) to
identify emerging    behaviours and   patterns  within  eTwinning.     It  operationalizes             various  activities for
measurement   and  monitoring   purposes. For   example,  the activities    carried            out while   conducting   school
collaboration belong to the category of teachers' professional development, which can be seen as enhancing
teachers' professionalism and self-efficacy.
         To experience a full range of professional development activities in eTwinning, and therefore to take
full advantage of it, a substantial time investment is needed. From our studies, it is clear that eTwinning has a
potential to engage its users over a long period of time. Evidence was found that one eTwinner in six, who
registered on the platform between 2005 and 2006, still returns to it.

Paper 5: Mainstreaming ICT-enabled innovations in Education and Training in
Europe: Challenges and Opportunities
Yves Punie and Panagiotis Kampylis
European Commission, Joint Research Centre, Institute for Prospective Technological Studies (IPTS)
Yves.PUNIE@ec.europa.eu

This paper presents results from a European-wide research project, running from December 2011 to June 2013,
on up-scaling ICT-enabled innovation in Education and Training (E&T), titled Up-Scaling Creative Classrooms
in Europe (SCALE CCR). The aim of this project is to establish a sound understanding and evidence-base on
ICT-enabled innovations for learning which has significant scale and/or impact at system level and to identify
policy recommendations for the further mainstreaming of ICT in E&T in Europe. In addition to an in-depth
literature review, a number of case studies are being undertaken (1:1 learning initiatives, Boccini et al. (2013)),
eTwinning, Hellerup School and Asia/Europe exchange), which will have produced final results before the
CSCL 2013 Conference. Also, consultations with a wide spectrum of experts will have been undertaken with
regard to the policy recommendations.

© ISLS                                                                                                                     577
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                  Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

        In order to investigate the sustainability and scalability of Creative Classrooms (CCR), we need to
capture the complexity  and richness of these learning ecosystems (Law et  al., 2011).    A  multi-dimensional
concept for CCR comprising eight encompassing and interconnected dimensions is proposed (Bocconi, et al.,
2012) to capture the essential nature of these learning ecosystems: Content and Curricula, Assessment, Learning
Practices, Teaching Practices, Organization, Leadership and Values, Connectedness, and Infrastructure. A set
of 28 reference parameters have also been developed for policymakers, researchers and practitioners, which
depict the systemic approach needed for the sustainable implementation and progressive up-scaling of Creative
Classrooms across Europe. This holistic framework (see Figure 1) takes into account the key characteristics of
innovative pedagogical practices at organizational, curricular, and assessment levels, and articulates with the
systemic capability involving practices at classroom, school and whole community levels (i.e. at micro, meso
and macro levels).

  Figure 1.  Bocconi, S., Kampylis, P. & Punie, Y. (2012) Innovating Teaching and Learning Practices:
  Key Elements for Developing Creative Classrooms in Europe, eLearning Papers, No. 30, September,
  http://www.elearningeuropa.info/sites/default/files/asset/In-depth_30_1.pdf, p. 3.

                     Figure 1. Key dimensions and building blocks of Creative Classrooms

This paper will draw on the key findings from the SCALE-CCR project to address the three focal questions for
this symposium, highlighting the multi-dimensional and holistic nature of ICT-enabled innovations in learning.

References
Bocconi, S., Kampylis, P. & Punie, Y. (2013). Framing ICT-enabled Innovation for Learning: the case of one-
     to-one learning initiatives in Europe. European Journal of Education. 48(1), 113-
Bocconi, S., Kampylis, P. G., & Punie, Y. (2012). Innovating Learning: Key Elements for Developing Creative
     Classrooms in Europe     Retrieved from http://ftp.jrc.es/EURdoc/JRC72278.pdf
Brown,  A.  L. (1992). Design experiments: Theoretical  and methodological challenges     in creating complex
     interventions in classroom settings. The Journal of the learning Sciences, 2(2), 141-178.
Collins, A., & Halverson, R. (2009). Rethinking education in the age of technology: The digital revolution and
     schooling in America. New York: Teachers College Press.
European Commission. (2013). Study of the impact of eTwinning on participating pupils, teachers and schools.
     Retrieved from http://ec.europa.eu/education/more-information/reports-and-studies_en.htm
Fixsen, D. L., Naoom, S. F., Blase, K. A., Friedman, R. M., & Wallace, F. (2005). Implementation research: A
     synthesis of the literature. Tampa, FL: University of South Florida, Louis de la Parte Florida Mental
     Health Institute, The National Implementation Research Network.

© ISLS                                                                                                    578
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                            Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

Fullan, M. (2008). The Six Secrets of Change: What the Best Leaders Do to Help Their Organizations Survive.
      San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Fullan, M. (2010). Change leader: Learning to do what matters most. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Galvin, C. (2009). eTwinning in the classroom - A showcase of good practice. European Schoolnet. Retrieved
      from http://www.etwinning.net/en/pub/news/press_corner/statistics.cfm
Hargreaves, A., & Fink, D. (2012). Sustainable leadership. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Hatano, G, & Inagaki, K. (1991). Sharing cognition through collective comprehension activity. In B. Resnick,
      Levine,   J.M. &   Teasley,   S.D.(Eds.),   Perspectives   on  socially shared    cognition,   Washington    DC:
      American Psychological Association, 331-348.
Itakura, K. (1971). Kagaku to kasetsu-Kasetsu-Jikken-Jugyo heno michi. [in Japanese] (In English: Science and
      hypothesis: The road to the Hypothesis-Experiment-Instruction), Nobi Shobo.
Law, N., Yuen, A., & Fox, B. (2011). Educational Innovations Beyond Technology: nurturing leadership and
      establishing learning organizations. New York: Springer.
Looi, C.K., Chen,  W.L.   &  Patton,  C. (2010),   Principles   and  enactment    of  rapid collaborative  knowledge
      building in classrooms, Educational Technology Magazine, September-October, 2010.
Looi, C.K., So, H-J.,  Toh,  Y.   & Chen    W.  (2011), The   Singapore   experience:    Synergy   of national policy,
      classroom practice and design research, ijCSCL, 6(1), 9-37.
Looi, C.-K. (2011). Sustained Innovation in Classroom Practices: The Role of Educational Researchers as
      Meso-Level Actors. Paper presented at the Beijing Forum 2011, Beijing, China.
Miyake, N., Pea, R., Barron, B., Schwartz, D., & Hall, R. (2007). Redefining Learning Goals of Very Long-
      Term    Learning  Across  Many    Different  Fields  of Activity. Proceedings      of the Computer    Supported
      Collaborative Learning (CSCL) Conference 2007, Part1 [CD-ROM], USA, 26.
Miyake,  N. (in press). "Conceptual   change    through   collaboration",     In  S. Vosniadou    (ed.), Handbook   of
      research on conceptual change, 2nd Edition, Taylor & Francis, London: U.K.
mp3   (2009).  Singapore's   Third   Masterplan    in   ICT   in  Education    (mp3)     (2009-2014).    Available  at:
      (http://ictconnection.edumall.sg/cos/o.x?c=/ictconnection/pagetree&func=view&rid=665
OECD (2009). Creating effective teaching and learning environments: First results from TALIS. Paris: Author.
Penuel, W.  R., Fishman,  B.  J., &  Cheng,    B. (2011).  Developing   the   area   of design-based  implementation
      research. Menlo Park, CA: SRI International.
Sawyer,  R. K.  (2006).  The  Cambridge     handbook    of  the  learning sciences.     Cambridge,    MA:  Cambridge
      University Press.
Shear, L., Means, B., Gallagher, L., House, A., & Langworthy, M. (2009). ITL research design (pp. 35). Menlo
      Park, CA: SRI International.
Sinatra, G. M., & Pintrich, P. R. (2003). Intentional conceptual change. Mahwah, N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum
      Associates.
Spillane, J.P., Parise, L.M., & Sherer, J.Z. (2011). Organizational routines as coupling mechanisms for policy,
      school administration, and the technical core. American Educational Research Journal, 48(3), 586-619.
Vosniadou, S. (2008). Handbook of research on conceptual change. Taylor & Francis, London: U.K.
Vuorikari, R.  (2013). School  Teams:   Case   studies  on  teacher  collaboration    through   eTwinning.  European
      Schoolnet. Retrieved from http://www.etwinning.net/en/pub/news/press_corner/statistics.cfm
Vuorikari, R., Berlanga, A. J., Cachia, R., Cao, Y., Fetter, S., et al. (2011). ICT-Based School Collaboration,
      Teachers' Networks and their Opportunities for Teachers' Professional Development - A Case Study on
      eTwinning. In Leung, H., Popescu, E., Cao, Y., Lau, R.W.H. & Nejdl, W. (Eds.), Advances in Web-
      based Learning-ICWL 2011 (LNCS Vol. 7048, pp. 112­121). Berlin: Springer.
Vuorikari, R., Garoia,  V., Punie,  Y., Cachia,   R., Redecker,   C., Cao,    Y., ...   Sloep, P. B.  (2012). Teacher
      Networks - Today's and tomorrow's challenges and opportunities for the teaching profession. European
      Schoolnet.
Wastiau, P., Crawley, C., & Gilleran, A. (2011). Pupils in eTwinning- Case studies on pupil participation.
      Central    Support    Service     for   eTwinning       (CSS),   European       Schoolnet.     Retrieved   from
      http://resources.eun.org/etwinning/25/EN_eTwinning_165x230_Report.pdf
Wen, Y., Looi, C. K., & Chen, W. (2012), Supporting Teachers in Designing CSCL Activities: A Case Study of
      Principle-based   Pedagogical   Patterns    in  Networked     Second    Language      Classrooms.   Educational
      Technology and Society, 15 (2), 138­153.

© ISLS                                                                                                             579
