CSCL 2013 Proceedings                  Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

Learning through Computer-Assisted Collaborative Game Design:
              Mathematical, Design, and Computational Thinking
                Fengfeng Ke, Florida State University, Tallahassee, FL, 32306-4453, fke@fsu.edu

         Abstract: Employing a concurrent mixed-method research design, this study examined the
         potential  of computer-assisted,   collaborative  game-design     activities in promoting     design-
         based mathematical thinking for school children.       Sixty four middle school children, with a
         high   percentage  of Native  American    and    Hispanic students,   participated     in a six-week
         mathematics   game    design program.    Data were    collected  via  in-field  observation,  design
         interaction analysis, interviewing,  and an   attitudes survey.   The findings    indicated  that  the
         design-based   interaction and    programming-oriented    problem    solving   processes    embodied
         mathematical   thinking and  reinforced  positive    attitudes toward mathematics.     On   the  other
         hand, the prioritization of world/character design and the cognitive demand of computational
         programming led to a superficial integration or representation of mathematics in children's
         design products.

Introduction and Theoretical Perspectives
Constructivist and enactivism learning theories argue that learners actively construct knowledge out of their
experiences, especially when they are engaged in building objects (Papert, 1980; Kafai, 1995; Li, 2012). Rooted
in this theoretical disposition, this study postulated that school children, by collaboratively creating computer
math games, will work on and explain the math concepts and problems during design activities. Particularly,
students will   engage   in  two  learning    interactions that  transform    collaborative,    creative   activity into
mathematical thinking ­ learner-design interaction and game-design-based social interaction
         Interaction between students and the game-design task: A math game-design task may be deemed as a
microworld,   a promising   tool for  the   development    of mathematical    thinking   (e.g., Mitchell,  Kelleher,  &
Saundry, 2007; Roblyer & Edwards, 2000; Shaffer, 2005). As students design a math game, they will need to
explore, represent, and test their mathematical thinking and integrate them into a game's play mechanics. The
process will help students articulate, self-check, and constantly accommodate their prior mathematics mental
framework (Shaffer, 2005). Empirical research on the use of design practices as contexts for math learning (e.g.,
Kafai, 1995; Kolodner et al., 2003) indicates that students can "formulate mathematical conjectures during, and
as a consequence of, their design activity" (Shaffer, 2005, p. 7). These mathematical conjectures, representing
students' ability to "form inferences about general principles from specific observations", are significant for
mathematical understanding (Davis & Hersh, 1982; Fitzgerald, 1996; Shaffer, 2005, p. 7).
         Interaction between students and design partners: During the design process, middle school children
will explain the math topics they have valued and explore alternatives of gameplay quest to represent these
topics. Design partners can provide feedback and prompt each other to elaborate more conceptual insights or
mathematical    reasoning. Self-explanation   and communication     in   mathematics     thus   become    necessary  and
motivated. In   the  research  literature, self-explanations  have been    identified   as one     important factor  for
enhancing  and  correcting  students' understanding    of  mathematics   concepts (VanLehn,        Jones, &  Chi, 1992;
Wong, Lawson, & Keeves, 2002). Teachers or adult mentors then can act as critics who not only facilitate
mathematics communication but also model the in-context usage of mathematics vocabulary that gives young
learners the means of communicating math concepts universally.

Methods
An in-situ, mixed-method case study approach (Yin, 2008) was used to examine the phenomenon of learning
through collaborative design within computer gaming contexts. The study focused on two research questions:
(1) What nature is the collaborative-game-design-based cognitive and interaction processes for inviting and
sustaining forms of mathematical thinking (i.e., representation, communication, and reasoning of mathematics)?
(2) Has  participating  in computer   math   game design    helped students   to develop    positive  attitudes  toward
mathematics?

Sites and Participants
The study was conducted in a rural pueblo school of Native American students and an urban school with a high
percentage of Hispanic students. Sixty-four middle grade students were recruited from the two schools, with
around 20% of participants being Native American, 80% being Hispanic, and 43% being girls. A group of
education graduate students, along with two middle school teachers and the researchers of the study, acted as
mentors who provided design and technical support during the game design sessions.

© ISLS                                                                                                               58
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                   Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

Design Task and Procedure

Iterative Design processes
In this study, students  were  first   probed to identify a  mathematical     concept  or procedural  skill  that they
considered important (e.g., percentage and ratio, multiplication and division, as reported by the participants).
They were then requested to create a mini-game to explain the concept or afford the learning of the procedural
skill. The game design activity lasted for 6 weeks with 2 one-hour sessions each week. The design sessions took
place at the two schools' computer labs. Before performing the game-design task, student participants had all
played a selection of exemplary computer mathematics games over a month. A debriefing session was set to
probe them to reflect on the games that they had played and discuss on game world and play actions that had
engaged them in math learning. They also received training on using Scratch, a 2D programming environment
designed and developed by the MIT Media Lab for children and youth.
         The game design task was semi-structured, following the proposition by the prior research on game-
design studios (e.g., Sotamaa 2005) and learning-through-design programs (e.g., Kafai 2006; Kolodner et al.
2003;  Shaffer 2005).    Different design groups    were seated   at different tables.  Every  group  generally   went
through the following design procedure: (a) identifying the target math topic and design goal, (b) brainstorming
on solutions to   the design challenges,  (c)  sketching  to describe  and    demonstrate  the design ideas,  and   (d)
Scratch-based  computer    game    development.  To  reinforce interaction    and collaboration, we  requested  every
member of a design team to take on a particular role based on his/her expertise and interest, such as the team
leader, artist, leading developer, content expert, creative writer, and design assistant.
         During the first phase of the design task, students focused on paper-based prototype development. They
were told to share, accumulate, and negotiate their design ideas via paper sketching. When a paper-based design
prototype was ready, a design group then moved to computer stations and engaged in computer-based functional
prototype development during the remained sessions. They were provided a Scratch-oriented prototype template
sheet in which they had to further specify their design ideas from a computational programming perspective,
including the number and outlook of the characters (called sprites), the world description, and the major play
actions. Scratch was used as both a development and a cognitive tool to further externalize, refine, and embody
students' design ideas. In the end, all design groups were requested to upload their computer game prototypes to
the Scratch web site. A post-design group debriefing session was set to make student designers evaluate and
reflect on their design artifacts and experiences.
         A group of graduate students, who majored in education and were enrolled in an educational game
design course, facilitated all design sessions. They answered both design and content questions, gave feedback
between design moves, and occasionally prompted children participants for idea elaboration or math content
explanation. They also provided help on Scratch programming during game development.

Design-Based Programming
Scratch, a programming environment designed and developed by the MIT Media Lab, was used as students'
game design tool for this project. Scratch has been implemented and reported on in multiple recent studies that
involve computer-supported    learning   and  learning-though-game-design      workshops   for school students    (e.g.,
Emmerson, 2004; Manroy-Hernández & Hill, 2010). Prior research indicated that Scratch is user-friendly for
school children who can learn mathematical and computational ideas by creating and sharing Scratch projects.

Data Collection and Analysis
This study utilized both qualitative and quantitative data collection and analysis methods. Data were collected
through  in-field observation  on   the game   design interactions   and  activities, interviewing, and   an attitudes
survey.
         The researchers of the current study have conducted categorical aggregation analysis (Stake 1995) with
design conversations and observed activities to examine key patterns of design-based cognitive and interaction
processes. The design discourses throughout every session were recorded and coded. The researchers of the
current study  conducted     categorical  aggregation    analysis (Yin,   2008)    with  the  transcripts and  infield
observation  notes  to examine     the function  and  content  of design   interactions,  and  potential  evidence  of
mathematics learning and thinking within design processes, by coding the critical properties of meaningful
actions or instances   and classifying  them   into aggregations.  Via  a systematic    coding method     (Marshall &
Rossman, 2006), we then reduced and summarized the coded data based on the aggregations emerging from the
data. The  analysis   of all qualitative  data  contributed  an initial  list of  themes  that  depicted  facilitators'
experiences and perceptions, which were then refined and extended via a constant comparison, pattern matching
and frequency coding. Peer debriefing and member checking were part of the data collection (Lincoln & Guba,
1985). Peer debriefing consisted of formal reviews of data among the coders of the study data. Member checks
were conducted informally with participants during the process of data collection.

© ISLS                                                                                                              59
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                     Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

          A group   of  purposefully   sampled    student  participants  were    interviewed  at the end   of each  design
session for their perspectives of game design and learning experiences. A qualitative thematic analysis was
conducted   with    the interviewing   scripts    to examine   recurring   themes,   which    were   then  compared    and
congregated with the findings of in-field observation and transcript analysis results.
         All student    participants completed     the   Attitudes towards   Math  Inventory   (ATMI,     Tapia &   Marsh,
2004) before and after the game design intervention. This five-point Likert-scaled inventory is a 40-item survey,
assessing students' attitudes toward mathematics with a focus on four identified factors: self-confidence, value,
enjoyment, and motivation. The KR-20 reliability of the inventory in this study was 0.87.
         Student participants' scores of a state assessment of general math achievement before and after the
tutoring program were also collected. In the urban Hispanic-serving school, state assessment scores of both
participants and non-participants were collected; in the rural pueblo school, all of the 13 middle school students
were participants and hence there was no static control group.

Results

Potential Impact on Attitudes toward Mathematics
A pairwise   t-test was  conducted     to compare    all student   participants' attitudes towards   mathematics    in pre-
intervention and post-intervention conditions. The t-test indicated a significant result, t (62) = -2.56, p < .01. The
result indicated that   participants   in this study   had   developed    significantly more   positive   attitudes toward
mathematics after participating in the team-based game-design activities.
         The survey finding got corroborated by the qualitative interviewing results. In particular, the following
comments had highlighted how participants re-interpreted math:
         It's like you are learning new ways (on) how to like make better games and stuff. It's like making you
         practice this for the future and if you want to study then you can get practice over that.
         You could make it like square root and stuff instead of adding and subtracting.
         Math is everywhere, like math is in everything you have (to) do.
         I learned that even though math is everywhere you still have to learn it and when you learn it you will
         see it more in life that it will be in everything you do. Like cooking, technology, practically everything.
The aforementioned      comments,    notably,  had   encompassed     raised  awareness    of math's  value,   a broadened
expression  of math     content (e.g., "square    root instead of   adding   and  subtracting"), a proactive    disposition
towards math learning (e.g., "when you learn it you will see it more in life"), and confidence on "new ways" to
math learning (e.g., "you can get practice over that").

Nature of Collaborative Game-Design-Based Cognition and Interaction
The analysis with the qualitative data is not fully completed when this proposal is submitted. But three salient
themes depicting the nature of collaborative game-design-based cognition and interaction have emerged from
the data. These themes were outlined below.

Mergence of Mathematical Thinking and Computational Problem Solving
A mergence between mathematical thinking and computational-programming-based problem solving had been
frequently observed and coded from participants' design interaction and their programming artifacts. During
Scratch-based game programming, participants were heavily involved in customizing motion scripts of other
game cases to realize their design on game actions. During the process, they had: (1) developed solid conceptual
understanding  of   variables   and  coordinates     through analyzing     and   replacing numerical  values    of  control
variables and  defining    locations   and  motions    of each   charter,  (2) demonstrated    procedural    accuracy  and
quantitative reasoning in computing background transitions and syncing multiple motions via control loops, (3)
modeled   with math     by creating  math-relevant     simulations  (e.g., a car  distance   calculator), and (4)   showed
conscientiousness for problem solving during the iterative process of debugging, testing, and refining. Notably,
mathematical thinking development was more observed among children who were found reluctant to perform
critical thinking during previous game play activities.

Embodiment of Mathematical Communication in Design-Based Interaction
During  design-based    questioning    and clarification,  mathematics     was   found  to be adopted   and   learned  as a
situated, contextualized design language, especially when the design teams were involved in decomposing a
design  goal and    generating   solutions.    It was    observed   that the   collective  development    of  mathematics
vocabulary in a design team had been reinforced by varied, distributed memory among individual members on
mathematics concepts and math game cases played.
          During the design talk, there was a presentation preference for algorithms over explanatory narratives.
When designing math-related game quests, most children simply presented a challenge via a formal algorithm
(e.g., "4 x 7 = ?") rather than situating or visualizing a contextualized word problem (e.g., "There are seven

© ISLS                                                                                                                  60
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

rocks in each box. That is total of ..."). Correspondingly, 45% of their design prototypes simply displayed math
elements as algorithm equations.

Dissection between Design, Computational Thinking, and Mathematical Representation
       Content preference for procedural skills over conceptual presentation: When pondering on the math
content to be addressed by the game, almost all student designers voluntarily guided their design thinking via
the question, "Where will I use math in real life?" Accordingly, they tried to establish the scenarios and contexts
before considering the gameplay mechanics or content integration, and focused on the practice of procedural
skill (e.g., a numerical calculation) as the major learning goal of the games to be created. Few participants gave
consideration to the question of "What does math mean in real life," and hence rarely represent or explain a
math concept within their games.
       Design versus    learning:  Design   elements could distract student participants       from learning. For
example, students, especially girls, were observed actively searching and designing game characters and visuals
while ignoring the programming of game action and feedback ­ the design elements that were found as more
learning-related and deemed more effortful.

Implications of Research
The study findings should help to generate a clearer profile of learning through collaborative design in computer
game and mathematics learning settings. This research should serve as a catalyst for insight and increased
research in learning through collaborative design as well as inform the design and implementation of a game-
integrated collaborative learning system.

References
Davis, P. J., & Hersh, R. (1982). The mathematical experience. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Emmerson, F. (2004). Exploring the video game as a learning tool. ERCIM News 57, 30.
Fitzgerald, J. F. (1996). Proof in mathematics education. Journal of Education, 178(1), 35-45.
Kafai, Y. (1995).Minds in play: Computer game design as a context for children's learning. Mahwah, NJ:
       Lawrence Erlbaum.
Kolodner, J. L., Camp, P. J., Crismond, D., Fasse, B., Gray, J., Holbrook, J., Puntambekar, S., & Ryan, M.
       (2003). Problem-based learning meets case-based reasoning in the middle-school science classroom:
       Putting learning by design into practice. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 1532-7809, 12(4), 495-547.
Li, Q. (2012). Understanding enactivism: A study of affordances and constraints of engaging practicing teachers
       as digital game designers. Educational Technology Research and Development, 60(5), 785-806.
Lincoln, Y. S., & Guba, E. G. (1985). Naturalistic inquiry. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage Publications.
Maloney, J., Resnick, M., Rusk, N., Silverman, B., Eastmond, E. (2010). The Scratch Programming Language
       and Environment. ACM Transactions on Computing Education, November 2010.
Marshall, M., & Rossman,  G, B.  (2006). Designing Qualitative Research. Thousands Oaks: Sage Publication.
Mitchell, J., Kelleher, H., & Saundry, C. (2007). A multimedia mathematics project in a teacher education
       program. In L. Farr Darling et al. (eds.), Collective Improvisation in a Teacher Education Community
       (pp. 101-118), Springer Science Business Media.
Muller, M. J., & Kuhn, S. (1993). Participatory design. Communications of the ACM, 36(6), 24-28.
Papert, S. 1980. Mindstorms: Children, computers, and powerful ideas. Basic Books, New York.
Roblyer, M. D. and J. Edwards (2000). Integrating educational technology into teaching. Upper Saddle River,
       N.J., Merrill.
Shaffer, D. W. (2005). Studio mathematics: The epistemology and practice of design pedagogy as a model for
       mathematics learning. Wisconsin Center for Education Research    Working paper, No. 2005-3.
Sotamaa, O. (2005). Creative User-centred Design Practices: Lessons from Game Cultures. In Haddon et al.
       (eds.) Everyday Innovators: Researching the role uf users in shaping ICTs (pp. 104-116). London:
       Springer Verlag.
Stake, R. (1995). The art of case research. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Tapia, M. & Marsh, G. E. (2004). An instrument to measurement mathematics attitudes, Academic Exchange
       Quarterly,         8,        2.         Retrieved       August         15,               2004,         from
       http://www.rapidintellect.com/AEQweb/cho25344l.htm.
VanLehn, K., Jones, R. M., & Chi, M. T. H. (1992). A model of the self-explanation effect. Journal of Learning
       Sciences, 1532-7809, 2(1), 1-59.
Wong, R. M. F., Lawson, M. J., & Keeves, J. (2002). The effects of self-explanation training on students'
       problem solving in high-school mathematics. Learning and Instruction, 12(2), 233-262.
Yin, R. K. (2008). Case study research: Design and methods. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.

© ISLS                                                                                                         61
