CSCL 2013 Proceedings                     Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

              AppleTree: An Assessment-Oriented Framework for
                               Collaboration and Argumentation

 Wenli Chen, Chee-Kit Looi, Yun Wen, Wenting Xie, Learning Sciences Lab, National Institute of Education,
                     Nanyang Technological University, 1 Nanyang Walk, Singapore 637616
                                             Email: wenli.chen@nie.edu.sg

         Abstract:     In this   paper,  we    articulate  a framework     (called   AppleTree)   for   assessing
         collaborative argumentation with the purpose of evaluating and empowering the development
         of argumentation skills, collaboration skills and content knowledge in school learning. The
         framework is motivated by the need to achieve "learning to argue" and "arguing to learn" and
         the  necessity   to  embed  on-going     and automated     formative  assessments    for  collaborative
         learning   as reflected  in existing  literature.   It builds on  existing  systems  for  collaborative
         argumentation and automated assessment of collaborative learning to achieve assessment for
         learning and to realize it in authentic classroom environments. We illustrate the framework by
         instantiating it in the conceptual design of one such system for use in schools.

Introduction
Understanding   the  significance    of both   "learning  to argue"   and  "arguing  to   learn" (Scheuer,  et  al., 2010),
Computer-Supported      Collaborative    Learning    (CSCL)      researchers  have   developed    many    computer-based
systems to support argumentation in the collaborative fashion, to facilitate communication and argumentation
between  multiple   participants (Scheuer, et  al., 2010).   A typical problem  with  the use of such   systems is   the low
level of  participation   and  interactivity   in   online   learning  environments.    One   way    to foster  productive
collaboration is to empower regulation (i.e., supporting collaboration by taking actions "on the fly" to enable
immediate    adaptations   when   unexpected      events   occur   during  interaction,   Dillenbourg    &  Tchounikine,
2007). Regulation is a complex     skill depending    on a   quick appraisal of the current interaction   situation and its
compatibility with the desired (Jermann & Dillenbourg, 2008). This calls for embedding real-time assessments
of collaborative learning in the system. Considering this, we conceptualized AppleTree, an assessment-oriented
collaborative argumentation framework for measuring and fostering collaboration and argumentation in real
classrooms. We hope AppleTree can make a difference to existing school practices via: 1) helping equipping
students with  21st century   skills (critical thinking   and   collaboration skills in particular);  and  2)  providing a
workable approach to realize not only "assessment of learning", that is establishing what students have learnt in
a summative way, but also "assessment for learning", that is using multiple forms of information about students'
learning as feedback to modify the learning activities they are engaged in (Shepard, 2000). In the next few
sections, we advocate the ingredients of assessment in such a framework, and propose a conceptual design of a
system as an instantiation of the framework.

Ingredients of the AppleTree framework
In our   assessment-oriented     collaborative    argumentation    framework,     we  envisage    automated    assessment
components that can assess both cognition development and social participation. The former is achieved through
assessing  the structure  and  validity  of  the  represented    arguments.   The  latter is realized   through analyzing
quantitative information concerning data-based usage of the system, including all the interactions involving
argumentation   and    online-based  communication.       Knowledge     on  how   participation   in online   environment
contributes to learning is lacking (van Aalst, 2010). With the assessment components proposed, we seek to
contribute to  this topic  by  identifying   good   collaborative  patterns  that can   bring about   learning  in   domain
knowledge, development in argumentation skills and improvement in communication and collaboration skills.
         We    propose    the  AppleTree    framework      that  incorporates  mechanisms     for  supporting   formative
(diagnostic) assessment of the on-going collaborative argumentation process in order to foster and enhance
students' collaborative argumentation and optimize teachers' instruction. The key ingredients are:
 1)   It supports assessment for learning rather than assessment of learning.
 2)   It assesses domain knowledge, argumentation skills and collaboration at individual, group and class levels.
 3)   It is not only an assessment tool, but also a tool for visually representing learning processes         unfolding or
      happening in classrooms.
 4)   It assesses not only the learning outcomes but also helps track and monitor the process of collaboration.
 5)   It involves both self-assessment and peer assessment by the students.
 6)   It is a real-time assessment tool which provides immediate feedback to teachers and students with which
      they can adjust or improvise teaching and/or learning, as well as `feed forward' into future work.

© ISLS                                                                                                                   6
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                    Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

         In a CSCL system, if the ongoing analysis of the data is not available to teachers in real-time, it is
usually too late for teachers to their adjust in-situ instruction and enactment strategies based on the assessment
outcomes as the "end products". The visualization of on-going argumentation and collaboration amongst the
students provides a version of a cockpit's view for the teacher to orchestrate classroom activities. AppleTree has
the potential for providing teachers with the necessary information to tailor instruction to meet student needs.
The feedback is intended to be less final and judgmental (Boud, 1995) but more interactive and forward-looking
(Carless, 2002), timely and with a potential to be acted upon (Gibbs & Simpson, 2004), which can well facilitate
teachers to enact collaborative argumentation activities to cultivate argumentation and collaboration awareness
and skills in students.
         Moreover, assessing students' performance in collaborative learning is not just the prerogative of the
teachers. Equally, the students themselves need to understand own performances in a reflective way to help
improve the productivity of their interactions. The AppleTree framework is intended to inform student learning:
what learners are doing, what claims and evidences are they generating, editing, commenting or improving,
what argumentative relationships they are establishing, where they are spending their time, how well they are
progressing, and so on--at the individual or group level. It will inform students with regards to various aspects
of argumentation and collaboration. The students have access to other groups' artifacts and assessment so that
they can compare, critique and reflect. The integration of peer rating will encourage students to reflect on the
learning process, to become more responsible and engaged in collaboration, so as to cultivate a collaborative
culture in the long term.

An Instantiation of the Framework
To  concretize  the framework,    we envisage   a  system that  is conceived  as a  multiuser tool  for  developing
scientific argumentation skills and collaboration skills in secondary school students (see Figure 1). Like most
collaborative  argumentation    systems,  its user interface provides  students  with a  shared and   synchronized
working space for collaborative construction of arguments and a chat tool for communication and coordinating
group work. A collaboration script (see following) is embedded in the system design to guide group members to
do  iterative  cycles   of  intra-  and   inter-group  interaction  so  as   to  achieve  continuous     knowledge
improvement.    Real-time   visualizations    and  evaluations of  students'  social  participation and   argument
construction at different learning stages are displayed to scaffold the argumentation processes and to inspire
reflections on both individual and group work.

Argument Pattern and Representation
                                                                   Table 1: Argument elements and examples

       Figure 1. Screenshot of the AppleTree System

For argumentation    systems,    providing  an  external representation to   enable  the creation,  reviewing  and
modification of arguments by users is an important goal (Scheuer, Loll, & Pinkwart, 2010). An AppleTree
implementation will use graphic representations, as graphic representation expresses the argument structure
explicitly and is an intuitive form to model knowledge (Suthers & Hundhausen, 2001). There is the public
working space in which an argument is an organized set of argument elements represented by nodes and/or
directed links. The     specific types   of   argument elements    designed  are in   accordance    with Toulmin's
Argumentation Pattern (TAP) (1958), a most extensively adopted framework for both scaffolding and assessing
argumentation   in  educational  contexts (e.g. Jimenez,  Rodrigues  &  Duschl,  2000;   Mitchell, 1996). For both
pragmatic considerations (e.g. understandability by the secondary school students) (Scheuer, et al., 2010) and
assessment feasibility, three argument elements, namely claim, support (including data, warrant, or backing) and
rebuttal are identified as the essential components of an ideal argument. On an AppleTree implementation, these
three elements are indicated by: 1) the type of Node: Claim vs Evidence and/or 2) the type of directed Link: For
vs Against (Table 1). Considering there are times students may come up with some idea but they cannot decide

© ISLS                                                                                                           7
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                  Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

whether it is a claim, a support or a rebuttal, we provide a bubble node with an undirected link as "placeholders"
where   students can  record these  ideas.  Providing   these   "placeholders" is  important   as  it can encourage
brainstorming and pooling of ideas.

Scripted Collaborative Argumentation
To realize constant improvement in argumentation via collaboration, an adaptive and generic script is integrated
into AppleTree. Following this script, student collaborative argumentation process is composed of repeated two-
staged  (intra-group  and inter-group)   interaction episodes.  At the  first stage,  students  need  to  brainstorm,
generate and further improve arguments within a group. When a group has agreed upon the argumentation graph
created, group members are required to go to other groups' working spaces to evaluate the arguments developed.
They judge whether the argument elements and links generated are valid or not by indicating whether they "Like"
or "Dislike" it. Reasons for their judgment, which later can be used as constructive feedback with which the
group being evaluated can use to further improve their arguments, are also to be provided. In the following
episode, students go back to their own group to further improve the argumentation graph by addressing the
feedback and adding the good points from other groups via further group discussion and negotiation. If time
permits, a second round of inter-group evaluation can be enacted to seek greater improvement in group work.

Automated Assessment
Assessing Argumentation
AppleTree supports on-going automated analysis and evaluation of the argumentation graph. Argumentation
quality is measured   by  "structural completeness"    and   "content  validity" of   the arguments   constructed. A
scheme for categorizing different levels of argument in terms of its structural completeness is embedded in
AppleTree    programming    to enable    automated    analysis, visualization  and    comparison   of    collaborative
argumentation    graphs   developed   in  different   groups    and/or  at  different  phases   of    CSCL.   At  the
conceptualization  stage, based  on   the natural observations   made   of  students'  collaborative   argumentation
discourses occurred within small groups, 4 levels of arguments are identified in the coding scheme (see Table 2).

Table 2: Scheme for categorizing different levels of argumentation

         Besides structural completeness, content validity is also an important facet for assessment as it not only
reflects argumentation quality but also reveals students' understanding on domain knowledge. The realization of
automated assessment of content validity is based on peer-rating during inter-group interaction. As described
above, when having agreed on the group argumentation graph, group members shall go to other groups to
evaluate the arguments developed. In peer-rating, each student will decide whether the elements proposed each
is legitimate or not by selecting "Like" (valid) or "Dislike" (invalid). Thus argument content validity is indicated
by the ratio between total number of "Like"s (NL) and the total number of ratings received ("Like"s + "Dislike"s,
NL + ND).
         In  addition to  enabling  automated  assessment,      peer-rating itself is  also  an important    learning
mechanism. Peer-rating engages students in making judgments about the performance of other studentsa form
of learning in which the contributions from others can be a very useful input for self-assessment. This provides
an opportunity for learners themselves and their peers to understand and reflect what constitutes high-quality
performance, and how the performances can be improved. It can be treated as a means for learning how to
collaborate.  From  the aspect of  domain   knowledge    learning, the   disapproval  of  a certain   element in  the
argumentation graph also unveils the conflicting understanding between students on this particular knowledge
point. Through   rating and  commenting,   individual  understandings   are   pooled  and  aggregated.   Students can
explore these diversified thinking to form better understanding, leading to knowledge improvement. To facilitate
this process, these   "controversial" elements are    highlighted  via  increasing   the  brightness  of the  graphic

© ISLS                                                                                                              8
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                    Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

representation. The ratio between the number of "Dislikes" (ND) and the sum of "Likes" and "Dislikes" (NL +
ND) is calculated    for each   argument  element    and then translated into      the brightness of the    node   and       link
representing that element.

Assessing Social Participation
    On AppleTree, social participation is assessed by taking accounts of individual participation within the
group and group participation within the class community. Students' participation rates of different functional
interaction as well as the centrality of interaction are important indicators for their participation level. The data
consists of AppleTree log files and students' inscriptional group artifacts on the shared argumentation space.
Social network analysis (SNA), a well-known approach to investigate online social participation, is embedded in
AppleTree   to  help    identifying patterns of relationship  between    participants   and visualizing     the   "flow"      of
information/knowledge and/or other resources that are exchanged among participations (de Laat, et. al., 2007).
A variety of SNA indicators are used to examine the holistic interaction patterns and the positions of individual
participant in  it.  In AppleTree,   the analysis of  the  social network established     focuses  on     "centrality"       and
"density".
    Based on SNA, graphical representations visualizing the network connections developed can be generated
in AppleTree. These can be used as immediate and intuitive feedback to help teachers and students to adapt their
following   activities   in the classroom.   It offers   a method    for mapping        group interactions,     visualizing
`connectedness' and quantifying some characteristics of these processes (de Laat, et al., 2007). However, this
approach cannot reflect individual/group's contribution or participation ratio. Hence, in AppleTree, apart from
using SNA to reflect relations (links) among participant/small groups, the distribution of different functional
actions enacted by both individuals and groups indicated by action frequency is also incorporated. Quantitative
information on students/groups' contributions in the shared argument space or interactional moves through
online chatting are extracted and represented in AppleTree. Teachers or students can select the parameters what
they are concerned about, for instance, the number of claims created; the number of evidences provided; the
number of commented received.

Conclusion and Discussion
The need for an assessment framework for ongoing collaboration is motivated by the need to inform students
with regards to various aspects of argumentation and collaboration and help teachers to manage and orchestrate
collaboration activities in and after the classroom learning. We propose ingredients of an assessment-oriented
framework   for collaborative    argumentation    to provide  views  on  the      ongoing  social participation    and       the
cognitive progression of the argumentation structures and content. The tools are meant to help the teacher and
students to have awareness of what is going on, as well as help the students to be more reflective on their
participation and their contributions. Provided with these tools and resources for assessing collaboration skills,
teachers can be more cognizant of what and how collaboration skills are to be assessed ­ thus enabling them to
be better informed on how to support the development of these collaboration skills, an important component of
21st century skills.

References
Boud, D. (1995). Enhancing learning through self assessment. London: Kogan Page.
Carless, D. (2002). The `mini-viva' as a tool to enhance assessment for learning. Assessment and Evaluation in  Higher
        Education, 27(4), 353-363.
de Laat, M., Lally, V., Lipponen, L., & Simons, R. J. (2007). Investigating patterns of interaction in networked learning and
        computer-supported collaborative learning: A role for social network analysis. International Journal of Computer-
        Supported Collaborative Learning, 4, 259-287.
Gibbs, G. & Simpson, C. (2004). Conditions under which assessment supports students' learning. Learning and Teaching in
        Higher Education, 1, 3-31. Retrieved from: http://www.londonmet.ac.uk/library/r71034_39.pdf
Scheuer, O., Loll, F., & Pinkwart, N. (2010). Computer-supported argumentation: A review of the state of the art.
        International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 5, 43-102.
Shepard, L. E. (2000). The role of assessment in a learning culture. Educational Researcher, 29(7), 1­14.
Suthers, D. D., Connelly, J., Lesgold, A., Paolucci, M., Toth, E. E., Toth, J., et al. (2001). Representational and advisory
        guidance for students learning scientific inquiry. In K. D. Forbus & P. J. Feltovich (Eds.), Smart machines in
        education: The coming revolution in educational technology (pp. 7­35). Menlo Park: AAAI/MIT.
Toulmin, S. (1958). The Uses of Argument. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
van Aalst, J., & Chan, C. K. K. (2007). Student-directed assessment of knowledge building using electronic portfolios. The
        Journal of the Learning Sciences, 16(2), 175-220

© ISLS                                                                                                                         9
