CSCL 2013 Proceedings                  Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

    Is there evidence for expertise on collaboration and if so, is it
                          domain-specific or domain-general?
 Jan Kiesewetter, Lehrstuhl für Didaktik und Ausbildungsforschung in der Medizin, Ziemssenstraße 1, 80336
                                 München, Germany, jan.kiesewetter@med.lmu.de
Martin R. Fischer, Lehrstuhl für Didaktik und Ausbildungsforschung in der Medizin, Ziemssenstraße 1, 80336
                                 München, Germany, martin.fischer@med.lmu.de
     Frank Fischer, Department of Educational Science and Educational Psychology, Leopoldstr. 11, 80802
                                  München, Germany, frank.fischer@psy.lmu.de

        Abstract: External scripts have been widely used to guide computer-supported collaborative
        learners, yet little attention has been given to the internal collaboration scripts. These internal
        scripts can contain procedural knowledge, which is elaborated, organized and flexible. Is there
        evidence for expertise on collaboration and, if so, is it domain-specific or domain-general?
        If there is expertise on collaboration the retrieval of rich internal collaboration scripts should
        be differentiable from the retrieval novices' scripts. In two studies collaborative experts and
        novices of the domains academia and medicine were confronted with stimuli, in which people
        were    involved  in,   sometimes  technology-supported,     collaborative activities. To  test for
        domain-specifity stimuli differed regarding the same vs other domain as the subject. The
        answers were subsequently coded.
        There is evidence for expertise on collaboration as the results show that experts retrieve more
        script-like information overall. The difference was significant for stimuli regarding the same
        content domain, thus indicating domain-specifity.

Background
Collaborative learning research has made a case that through participation individuals gradually internalize
collaborative practices and use these skills in other contexts as well (Kolodner, 2007). It is argued that experts
have a better organization of procedural knowledge structures (Fischer, Kollar, Stegmann, & Wecker, 2013). An
expert in   collaboration should   therefore  have   elaborated   procedural knowledge    regarding     collaborative
situations (internal collaboration scripts), while   novices scripts are not as elaborated.    Collaborative experts
should be defined as those who consistently collaborate and outperform others in collaborative situations. It is
an unanswered question how to empirically and reliably assess the difference between novices and experts
internal collaboration scripts.
        A substantial difference between other expertise domains and expertise in collaboration is that a second
domain, the content domain, is needed, in which the experts collaborate in. It is an open empirical question
whether experts  in  collaboration  in one   content domain   can apply  their internal scripted  knowledge   when
confronted with a collaborative situation of another content domain.
        We investigated the following explorative research questions in two studies, which have not been
addressed systematically so far.
                  Is there evidence of collaboration expertise?
                  To what extent is collaboration expertise domain specific?

Hypothesis study 1
When confronted with a collaborative situation collaboration experts should be able to easily recall their internal
collaboration scripts, while novices do not yet have these knowledge aspects.

Hypothesis study 2
If collaborative expertise is domain-specific a collaborative situation of their content domain should activate the
experts internal collaboration scripts, while collaborative situation of another content domain should not activate
the scripts. If collaborative   expertise is domain-general,  the difference   between  collaborative   experts and
novices should be independent from the situations' content domain.

Method
Study 1
Ten collaboration novices (six female, M=23, SD=2.4 years), social-science students from LMU Munich and
ten experts (three female, M = 38.40, SD=7.32 years) volunteered for the study. To qualify as a collaborative
expert one had to have worked collaboratively for the last seven years at least a mean of two hours per workday.

© ISLS                                                                                                           62
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                     Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

To standardize expertise in the content domain experts needed to have advanced at least one hierarchical level
(PhD or specialist degree).
         To trigger collaboration scripts through standardized collaborative situations novices and experts were
shown pictures and videos as stimuli. The pictures contained collaborative situations (workshop or small group
work). After introduction the investigator showed the participant one of four counter-balanced pictures for five
seconds. Then the participant was asked to write down the answer to the "recall question"­What did you see on
the picture? The same procedure was repeated for another picture. For the remaining pictures the participants
were asked to answer three "script questions": What has most likely led to the situation? What happens in the
situation? What is most likely to happen next in the situation?. The participants were given as much time as they
needed to answer.

Study 2
Twenty   novices  (thirteen  female,   M=25.75,  SD=4.7   years) and   twenty  collaboration experts   (eight female,
M=41.57, SD=7.87 years) volunteered for the study. All novices were medical students of LMU Munich. We
investigated specialists who need a high amount of collaboration (internal medicine and anaesthesiologists).
         Counter-balanced one of eight stimuli (four videos, four pictures) containing collaborative situations in
medical contexts was shown to each participant for five seconds. The same procedure was repeated eight times;
four times   asking  the    recall question, and four  times  asking  script questions,   controlling for a balanced
combination of stimuli type (picture/video) and question type (recall/script questions). After the eighth stimuli
the participants were shown two collaborative situations of an academic      setting to compare their answers to the
answers out  of  their own  content domain.

Coding scheme
For both studies the same coding scheme was developed to analyse the data. Two main categories were defined:
superficial and script information. To assess detailed collaborative script information the categories of Kollar,
Fischer, and Hesse (2006) were used. For example it specifies activities and roles as the important determinants
in collaboration scripts. When the question is answered how this situation might continue and a person would be
described as summarizing the tasks this would be coded as one activity. One investigator coded all of the
transcripts and 10% of the transcripts was also coded by a student-assistant (Cohens kappa =.84).

Results

Study 1
A t-test    revealed   that collaboration    experts (Mexperts=25.20, SD=5.88)     stated significantly   more  script
information than novices (Mnovices=13.80, SD=4.4), t(18)=4.88, p<0.01, ²=0.57. As well for the recall questions
a t-test revealed that collaboration experts (Mexperts=5.80, SD=1.62) stated significantly more script information
than novices (Mnovices=2.40, SD=2.27), t(18)=3.86, p<0.01, ²=0.45.

Study 2
A MANOVA revealed, as hypothesized the collaboration experts stated significantly more script information
(Mexperts=71.65,  SD=33.23)         than  the    novices   (Mnovices=54.25,    SD=15.01),    F(1;38)=4.55;     p<.05;
²=.11.Furthermore,     when   stimulated  by  videos  experts (Mexperts=31.60, SD=14.90)   stated significantly more
script-like information  than   novices  (Mnovices=22.95, SD=9.03)    as revealed  by the  MANOVA       F(1;38)=4.93;
p<.05; ²=.12.    Outside    the medical   domain  neither the  difference for  the picture  (Mexperts=5.10, SD=4.60,
Mnovices=5.00, SD = 4.14), nor for the videos (Mexperts=6.60, SD=4.44; Mnovices=4.65, SD=2.39) was significant
(F(1;38)=1.45; n.s.).

Discussion
Experts differ regarding their knowledge of collaborative situations. Our studies are a first attempt to reliably
assess experts' internal collaboration scripts. The collaborative experts draw their knowledge from their internal
scripts, nonetheless which question they are asked.      The difference between collaborative experts and novices
disappears when confronted with situations outside their content domain. However, content domain dependency
has to be further investigated in other content domains as past research has argued for domain independency of
collaborative expertise (Kolodner, 2007). Further research is needed to better analyze the subcomponents of
internal collaboration scripts.

References
Fischer, F., Kollar, I., Stegmann, K., & Wecker, C. (2013). Toward a Script Theory of Guidance in Computer-
         Supported Collaborative Learning. Educational Psychologist, 48 (1), 56-66.

© ISLS                                                                                                            63
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                 Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

Kollar, I., Fischer, F., &  Hesse, F. W.  (2006). Collaboration scripts­a    conceptual analysis. Educational
        Psychology Review, 18(2), 159-185.
Kolodner, J. (2007). The roles of scripts in promoting collaborative discourse in learning by design. Scripting
        Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 237-262.

Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank all novices and experts who took part in the studies as well as the helpful
contributions of the students Fara Semmelies and Martin Gluza to this work.

© ISLS                                                                                                   64
