CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                          Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

      Navigating Through Controversial Online Discussions: The
                               Influence of Visualized Ratings
         Jürgen Buder, Knowledge Media Research Center, Tübingen Germany, j.buder@iwm-kmrc.de
   Christina Schwind, Knowledge Media Research Center, Tübingen Germany, c.schwind@iwm-kmrc.de
         Anja Rudat, Knowledge Media Research Center, Tübingen Germany, a.rudat@iwm-kmrc.de
      Daniel Bodemer, University of Duisburg-Essen, Media-Based Knowledge Construction, Germany,
                                                bodemer@uni-due.de

         Abstract: Awareness tools using visualized ratings of other people can help recipients to find
         their way in crowded information spaces. This article reports on a laboratory experiment that
         investigates how the design of an awareness tool impacts the navigation behavior of recipients
         within an online discussion forum. In the experiment, 127 participants read through a forum
         discussion for which posts were rated by average agreement and average quality. Depending
         on   the experimental   condition,  posts were   visualized   along  continua  indicating   average
         agreement ratings (absent vs. present) and/or average quality ratings (absent vs. present). It
         was hypothesized that an agreement visualization will increase the salience of both high-
         agreement and low-agreement posts, whereas a quality visualization will only increase the
         salience of high-quality posts. Measuring reading times for discussion posts, these hypotheses
         could be confirmed. However, neither recipients' attitude strength nor recall of discussion
         arguments was affected.

Introduction
One of the hallmarks of computer technologies is their ability to create social situations over a distance. Email,
online discussion forums, virtual environments, multiplayer games, social networks, microblogging, and wikis:
All these technologies enable communication and collaboration among persons who are spatially separated. But
communicating over a distance is not without its problems, as nearly 30 years of research has shown that
computer-mediated communication is impoverished in comparison to the richness of face-to-face environments
(Kiesler, Siegel, & McGuire, 1984). For instance, the lack of copresence implies that it is much more difficult in
a computer-mediated environment to refer to spatial relations, for example, pointing at an object (Kramer, Oh,
& Fussell, 2006). Similarly, other non-verbal cues like facial expressions, intonation or pitch, are not (or not
sufficiently) transmitted (Walther & Tidwell, 1995). And finally, social cues about the person one is interacting
with (e.g., gender, age) might be missing. In the early 1990s researchers in the field of computer-supported
cooperative work began to address this problem by developing tools that try to re-create some of the richness of
face-to-face  environments    (e.g., Heath  & Luff, 1992).    These  so-called group   awareness    tools (Gutwin  &
Greenberg, 2002) were able to show who is present in an environment, indicate the activities that other persons
are currently involved in, or provide background information about communicators through profile pages.
         Starting  in  the mid-2000s,   researchers in    the field of computer-supported     collaborative  learning
(CSCL) have started to adapt, develop, and test group awareness tools with the goal of supporting collaborative
learning processes.   In conjunction   with this shift of application  fields came   a shift in the  design of  group
awareness tools. Rather than trying to imitate the contextual richness of copresent scenarios, CSCL awareness
tools provided information that would be difficult or even impossible to yield in face-to-face environments, thus
lending an added value to computer-mediated communication (Buder, 2007). For instance, CSCL awareness
tools provide information about the knowledge of learning partners (Engelmann, Dehler, Bodemer, & Buder,
2009), their degree of comprehension (Dehler, Bodemer, Buder, & Hesse, 2011), their assessments on tests
(Sangin, Molinari, Nüssli, & Dillenbourg, 2011), perceived personality traits (Phielix, Prins, Kirschner, Erkens,
& Jaspers, 2011), or their opinions (Buder & Bodemer, 2008).
         In particular, Buder and Bodemer (2008, 2011) conducted two experiments that investigated the use of
group awareness    tools for  controversial online  discussions.  Small  groups  of  learners   (3-4 members)   were
required to discuss two conflicting hypotheses from various science topics. By providing differential access to
learning material prior to discussion, it was ensured in all conditions of both experiments that one learner (the
informed minority) of each group favored a "correct" hypothesis. However, this learner was confronted with a
dissenting majority who favored an "incorrect" hypothesis. The task of the groups was to discuss the conflicting
evidence before making a decision about the better hypothesis. Among other things, both experiments compared
groups using an awareness tool and groups without a tool. In the tool conditions, group members were required
to rate the discussion posts of their collaborators on two dimensions, namely, agreement and novelty. The
awareness tool computed the average ratings for each contribution and fed these data into a two-dimensional
visualization in  real   time where   each  dot  represented  a discussion    post. On  the  horizontal   axis of the
visualization, dots were displayed along an agreement dimension. The rationale behind this was to visually

© ISLS                                                                                                            65
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                               Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

separate majority contributions (high agreement) from minority contributions (low agreement) in order to create
an awareness     that different  opinions  were    available. On   the  vertical axis  of  the  visualization,  dots were
displayed along a novelty dimension. The idea behind this was that minority contributions garner higher novelty
ratings than   majority    contributions,  and   therefore    become    highly   salient. The   rationale   behind   these
visualizations   can  be  related  to the  notion   of representational   guidance   (Suthers   & Hundhausen,       2003).
According to this concept, different representational formats lead to differences in how individuals and groups
process information: Representations constrain the way in which learners think about an object (e.g., in terms of
agreement and novelty), and they make some parts of a representation more salient than others (e.g., novel
minority  posts).  The    results  of both  experiments     indicate   that  without  awareness   tool,   post-discussion
preferences of groups and individuals were leaning toward the incorrect majority viewpoint. However, in groups
that were supported by the awareness tool, the social influence of minority members could be strengthened,
resulting in a higher likelihood that the correct hypothesis was chosen by individuals and groups. In sum, these
experiments    showed    that   carefully designed    awareness    tools can   have   an   impact on    the behavior     of
collaborating groups.
          The current work builds on these prior findings, but takes the project in two new directions. The first
new direction is associated with a change of the learning setting. While the prior studies by Buder and Bodemer
(2008, 2011) involved small groups of learners in formal contexts, we are now investigating potentially large
groups in informal contexts, that is, controversial discussions in online forums that are part of the Web portals
of newspapers or magazines. The rationale for this shift is that group awareness tools can act as filters for
information   seeking    (Dourish   &   Chalmers,   1994).    In  small  groups, learners   can  actually   attend   to all
information that is produced by their collaborators. However, in a large online forum there can be literally
thousands of discussion posts on a single topic, and participants can only attend to a small portion of the
available information.
          The  second    departure  from  the   prior  experiments   has  to do  with  a  deeper  understanding     of  the
mechanisms that help explaining the effectiveness of awareness tools. While the experiments from Buder and
Bodemer (2008, 2011) showed that visualizations by a rating-based awareness tool can be effective in shaping
the behavior of a group, the present work is focused on the way in which these visualizations are actually used.
In other words, the current study investigates how visualizations of rating dimensions impact the navigation of
recipients. The general idea is that different rating dimensions exert different types of representational guidance
(Suthers & Hundhausen, 2003).
          In particular, we distinguish between two types of behavior termed bipolar and unipolar navigation. If
discussion  posts  are   visualized   alongside  a  continuum,    bipolar   navigation    means that   both ends   of   the
continuum   become     salient. This  should  be   the case   for the  visualization  of  agreement    ratings, as such  a
visualization gives insights into the pros and cons of a discussion. In contrast, unipolar navigation means that
only one end of a continuum becomes salient. In previous studies, this was accomplished with the novelty
dimension. However, as the current study involves discussions in online forums where participants can enter at
different times,  novelty  becomes     a  relative concept.   Therefore,  the  current   study tries to   trigger unipolar
navigation  through    the use   of a   quality visualization.    Visualization  of quality  ratings   is likely  to exert
representational guidance in a way that high-quality posts become more salient than low-quality posts.

Hypotheses
The present experiment investigates these issues by confronting individuals with the content of a large online
discussion, with only limited time to read all discussion posts. If the posts are visualized along an agreement
rating continuum, it might become likely that recipients will read posts with both high and low agreement
ratings (bipolar navigation) as this provides insights into the different viewpoints of the controversial discussion
(pro vs. con). A good balance between attention towards the pros and cons of a controversial discussion should
not only be found with regard to the frequencies of opened discussion posts, but also with regard to subsequent
reading   times. We    measured    navigation   by  reading   times   because   they  provide   better insights   into  the
processing of information. As a consequence of bipolar navigation, recipients might achieve a more balanced
view on the controversial issue. This, in turn should be accompanied by an attenuation of a recipient's post-
discussion  attitude  strength  compared    to  the   pre-discussion  attitude  strength.  This leads   to  the   following
hypotheses:
          Hypothesis   1:  Participants  who  are  provided   with an   agreement   visualization should    show   smaller
reading time differences between pro and con discussion posts than participants who are not provided with an
agreement visualization.
          Hypothesis 2: Participants who are provided with an agreement visualization should show a weakening
in attitude strength, whereas participants who are not provided with an agreement visualization should show an
enhancement in attitude strength.
          If the discussion posts are visualized along a quality rating continuum, it might become likely that
recipients will read high-quality posts at the expense of low-quality posts (unipolar navigation). As high-quality

© ISLS                                                                                                                  66
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                            Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

contributions are most   likely to  contain   the main     arguments   of a discussion,  the availability of a quality
visualization should  also lead  to better  memory     for  these   crucial arguments.   This  leads  to the following
hypotheses:
         Hypothesis 3: Participants who are provided with a quality visualization should have longer reading
times for the top quality contributions than participants who are not provided with a quality visualization.
         Hypothesis 4: Participants who are provided with a quality visualization should better recall the crucial
discussion arguments than participants who are not provided with a quality visualization.

Method

Participants
Data were collected from 127 participant volunteers (38 male). All participants were students, recruited via a
university mailing list. For their participation in the experiment, which took 60 minutes, participants were paid
8 . Alternatively, the students could get a certificate of their participation if needed for course requirements.
Participants' age ranged from 18 to 58 years (M = 24.94 years, SD = 5.22, one missing value).

Design
This lab study used a 2 x 2 design to explore the effect of the two visualizations of agreement ratings and quality
ratings. Thus, we set up four experimental conditions in which the visualizations of agreement ratings and/or
quality ratings were   either   available  or not     (see Table   1): a   condition   without   any visualization  (no
Visualization), a condition with only a visualization of the agreement ratings (Agreement only), a condition with
only a  visualization of  the   quality ratings   (Quality   only), and   a condition   with   a combination   of  both
visualizations, agreement ratings and quality ratings (Combination).

Table 1: 2 x 2 factorial design of the experiment.

      Availability of rating visualization                                       Quality
                                                                   NO                                YES
         Agreement              NOYES              no VisualizationAgreement only       Quality onlyCombination

Material
         Discussion forum: We used a discussion from an online forum that is part of the Web portal of a
German   news   magazine.  The  discussion    is about  pro  and  cons  of  the three-tier school  system, which   is a
controversially discussed topic in German public discourse. We took the first 137 original posts and coded them
for their position (pro or contra the discussed three-tier school system, Interrater-Reliability Cohen's  = .64)
and the arguments contained therein.
         Arguments: Based on the material we identified eleven main arguments, speaking for or against the
three-tier school system (e.g., "Leveling down is bad and has negative consequences. It results in overload or
underload." as an argument pro three-tier school system; "It is bad to select pupils too early because their
potential might be unexploited." as an argument contra three-tier school system).
         Ratings: In a pre-study (N = 67), all discussion posts have been rated on their quality on a five point
Likert-scale (1 very low to 5 very high). Out of the pro-posts and out of the contra-posts we identified the ten
qualitative best posts (so called TOP 10 posts), five of pro and contra each. All main arguments can be found in
these TOP 10 posts. For reasons of experimental systematicity, the ranges of ratings on agreement and quality
have been adapted in a way that, for example, all posts could be identified separately in the visualization.
         List display: The discussion was presented in a simulated online forum environment and the discussion
posts were presented in all conditions in a list of their headings in their original chronological order. In the no
Visualization condition only the list display was presented.
         Visualizations:  Participants  in  the   three    other conditions   (Agreement     only, Quality   only, and
Combination)   were   additionally  provided     with embedded     visualized   rating dimensions.   The  visualization
represented all discussion contributions as dots along continua, with the position of each dot indicating the
average ratings that a contribution received.

Measures
As dependent variables we measured reading times, attitude strength, and recall. Reading times include three
different types: the reading time of the pro-posts and the contra-posts, and the reading time of the TOP 10 posts.

© ISLS                                                                                                              67
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                            Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

           Reading time PRO-CON. Reading time PRO-CON was measured for testing the impact of different
types   of visualizations   on bipolar    navigation.   We  measured  and   compared   reading    time    PRO-CON    by
calculating the difference of the reading time of pro-posts and the reading time of the contra-posts.
           Attitude strength. The attitude indication was represented by a word pair ranging from weak (= 1) to
strong (= 5) attitudes about the subject matter. The attitude strength was calculated as the difference between the
pre-discussion    attitude strength  and   the post-discussion attitude strength. Zero  indicates    that there was  no
difference in attitude strengths, whereas negative values indicate an enhancement of attitude strengths, and
positive values indicate a weakening of attitude strengths.
           Reading time TOP 10. We measured reading times of the TOP 10 posts. In this way, it was possible to
test the impacts of different types of visualizations on unipolar navigation.
           Recall. We measured free recall of arguments. For that, participants wrote down as many arguments
out of  the    whole discussion     they could    remember.  For measurement,    we   coded   the number    of  recalled
arguments with a self-developed coding scheme (Interrater-Reliability Cohen's  = .72).

Procedure
We recruited participants from a database of all university students from a German university via mailing list
and asked them to take part in an "online discussion forum - study" where they would have to read an online
discussion forum. All instructions and materials were presented on a computer screen. Each participant was
randomly assigned to one of the four experimental conditions. After having read the instructions, participants
indicated their pre-attitudes about the three-tier school system. Then, all participants had 20 minutes time to
navigate freely in the online discussion forum. To avoid them rushing through the posts without reading, they
were  told  it is hardly   possible to read   all 137 posts within 20 minutes.   Participants in  the no  Visualization
condition saw an online forum without any ratings, but only with a list display. Participants in the Agreement
only condition were additionally provided with visualized average ratings of agreement of all discussion posts.
Each dot in the visualization represented one corresponding post (see Figure 1). In contrast, participants in the
Quality only condition saw a visualization with quality ratings of all discussion posts. Again, each dot in the
visualization  represented   the  average  rating   the corresponding discussion  post  received.    Participants in the
Combination condition were provided with visualized ratings of both, agreement and quality (see Figure 2)
additionally to the list display. Again, in the visualization each dot marked one corresponding discussion post.
The visualization in the Combination condition was two-dimensional. That means, on the horizontal axis the
agreement ratings were shown, and on the vertical axis the quality ratings were shown.
           Participants could access forum posts either by scrolling through the list display, or by clicking on a dot
in  the visualization. Only    by   clicking,  the corresponding post opened   on  the bottom     of the  screen. In all
visualization conditions, the headings of the posts could be made visible by moving the mouse over a dot of the
visualization. Posts that have been read were marked in orange in both the list display and the visualization.
           After  20 minutes   with    the online   forum,  post-attitudes about  the three-tier  school  system   were
measured. Then, participants performed the recall task. For that, they were told to keep in mind that arguments
should not be confused with posts as one single post could include none, one or more arguments. At the end,
participants were thanked and debriefed.

                Figure 1. Screenshot of the presented online forum in the Agreement only condition.

© ISLS                                                                                                               68
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                        Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

               Figure 2. Screenshot of the presented online forum in the Combination condition.

Results
The preliminary analysis and the main results were based on logfile data (opening frequencies, reading time
PRO-CON and reading time TOP 10). Navigation and recall measures were analyzed using analyses of variance
(ANOVAs). Before addressing the main results, the preliminary analysis of the opening frequencies investigated
in  how  far participants in the three  conditions with visualizations    (Agreement  only vs. Quality only    vs.
Combination) used the visualization vs. the list display for navigation.
         Preliminary analysis. We explored if participants show differences in using the visualizations or using
the list display to navigate  within the discussion. The measurement       expressed the difference between    the
amount of post openings via the visualization and the amount of post openings via the list display. This means
that positive values indicate that participants used mainly the visualization, whereas negative values indicate
that participants used mainly the list display for navigation.
         To explore the difference in opening frequencies via the visualization and via the list display, a one-
factorial ANOVA with condition (Agreement only vs. Quality only vs. Combination) as independent variable
and the difference of opening frequencies (opening frequencies for the visualization minus opening frequencies
for the list display) as dependent variable was conducted. Results show a significant main effect for condition
(F(2, 92) = 5.75, p = .004, partial ² = .11). Subjects in the Agreement only condition (M = 5.81, SD = 16.94) as
well as subjects in the Quality only condition (M = 1.87, SD = 16.02) mainly used the visualization, whereas
subjects in the Combination condition (M = -8.19, SD = 18.02) used the list display for navigation (see Figure
3).
         Pairwise comparisons using Tukey-HSD revealed that there was no difference between the Agreement
only condition and the Quality only condition (p = .630) regarding the opening frequencies via visualization and
via list display. However, subjects in the Combination condition used the visualization less frequently compared
to subjects in the Agreement only condition (p = .004) and marginally less frequently compared to subjects in
the Quality only condition (p = .055).

    Figure 3. Opening frequencies difference (visualization versus list display) for the three conditions with
                                                visualization.

© ISLS                                                                                                         69
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                 Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

        Reading time PRO-CON.     In Hypothesis 1,  it was predicted  that the presence     of an      agreement
visualization will support bipolar navigation: Participants in the conditions with agreement visualization will
show more balanced reading times, meaning that they equally distribute their overall reading time to pro posts
and to con posts. To test this prediction, we computed a two-factorial ANOVA with Agreement (agreement
visualization: no vs. yes) and Quality (quality visualization: no vs. yes) as independent variables and reading
time PRO-CON as dependent variable. In line with the hypothesis, the analysis for the reading time PRO-CON
revealed a significant main effect, F(1, 123) = 8.37, p = .005, partial ² = .06. As shown in Figure 4, participants
in the conditions with agreement visualization (M = 27.27, SD = 198.85) showed more balanced reading time
PRO-CON than participants in the conditions without agreement visualization (M = 130.33, SD = 199.08).

                     Figure 4. Reading time PRO-CON (in sec.) in the four conditions.

        Attitude strength. We hypothesized that participants in the conditions with the agreement visualization
will show a weakening in attitude strength, whereas participants in the conditions    without  the     agreement
visualization will show an enhancement in attitude strength (Hypothesis 2). We analyzed this hypothesis using a
two-factorial ANOVA with Agreement (agreement visualization: no vs. yes) and Quality (quality visualization:
no vs. yes) as independent variables and the difference of pre-discussion attitude strength and post-discussion
attitude strength as dependent variable. Contrary to our expectations, no difference between the four conditions
was revealed: Participants with the agreement visualization (M = -0.03, SD = 0.87) showed the same attitude
strength difference between pre-discussion and post-discussion as did participants in the conditions where the
agreement visualization was not present (M = -0.19, SD = 0.78). There were no differences for agreement
visualization (F(1, 123) = 1.18, ns), for quality visualization (F(1, 123) < 1, ns) and no interaction effect (F(1,
123) < 1, ns). This means that no change in attitude strength was found in any of the four conditions.

        Reading time TOP  10. It  was  hypothesized  that the quality visualization    will support      unipolar
navigation. This means that for conditions with quality visualization, it was predicted that participants will show
longer reading times for the TOP 10 posts than participants in the conditions without quality visualization
(Hypothesis 3). A two-factorial ANOVA with Agreement (agreement visualization: no vs. yes) and Quality
(quality visualization: no vs. yes) as independent variables and reading time TOP 10 as dependent variable was
conducted. The analysis yielded the expected highly significant main effect, F(1, 123) = 56.91, p < .001, partial
2= .32. Participants in the conditions with quality visualization (M = 379.16, SD = 214.05) read TOP 10 posts
longer than participants in the conditions without quality visualization (M = 157.58, SD = 103.08); see Figure 5.

                      Figure 5. Reading time TOP 10 (in sec.) in the four conditions.

© ISLS                                                                                                       70
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                                Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

         Recall. Since TOP 10 posts cover all crucial arguments in the discussion, we expected a similar result
pattern for reading time TOP 10 and for recall. Therefore, it was hypothesized that participants in the conditions
with quality visualization will show better recall for the crucial discussion arguments than participants in the
conditions  without   quality visualization.   To  test   Hypothesis    4, we  computed     a two-factorial    ANOVA      with
Agreement (agreement visualization: no vs. yes) and Quality (quality visualization: no vs. yes) as independent
variables and  recall  as  dependent     variable. Contrary     to our  expectations,   no  differences    between  the   four
conditions were found (no Visualization: M = 3.56, SD = 1.32; Agreement only: M = 3.50, SD = 1.63; Quality
only: M = 3.74, SD = 1.83; Combination: M = 3.46, SD = 1.67). Participants with the quality visualization
(M = 3.46, SD = 1.76) recalled the same amount of arguments as did participants in the conditions where the
quality visualization  was   not   present (M = 3.53,    SD   =  1.47). There   were    neither differences    for agreement
(F(1, 123) = 1.15, ns), nor for quality (F(1, 123) < 1, ns) and no interaction effect (F(1, 123) < 1, ns). This
means that overall participants in all four conditions recalled the same amount of arguments.

Discussion
We have tested an awareness tool that employs visualized user ratings of discussion posts. In order to test
whether different forms of visualizations give rise to different navigation styles, we conducted an experiment
that varied the presence or absence of an agreement rating visualization and a quality rating visualization. A
number of results provide insights into the design of awareness tools and its implications for learner navigation.
First, results indicate that making agreement ratings available leads to bipolar navigation, that is, readers of the
discussion forum tended to read both pro and con contributions of the controversial discussion to the same
degree.  Ensuring  balanced   attention    to both    viewpoints   pertaining  to a  controversial   issue  is  an important
antecedent of unbiased opinion formation and critical thinking (Schwind, Buder, Cress, & Hesse, 2012). Hence,
the current study gives some insight into how the design of awareness tools can contribute to an open-minded
stance of learners towards a controversial topic. Second, the study could show that the availability of quality
ratings leads to unipolar navigation, that is, readers of the discussion forum spent more time reading the TOP 10
posts once this information was made salient. Third, our results show that combining both rating visualizations
in a two-dimensional display comes with a cost: This could be the main reason why learners in the Combination
condition seemed to prefer a standard list display for navigation. Taken together, the navigation results show
that the design of awareness tools can exert different types of representational guidance, but that the complexity
of a graphical representation could be a roadblock that might prevent a group awareness tool from unfolding its
full potential. For instance, in the present study the group awareness tool did not affect attitude strength and
recall. The  reason   for the lack    of  effects on    cognitive  variables might    be explained    by   the  status of our
participants  as  relatively passive   recipients  who    could    only read   discussion   posts.  Our   prior experiments
involving active participants have shown that an awareness tool also impacts individual and perceived group
preferences.  This  would    be   in line with    the   general notion  that active   participation   is a key  to  effective
collaboration (Cohen,     1994).  However,    the  lack   of cognitive  effects   can also   be explained   by  the    specific
paradigm used in the study: The measurements for the cognitive variables (i.e. attitude strength and recall) were
delayed measurements. Therefore, it might be interesting to investigate in follow-up studies if it is possible to
affect  cognitive variables   when    directly measured      after the  confrontation    with   the group   awareness     tool.
Another question for further research is whether learners with higher involvement and/or interest in the topic
show    more  effects on  cognitive   variables    than  the  student   population   in the   present study.   Thus,   topical
involvement and interest might be moderators for the found results.
         The current study employed an experimental approach that allowed us to carefully control for opening
frequencies  and  reading    times   with regard  to    each discussion  post. While    the  experimental   control   had the
advantage that navigational behavior could be assessed in greater detail than before, it also gave rise to a
number of limitations having to do with the selection of participants and the temporal nature of the study. First,
participants were not self-selected. This is in contrast to real-world online forums in which it is likely that
readers will have a personal interest in the topic under discussion. It would be interesting to see whether the
results that we have found (and even more, the results that we haven't found) could be shown with a sample of
participants who have a vested interest in the controversy. Second, participants were confronted with a static
picture of a controversial group discussion. While it could be said that even in real-world online forum each
reader only sees a static picture of the discussion when logging in, it cannot be denied that there is an ongoing
dynamic in a discussion that unfolds over repeat visits in a forum. It would be fascinating to see how a rating-
based   group awareness      tool would   fare as     a support   mechanism    of  a  large,  controversial    online  forum,
particularly at the early and formative stages of discussion. Will the distribution of agreement ratings lead to
changes in the type of posts that are made? Will high-quality posts spur or inhibit further discussions? These
questions can only be tapped into by employing a rating-based group awareness tool in an actual online forum.
Consequently, transferring group awareness tools into the "real world" is an obvious step once the mechanisms
of these tools are better understood.

© ISLS                                                                                                                    71
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                          Volume 1: Full Papers & Symposia

         Collecting user ratings has become a widespread phenomenon in Web 2.0 environments. However,
most systems make use of relative primitive ratings (5-star ratings or "Like it" ratings). We set out to explore
whether different forms of representational guidance can be achieved by using more specific rating dimensions.
Our results lend some support to the idea that navigation of learners in large online environments can be shaped
in educationally meaningful ways.

References
Buder, J. (2007). Net-based knowledge-communication in groups. Zeitschrift für Psychologie, 215(4), 209-217.
Buder, J., & Bodemer, D. (2008). Supporting controversial CSCL discussions with augmented group awareness
         tools. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 3, 123-139.
Buder, J., & Bodemer, D. (2011). Group awareness tools for controversial CSCL discussions: Dissociating
         rating effects and visualized feedback effects. In H. Spada, G. Stahl, N. Miyake, & N. Law (Eds.),
         Connecting    Computer-Supported      Collaborative   Learning     to  Policy   and  Practice:   CSCL2011
         Conference    Proceedings    (Vol. I, pp.  358-365). Hong    Kong,    China:  International Society of  the
         Learning Sciences.
Cohen,   E.  G. (1994).    Restructuring  the  classroom:  Conditions   for productive    small  groups.  Review  of
         Educational Research, 64, 1-35.
Dehler, J., Bodemer, D., Buder, J., & Hesse, F. W. (2011). Guiding knowledge communication in CSCL via
         group knowledge awareness. Computers in Human Behavior, 27, 1068-1078.
Dourish, P., & Chalmers, M. (1994). Running out of space: Models of information navigation. In G. Cockton, S.
         W. Draper, G. R. S. Weir (Eds.), Proceedings of the HCI Conference. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
         University Press.
Engelmann, T., Dehler, J., Bodemer, D., & Buder, J. (2009). Knowledge awareness in CSCL: A psychological
         perspective. Computers in Human Behavior, 25, 949-960.
Gutwin, C., & Greenberg, S. (2002). A descriptive framework of workspace awareness for real-time groupware.
         Computer-Supported Cooperative Work, 11, 411-446.
Heath, C., & Luff, P. (1992). Collaboration and control: Crisis management and multimedia technology in
         London Underground Line control rooms. Journal of Computer-Supported Cooperative Work, 1, 24-
         48.
Kiesler, S.,  Siegel,  J., &  McGuire,    T.   W.  (1984). Social  psychological    aspects   of computer-mediated
         communication. American Psychologist, 39, 1123-1134.
Kramer, A. D., Oh, L. M., & Fussell, S. R. (2006). Using linguistic features to measure presence in computer-
         mediated communication (Research Paper 53) Retrieved from Human-Computer Interaction Institute
         website: http://repository.cmu.edu/hcii/53
Phielix, C., Prins, F. J., Kirschner,  P. A.,  Erkens, G., &  Jaspers, J.  (2011).  Group  awareness   of social and
         cognitive  performance    in  a  CSCL   environment:  Effects  of  a  peer   feedback   and reflection  tool.
         Computers in Human Behavior, 27, 1087-1102.
Sangin,  M., Molinari,  G.,  Nüssli,  M.-A.,   & Dillenbourg, P.   (2011).  Facilitating peer knowledge   modeling:
         Effects of a knowledge awareness tool on collaborative learning outcomes and processes. Computers in
         Human Behavior, 27, 1059-1067.
Schwind,  C.,   Buder, J.,  Cress, U., &    Hesse, F.  W.  (2012). Preference-inconsistent    recommendations:   An
         effective approach for reducing confirmation bias and stimulating divergent thinking? Computers &
         Education, 58, 787-796.
Suthers, D., &  Hundhausen,    C.   (2003).  An  empirical study   of the  effects of representational  guidance  on
         collaborative learning. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 12, 183­219.
Walther, J. B., & Tidwell, L. C. (1995). Nonverbal cues in computer-mediated communication, and the effect of
         chronemics on relational communication. Journal of Organizational Computing, 5, 355-378.

Acknowledgments
This research was financed and supported by the ScienceCampus Tübingen "Informational Environments". We
would like to thank Susanne Stoll and Tim Höfling for their support.

© ISLS                                                                                                            72
