CSCL 2013 Proceedings                 Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

       Designing Learning Environments for Knowledge Building:

                  Inquiry Discourse of Chinese Tertiary Classes

        Chunlin LEI, Carol K.K.Chan, Jan van Aalst, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China
                              leichl@hku.hk; ckkchan@hku.hk; vanaalst@hku.hk

         Abstract:  This  study  examined   the  effects  of two  designed    learning environments    for
         knowledge  building.  Two  groups  of  first year Chinese   tertiary students learning  business
         English were engaged in a strong form of a knowledge-building environment (Principle-based
         Learning  Environment,   PBLE)     and  a weak    form   of  knowledge-building     environment
         (Knowledge Forum Learning Environment, KFLE), respectively. Inquiry thread analysis of
         the online discourse suggested PBLE students were more able to self-initiate goals for inquiry,
         improve ideas, and achieve toward deeper collective knowledge advances. The design issues
         including the importance and manifestation of knowledge building principles are discussed.

Introduction and Background
CSCL   studies involving  educational   interventions are  expected  to provide   information on   how  a  learning
environment is created, what effects it brings about, and explanation of factors contributing to success or failure.
A striking feature of design research is to design effective learning environments with principles. Knowledge
building (Scardamalia and Bereiter, 2006) focuses on creation of new knowledge, representing one of the key
examples for educational innovation. Scardamalia (2002) proposed 12 knowledge building principles for the
knowledge building community. However, as the principles are usually not sufficiently detailed to determine
every  design  decision (Edelson, 2002,  p. 106),  teachers  may  find  it hard  to transform the  principles into
classroom practices. For example, the principles are intertwined and may appear unclear and vague in terms of
social practices (Hakkarainen,   2009); Chan's  project  (2011), the Hong     Kong  Knowledge    Building  Teacher
Network revealed that there were many false starts and surface understanding of principles. Even though ample
evidence has  been  collected to delineate  the successful implementation     of knowledge   building  approach in
schools (Lee et. al., 2006; van Aalst, 2009; Zhang et. al., 2007; 2009), knowledge building still poses great
challenges and demands on teachers (Zhang, 2009). Therefore, more examples illuminating knowledge building
classroom and online practices informed by knowledge building principles are needed. This study intends to
describe a case of designing environments for knowledge building in higher education setting and address one
research question:  what  are the  differences  on student   discourse  between   an   innovative, principle-based
knowledge  building  environment   (PBLE)   and  a less  innovative, only  technology   (in this case, Knowledge
Forum) supported learning environment (KFLE), and how are they manifested?

Method
Two classes (n=60) of first year university students learning business English in a Sino-British Educational
Program in Mainland China participated in the study. In view of the innovative nature of knowledge building
(like the Copernican Revolution, profoundly different from even the best of traditional and modern classrooms,
Scardamalia, 2002, p.77), and the didactic past instructional experience of the Mainland Chinese students, we
adopted a quasi-experimental design in which Group 1 (n=30) was exposed to a strong principle supported
knowledge building learning environment (PBLE) and Group 2 (n=30) was exposed to a weak, KF technology
supported learning environment (KFLE); KFLE is less innovative, but still a leap from traditional classroom
because technology was used to support learning and communication. We argue such a design is appropriate to

© ISLS                                                                                                          69
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                      Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

identify to what   extent   an innovative   educational  model  can   be accepted   by  the  students  who    are new   to
collaborative knowledge building.
         Both    classes were   taught  by the  same   teacher in a  two-semester    course,  entitled "Introduction    to
Business", which is a franchised course from the Sino-British program, aiming to strengthen students' business
knowledge as well as communicative and critical thinking skills. Each semester consisted of 14 weeks, with two
consecutive lessons (1.5 hours) per week. In both classes, students followed the same curriculum: learning
business   concepts,  holding  discussions   and  doing  group  work    (projects). After  class, they  wrote  notes    on
Knowledge    Forum    (KF),    which is  a computer-supported     platform   for collaborative  learning.  While     KF is
considered an integral part of knowledge building, we employed it for both PBLE and KFLE. To design and
differentiate the PBLE and the KFLE, we focused on three key dimensions of curriculum, engagement, and
reflection  in   particular premising   on  three KB     principles: improvable     ideas, community    knowledge     and
collective, reflective assessment. (1) We implemented inquiry-based course curriculum (case studies, authentic
questions, etc.) for both environments and students tried to answer questions and raised their own questions as
well. However, in alignment with the knowledge building principle of improvable ideas, PBLE students were
explicitly scaffolded to focus on ideas. They were not only asked to make their own ideas public on KF, but
were encouraged to work with those ideas. They posited an idea has a life; and sufficient time was allowed for
them to nurture ideas; elaborate, refine, and revise those ideas; and track the evolution path of them. KFLE
students, as typical for tertiary courses, also focused on getting good ideas but they tended to miss out the notion
that ideas  are  objects  that are improvable.(2)    For engagement,    both  groups  were   encouraged    to  participate
actively; specifically, PBLE students were acculturated into a community ethos and regarding KF as the public
space for idea improvement. They were encouraged to take on collective responsibility to build on each other, to
improve    their initial understanding,    and to solve  problems    in  the  common    goal  of  advancing    collective
knowledge.     KFLE   students   were   required  to answer    teacher  questions   and    individual effort  was    much
appreciated. (3) All students were involved in reflective presentations, with PBLE focusing on meta-discourse
and KFLE on task-accomplishment. From Week 3 to Week 9, an 8-minute or so presentation was conducted by
selected student   at the   beginning   of each  lesson. For   PBLE    students,  reflection as a  way   of   concurrent,
transformative assessment, helps them think about what they have learnt, conceive of the connections between
new  and   prior  knowledge,    and  set possible  new   goals for   inquiry. KFLE    student   were   not informed     by
knowledge building principles and might present in class his/her view of how a task has been completed or how
a problem has been solved, without deliberately identifying the knowledge gaps.

Data Sources and Results
Before the study, we obtained the National Matriculation Test scores of the students and an independent sample
t-test showed there was no significant statistical difference in terms of the students' baseline abilities, t(58)=.50,
p=.62. To compare the discourse process of the designed environments, we included students' forum notes and
classified them into inquiry threads. An inquiry thread was defined as a cluster of notes addressing the same
principle topic or problem in the communal space (Zhang et al., 2007). Thread analysis has been widely used to
help characterize knowledge building dynamics and track collective knowledge growth.
         Student forum discourse during semester one focused on a core theme "Business Environment". Six
views (online    note-writing  space)   were   established, namely   "What    is business?",  "Egg    theory", "Political
environment",    "Economic     environment",   "Social Environment"     and   "Technological   Environment".      In these
views, PBLE students wrote a total of 919 notes, and KFLE students 472 notes; apparently, PBLE students were
more productive in note creation. To further investigate knowledge building dynamics, we coded all KF notes
into inquiry threads. This iterative process resulted in identification of 51 and 30 threads in PBLE and KFLE
respectively. Inquiry thread maps (omitted for space consideration) were drawn subsequently to indicate how

© ISLS                                                                                                                  70
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                      Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

many notes were created around a thematic topic, how many students were involved in the discussion, how long
the discussion lasted, and the interconnections among the threads (similar to Zhang et al., 2007). However,
unlike students immersed in knowledge building for a long period of time and able to initiate all inquiry threads
(Zhang et al., 2009), the students in this study were new to knowledge building and the teacher adopted a more
eclectic instructional design. He pre-specified some inquiry themes in line with the curriculum topics and,
simultaneously    encouraged     emergent,   student self-defined         trajectories of inquiry,  which  were       particularly
emphasized in PBLE. As a result, 60.8% (31 of 51) of the inquiry threads in PBLE were self-initiated by the
students and only 26.7% (8 of 30) in KFLE were self-initiated by students. The other inquiry threads were
started by the teacher.
         To examine the deepening moves of discourse in the inquiry threads, we analyzed the threads informed
by four knowledge building principles: use of authoritative information, improvable ideas, idea diversity, and
epistemic agency. Based on KB literature and thorough reviews of all the inquiry threads, we developed a
coding scheme with different categories and levels indicating the quality of the inquiry discourse (Table 1).

Table1: The coding scheme for the inquiry threads
Category        Level                                                  Description
  Use of           1     Limited indication of use of information; or simply refer to a web link or suggest sources;  informationis not pertinent to the issue in question
authoritative      2     Indicate relevant sources; copy and paste information, relevant but lack of understanding and digestion
information        3     Contribute authoritative information in a digested and constructive manner; use referenced notes; useinformation to improve theories
                   1     Most of the ideas are scattered, fragmented, and unfocused; claims and assertions from students'common sense
Improvableideas    2     Quite a number of build-on discourses, with examples, investigations, or meaningful information tosupport and show understanding of a business topic, situation, phenomenon, case, etc
                   3     Discourse indicating inquiry developed in a deepening way, forming coherent, refined views on businessconcepts, situations, phenomena, etc; revision of or improvement on theories and models
                   1     Simply show disagreement or being cynical without providing sufficient reasons
Idea diversity     2     Provide some other lens to questions or problems, with good reasons backing up argument, hypothesis,conjectures, etc
                   3     Discern critically both aspects of the phenomena, situations or business cases; use another theory toexplain, forming a holistic view on existing theories and models
                   1     Ask factual, information-seeking questions; mostly general description, not negotiation of ideas betweenparticipants
 Epistemicagency   2     Show doubt, confusion, puzzlement and seek clarification and better understanding of a businesssituation, phenomenon, case, concept, etc
                   3     Set goals for inquiry; meta-cognitive; review and monitor group discourse development; evaluate andsummarize; compare different models; meta-discourse

         One rater coded all the threads; a second rater coded 30% of the threads, with an inter-rater reliability
of.83 (Pearson's     correlation coefficient). The   mean          scores and standard    deviations  of  each       KB-principle
category are shown in Table 2. Multivariate analyses conducted indicating significant results following by
univariate  analyses.  Significant    differences were    obtained     for  Epistemic     Agency,   F (1, 79)  =11.0,     p<.01;
marginal significance for Use of Authoritative Information, F (1, 79) = 3.9, p=.053; and Improbable Ideas, F (1,
79) = 3.7, p=.058; while no significant difference was found for Idea Diversity F (1, 79) = 1.4, p=.24. These
results suggest that the PBLE class was more able to ask questions and seek explanations, set forth ideas and
theories, and be committed to sustained knowledge advancement with support of outer resources.

Table 2: Comparison of knowledge building discourse between PBLE and TELE
                                 Use of                    Improvable           Idea Diversity          Epistemic Agency
                          Authoritative Info.              Ideas
PBLE (n=51)      M(SD)            1.6 (.14)                 2.0 (.10)                   1.4 (.14)              1.8 (.09)
TELE (n=30)     M(SD)             1.2 (.19)                 1.7 (.13)                   1.2 (.18)              1.3 (.12)

© ISLS                                                                                                                          71
                                               Mean Score of KB Discourse
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                                                          Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

       To  obtain an overall  picture                                           of forum         discourse,        we conducted           factor analysis for the 4 items of
KB-principle, which led to one factor structure (we call knowledge building discourse) with 71.6% of the
variance explained. We then classified inquiry threads into three phases depending on the date of the last written
note in a thread, namely Phase 1(Week 1 to 4), Phase 2 (between Week 4 and 8) and Phase 3 (beyond Week 8).
As a result, PBLE produced 10, 25, and 16 threads during Phase 1, 2 and 3 respectively; and KFLE created 6, 13,
and 11 threads. A 2 (Environment)×3 (Discourse Phase) ANOVA was performed to assess whether knowledge
building discourse could be predicted from learning environment (PBLE vs. KFLE), phases of discourse (Phase
1, 2 and 3), and the interaction between these two factors. This analysis of variance revealed a significant main
effect for discourse phases, F (2, 75) = 9.2, p<.001, 2=.20; for environments as well, F (1, 75) = 6.0, p<.05,
2=.07; but no significant interaction effect, F (2, 75) = .38, p= .68, 2=.01. Figure 1 shows the mean scores of
knowledge building discourse across three discourse phases in two learning environments.

                                                                                                     PBLE       TELE

                                                                           2.5

                                                                                                                                     2.17
                                                                            2

                                                                                                                1.68                 1.61
                                                                           1.5
                                                                                                                1.30
                                                                                            1.13
                                                                            1
                                                                                            0.92

                                                                           0.5
                                                                                      Phase 1              Phase 2             Phase 3

              Figure 1.  Mean scores of knowledge building discourse across three phases

Conclusion
With the PBLE and KFLE design, both classes were engaged in inquiry and discussion (generating 919 and 472
notes respectively) and improved the quality of their discourse over time (see Figure 1), which is a sharp
contrast to and far better than (we argue) the usual teaching environment, characterized by teacher as the sage on
stage and limited teacher-student/student-student communication. Inquiry thread analyses indicated that PBLE
students demonstrated much more agency for inquiry, used information more constructively, and refined ideas
more sustainably than their counterparts in KFLE, which on one hand, removed our fear that whether Mainland
Chinese students could accept and adapt to such an innovative notion of knowledge building; on the other hand,
shed light on the importance of knowledge building principles in the design process. This study demonstrates
how instructional design can be aligned with knowledge building principles. Thread analyses also suggest some
principles, such as epistemic agency, could be manifested saliently after the instruction, while others such as
idea diversity might not appear so salient.

References
Chan, C. (2011). Bridging research and practice: Implementing and sustaining knowledge building in Hong
       Kong classrooms. Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 6, 147-186.
Edelson, D. C. (2002). Design Research: what we learn when we engage in design. Journal of the Learning
       Sciences, 11, 105-121.
van Aalst, J. (2009). Distinguishing knowledge-sharing, knowledge-construction, and knowledge-creation
       discourses. Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 4, 259-287.
Scardamalia, M. (2002). Collective cognitive responsibility for the advancement of knowledge. In B. Smith
       (Ed.), Liberal Education in a knowledge society (pp. 67-98)
Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (2006). Knowledge building. In R.K.Sawyer (Ed.), The Cambridge handbook of
       the learning sciences (pp. 97-115). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Zhang, J. W.,Scardamalia, M., Lamon, M., R. & Reeve, R.(2007). Socio-cognitive dynamics of knowledge
       building in the work of 9 and 10-year-olds. Education Tech Research Dev55, 117-145.

© ISLS                                                                                                                                                                    72
