CSCL 2013 Proceedings                  Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

     Facilitating belief change via computer-supported collaborative
                                        knowledge-building
                   Pei-Jung Li, National Chengchi University, Taiwan, 97102006@nccu.edu.tw
                 Chih-Hsuan Chang, National Central University, Taiwan, chsuchang@gmail.com
                 Huang-Yao Hong, National Chengchi University, Taiwan, hyhong@nccu.edu.tw
                   Hsien-Ta Lin, National Chengchi University, Taiwan, htlin.nccu@gmail.com

          Abstract: In this study, we investigated prospective teacher-education students' belief change
          in a CSCL environment enabled by knowledge building pedagogy. Data mainly came from a
          belief survey and students' online discussion. The results indicated that engaging students in
          collaborative work with knowledge was conducive to making their teaching beliefs become
          more student-centered.

Introduction
Quality teaching is essential to effective education and is deeply influenced by teachers' teaching beliefs (Clark
& Peterson, 1986; Pajares, 1992; Richardson, Anders, Tidwell & Lloyd, 1991; Stuart & Thurlow, 2000; Wilson,
1990). Teaching beliefs, however, are difficult to change and are shaped by one's past learning experiences
(Entwistle, Skinner, Entwistle, & Orr, 2000; Nespor, 1987; Rath, 2001; Schaefer & Zygmont, 2003; Stuart &
Thurlow,   2000).  Thus, during  the stage  of teacher  education, it is   essential to examine   teacher-education
students' teaching-related beliefs, and more importantly to help them develop more informed and diversified
teaching beliefs. To help teacher-education students reflect on their own teaching beliefs while experiencing
other possible kinds of teaching beliefs, this study developed a knowledge building environment that focused on
sustained production and improvement of ideas of value in a community (Scardamalia & Bereiter, 2003)--i.e.,
Knowledge     Forum, a computer-supported   collaborative  knowledge­building     environment.    It  is posited  that
learning   in  a more  socio-constructivist manner     would provide     teacher-education    students    with  more
opportunities to collectively reflect on teaching beliefs and eventually construct more informed teaching beliefs.

Method
Participants (N=28) were teacher-education students taking a course about science teaching. The course was 18
weeks long and aimed to help students develop more informed teaching beliefs and practices regarding student-
centered   and constructivist-oriented teaching beliefs and  practices.    Previous  studies showed      that teacher-
education student's teaching beliefs were more teacher-oriented and less informed. The instructional design was
based   on  knowledge  building  pedagogy,   with   Knowledge  Forum       (KF)  being  employed     to  complement
knowledge building via sustained idea improvement. All students' ideas and discussion related to improving
teaching practice were recorded in a KF database. To make the course more efficient within limited time span,
in the beginning of the course, students were paired and were required to practice their teaching (i.e., to co-teach)
twice--therefore, there was 28 times of practices in total, with practices 1-14 being referred to as the first phase,
and practices 15-28 as the second phase. During their practices, students were guided by knowledge building
pedagogy to discuss and reflect on their teaching online in KF. Both the instructor and students worked as
community members. In particular, the instructor served as a facilitator to engage students in online discussion
and to improve their teaching practice. Everyone could freely propose questions and comments in KF for deep
discussion and reflection. Data mainly came from a pre-post belief survey and online posting in KF as described
below:
1. Analysis of the belief survey. The belief survey contains the following questions which were adapted from
Tsai's (2002) study with only minor text revision to suit for this study: (a) What do you think is an ideal way to
teaching science, and why? (b) What do you think are the key factors to ensure successful science teaching, and
why? (c) What constitutes an ideal science teacher, and why? (d) What do you think is an ideal way to learn
science, and why? (e) What do you think are the key factors to ensure successful science learning, and why? (f)
What does an ideal science learning environment meant to you, and why? The survey data were analyzed using
a   pre-determined coding  scheme  (see  Table  1). Using  50%  of    this data, the  inter-rater reliability  (kappa
coefficient) were computed to be 0.92 (p<.01).

Table 1. Coding Scheme of teaching beliefs

        Category       Example
Teacher-centered       "[Teachers should provide] complete laboratory materials and various equipments".
teaching               "[Teachers  should]  transfer basic  knowledge,     by giving    lectures  and helping
beliefs                students establish knowledge base".

                                                                                                                    
© ISLS                                                                                                            73
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                    Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

                         "Teaching through demonstration and experiment is important."
Student-centered         "Open and comfortable environment."
teaching beliefs         "Respond   to   students'      differences  and  needs  by  using  suitable  teaching
                         pedagogy".
                         "Stimulate learning motivation and curiosity".

2. Analysis on online posting (with a focus on learning processes). Online posting was analyzed via multiple
ways. First, we analyzed student participation patterns by employing descriptive analysis (e.g., number of notes
contributed, number of notes read, and number of notes built-on). Second, we analyzed the function and quality
of feedback for the two phases of teaching practices. In terms of function of feedback, we adopted the same
coding scheme used for the above survey to code teaching beliefs, including feedback for improving "teacher-
centered" teaching practice and feedback for improving "student-centered" practice (see Table 2). Using notes
as units of analysis, the inter-rater reliability of this coding was computed to be 0.94 (p<.01) (using using 50%
of this data and kappa reliability coefficient). In terms of the quality of feedback, we employed the coding
scheme by Dempsey, Driscoll, and Swindell (1993) which contains four evaluative categories, including "no
feedback", "simple verification feedback", "specific feedback" and "elaborated feedback", with the latter ones
representing better quality feedback (see Table 3 for rating procedure). This analysis used sentences as units of
analysis, the inter-coder reliability (using 50% of the data and Spearman correlation) was computed to be 0.91
(p<.01). Pair-sample t-test was performed to examine whether there were any significant differences in terms of
both the function and quality of feedback between the two different phases of teaching practice.

Table 2: Definition of each coding category regarding function of feedback posted on Knowledge Forum

       Category                                         Examples of student answers
                       The two teachers' classroom management was good, and the managing processes also
    Teacher-centered   went well, too.(s11)If I were you, I would explain the purpose and principles of this experiment first.
                       Then, I would explain the process of the experiment, and after that, try it out. (s09)
                       The designed content of the lesson was inviting, which increased the interaction
                       between students and the teacher really well, and also made the students to think more
                       actively. (s14)
    Student-centered   After finishing the learning activities using learning sheet, the teacher and the whole
                       class should go through the questions again and rethink about the activity, to  give the
                       students time to reflect on what they did and ideas they generated based on their
                       observation; this is great! (s15)
Note: The " s + number " represents a particular student in the class.
  
Table 3: Coding scheme regarding quality of feedback posted online in Knowledge Forum

    Category       Definition                             Examples from the answers of student teachers
    No             Presents a question and requires a     Magnets are marvelous things, they make me think of
    Feedback       response, but does not indicate        the magnet board and fishing game I played with
                   whether the response  is good.         when I was in elementary school. (s22)
    Simple         Simply informs the learner of a        The teaching tempo is really good, such as the time
    verification   "good" or "bad" response.              management     and classroom management;    everything
    Feedback                                              was good! (s13)
    Specific       Informs the learner what the good      You can ask students more questions before
    Feedback       response should be.                    explaining. Sometimes you forget to give the students
                                                          feedback. (s06)
    Elaborated     Provides an explanation for why        After the explanation, you can let the students identify
    Feedback       the learner's response is good or      the bugs on the stage; this way, you can both facilitate
                   bad or allows the learner to review    some interactions, and get to know better if they can
                   materials relevant to the attributes   really identify the categories of bugs or not. (s15)
                   of a good response.

Results
1. Belief change as learning outcome

                                                                                                                     
© ISLS                                                                                                             74
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                      Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

As Table 4 shows, it was found that the score of participants' teacher-centered beliefs dropped significantly
after the semester. At the same time, the participants' student-centered beliefs      significantly raised after the
semester.

Table 4: belief change assessed in the beginning and at the end of the semester

           Category                          Pre-testM SD                 Post-testMSD               t-value
       Teacher-centered            1.08               1.35           0.46           0.76              2.54*
        Student-centered           5.15               2.49           8.00           3.26             -4.58**
*p<.05     **p<.01

2. Learning processes: Online KF activities
Pre-post comparisons were made between two phases of teaching practice (9 weeks for each phase) in terms of
basic online KB activities/measures (see Table 5). Overall, the findings suggest that the time and effort spent on
collaborative learning and discussion in KF were progressively increasing over time. Figure 1 showed that
students' built-on links on KF. There was a lot of feedback and suggestions made for each teaching practice as
shown in each note cluster (the arrow signals who provided feedback to whom), indicating that students were
reading and sharing ideas for improving teaching frequently.

Table 5: Profiles of participants' online performance

                                                         Phase 1MSD           Phase 2MSD             t-value
    1. # of notes created (contribution)              11.39     4.69      13.81       5.13           -2.38*
    2. # of notes read (community awareness)        124.39      69.56     187.18     137.33          -2.75*
    3. # of notes built on (collaboration)            9.75      4.38      12.93       4.60           -3.29**
*p<.05     **p<.01

3. Learning processes: function and quality of feedback
First, in terms of the function of feedback, as Figure 2 shows, it was found that feedback given to enhance
"teacher-centered" beliefs decreased while feedback given to enhance "student-centered" beliefs increased. The
result of t-tests showed that there was a significant decrease from the first phase of teaching practice (Practices
1-14) to the second phase of teaching practice (Practices 15-28) in terms of "teacher-centered" beliefs (M=6.11,
SD=2.78, for 1st phase; M=3.71, SD=2.24, for 2nd phase; t=4.62, p<.01), while there was a significant increase
in   terms of the feedback provided      to enhance   "student-centered" beliefs (M=5.07,  SD=3.11,     for 1st phase;
M=7.25, SD=2.77, for 2nd phase; t=-4.52, p<.01).

Figure1. Students' collaborative built-on links in a     Figure 2. Function of feedback: To improve teacher-
KF view (i.e. a discussion board).                       centered or student-centered teaching   

Moreover, it was found that in terms of quality of feedback, there was a significant change in terms of how the
quality of feedback changed in the 28 individual teaching practices (14 each for the first, and second, phase of
the teaching practice). The results of t-tests (see Table 6) indicate that better quality feedback (e.g., elaborated
feedback) contributed by teacher-education students progressively increased over time, while the lower quality
feedback (such as no feedback or simple verification feedback) gradually decreased over time.

Table 6. T-test results regarding quality of feedback between two phases of teaching practices

                                                                                                                    
© ISLS                                                                                                             75
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                      Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

                                            First Phase               Second PhaseMSDMSD        t-value
    No feedback                       0.05          0.05           0.03           0.03                2.15*
    Simple verification feedback      0.30          0.08           0.23           0.09               4.07**
    Specific feedback                 0.29          0.09           0.26           0.09                 1.49
    Elaborated feedback               0.36          0.11           0.44           0.14               -3.82**
*p<.05   **p<.01

Conclusion
To sum up, the instructional design in this study is based on knowledge building pedagogy. Each participating
teacher-education student was required to practice his or her teaching twice. After practice, they collectively
reflected on their teaching beliefs and practice to better understand more diversified possibilities of teaching and
learning approaches. During the process of teaching practice, participants provided teaching feedback online in
KF for discussion and systematically integrated their feedback into their instructional design for their second
teaching practice. By discovering and solving related problems occurred during their first teaching practice,
students  were   able to  improve    their teaching ideas/practices  by   re-designing their instruction. The  results
showed that after working continuously to generate, build on, and improve their ideas and practices, the teacher
education students could generate more elaborated feedbacks and ideas about teaching, and those feedback/ideas
tended   to  support  more  student-centered  beliefs.  In addition,  the results of the pre-post belief  survey also
suggested that the participants' teaching beliefs shifted from teacher-centered to student-centered ones. The
findings confirm previous research in that it is possible to help students transform their beliefs by engaging them
in computer-supported collaborative knowledge building environment/community (Chang & Hong, 2011; Hong
& Lin, 2010). Further studies will be conducted in order to better understand the process of belief change for
teacher-education students.

References
Chang, Y. H., & Hong, H. Y. (2011). Facilitating belief change among prospective science teachers through
       knowledge   building.   Paper presented   at the    annual conference  of   American   Educational    Research
       Association, New Orleans.
Clark,   C.  M., &   Peterson, P. L.  (1986).  Teachers'   thought processes.  In  M.  Wittrock (Ed.),   Handbook  of
       research in teaching (pp. 255-296). New York: MacMillan.
Dempsey, J. V., Driscoll, M. P., & Swindell, L. K. (1993). Text-based feedback.           In J. V. Dempsey, & G. C.
       Sales (Eds.),  Interactive instruction  and   feedback  (pp.   21-54). Englewood      Cliffs, NJ:  Educational
       Technology Publications.
Entwistle, N., Skinner, D., Entwistle, D., & Orr, S. (2000). Conceptions and beliefs about "good teaching:" An
       integration of contrasting research areas. Higher Education Research & Development, 19(1), 5-26.
Hong,    H.  Y.  &   Lin, S. P.   (2010).  Teacher-Education   Students'   Epistemological   Belief  Change   through
       Collaborative Knowledge Building.The Asia-Pacific Education Researcher, 19(1), 99-110.
Nespor, J. K. (1987). The role of beliefs in the practice of teaching. Journal of Curriculum Studies, 19(4), 317-
       328.
Pajares, M. F. (1992). Teachers' beliefs and educational research: Cleaning up a messy construct. Review of
       educational research, 62(3), 307.
Raths, J. (2001). Teachers' beliefs and teaching beliefs. Early childhood research and practice, 3(1), 1-10.
Richardson, V., Anders, P., Tidwell, D., & Lloyd, C. (1991). The relationship between teachers' beliefs and
       practices in reading comprehension instruction. American Educational Research Journal, 28(3), 559-586.
Sawyer, R. K. (2004). Creative teaching: Collaborative discussion as disciplined improvisation. Educational
       Researcher, 33(2), 12-20.
Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (2003). Knowledge building. In Encyclopedia of Education (2nd ed., pp. 1370-
       1373). New York: Macmillan Reference, USA.
Schaefer, K.M., & Zygmont, D. (2003). Analyzing the teaching style of nursing faculty: Does it promote a
       student-centered or teacher-centered learning environment? Nursing Education Perspectives, 24(5), 238-
       245.
Stuart, C. & Thurlow, D. (2000). Making Ittheir own: Preservice teacher`s experiences, beliefs, and classroom
       practices. Journal of Teacher Education,51(2),113-121.
Tsai,   C.C.  (2002).  Nested    epistemologies:  science   teachers' beliefs  of  teaching,  learning   and  science.
       International journal of science education, 24(8), 771-783.
Wilson, S. M. (1990). The secret garden of teacher education. Phi Delta Kappan, 72, 204-209.

                                                                                                                    
© ISLS                                                                                                            76
