CSCL 2013 Proceedings                     Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

                    Group Cognition As Multimodal Discourse
                        Wenjuan Li, University of Illinois at Chicago, USA, wli26@uic.edu
                Mara Martinez, University of Illinois at Chicago, USA, martinez@math.uic.edu

         Abstract:  Group cognition has been instrumental in the development of CSCL, thus further
         understanding   its nature     becomes  necessary    to sustain  growth    in the field..  In  this paper,
         following Sfard's conception of thinking as communicating, we study group cognition from
         the perspective  of    discourse.  We     go beyond   the more    traditional  stance   on discourse   by
         focusing  not  only    on the  verbal  modes     of communication,     but also   on  nonverbal     modes,
         including gesture,      static  image,    and  dynamic    visualization.   Specifically,    we    use  the
         mathematical    discourse     of a group     of  preservice   teachers,  who     are  solving     problems
         collaboratively  with     the  support  of   a   dynamic  geometry     environment,     to illustrate  the
         multimodal nature of group cognition.

Introduction
Our study is motivated by the need to better understand group cognition (Stahl, 2006) in order to ultimately
promote   collaborative  knowledge       building   in  computer-supported      learning   environments.      Indeed, group
cognition is not  the   sum  of  group    members'     cognition  and  cannot   be  decomposed      into   individual group
members'  cognition     (Stahl, 2006).    Instead, group   communication     itself should    be the   core  of analysis for
studying  group  learning    for   two  reasons.   First, according  to   Sfard  (2008),   thinking     is a  predominantly
discursive. Second, group collaborative problem solving is accomplished no only by the interactions among
group members but also by the interactions between group members and the learning environment. The focus of
much research in the field of CSCL has tended to be solely on the verbal modes of communication (i.e., speech
and writing). Such research provided insights in observing and interpreting verbal and written communication in
collaborative learning. However, it did not take into consideration other modes such as gesture, image, and
dynamic simulation. Indeed, communication in a group is a complex process mediated by multiple modalities if
not simultaneous. Consequently, in this paper, we take into consideration multiple modes of communication to
analyze the mathematical discourse of a group of secondary preservice teachers (PSTs) as they are solving
problems collaboratively with the support of a dynamic geometry environment. The focus of the paper is how
group collaborative observation and conjecturing is mediated by various communicative modes (Kress, 2001).

Context, Participants and Data Sources
Data was  drawn    from   a  teaching    experiment    (Steffe &   Thompson,    2000)    conducted     in  a large mid-west
university. A unit about geometric transformations was designed for a geometry content course for secondary
preservice teachers. One of the overarching goals of the unit is to develop the idea of geometric transformation
as function or mapping taking points on the plane to points on the plane (Hollebrands, 2003).                   Fifteen PSTs
enrolled in the course participated in research. Two groups of four PSTs were randomly selected from all the
participants as focus groups. All eight PSTs in the focus groups were interviewed individually before and after
the geometric  transformations     unit.  Each  focus   group's  class    interactions were   videotaped.    PSTs'  artifacts,
including, notebook, worksheets, and screen records of computer activities, were collected. The episode we
present here is from the first class of the unit. Prior to this activity, PSTs reviewed four types of geometric
transformations  (i.e., reflection, rotation,   translation,   dilation). With  the    support of   the dynamic    geometry
environment, PSTs were examining the effect of the two functions with exact same rule but different domain:
                             Function 1: f(x, y)=(x+y, x-y), where (x, y) x2+y2=4;
                             Function 2: f(x, y)=(x+y, x-y), where (x, y) R2.
         The goals of the entire activity with 18 functions include: 1) elicit PSTs' misconceptions of geometric
transformations, for example, two similar shapes means dilation; 2) help PSTs attend to the relationship between
preimage  and its  correspondent    points;  3)  help   PSTs   understand   the role   of domain    in  defining   geometric
transformations. The episode we present is from one of the focus groups, which comprised of four PSTs: PST 1,
PST 2, PST 3, PST 4. They were sitting in a hexagon shape table with one computer installed with dynamic
geometry software, as it is show in Figure 1. A worksheet with the steps of constructing circle and preimage and
image of the functions is available to each PST.

© ISLS                                                                                                                   77
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                   Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

       Figure 1. PSTs explore geometric                            Figure 2. Screen shot of Function 1
              transformations.

Analysis
Since our aim is to illustrate the multimodal nature of group cognition in the aforementioned context, we
focused our analysis on multiple communicative modes in collaborative group observation and conjecturing. To
do this, we transcribed the video taking into account speech, actions and visual mediators, and arranged them by
a combination of verbal turn-taking and action given that speech and action might not occur simultaneously.
This way of defining turn-taking stands in contrast to the more commonly way of defining turns in which the
main mode is speech and actions and mediators are attached to the turn as defied by speech. In doing so, we
would be able to make explicit the use of multiple modes as they happened in the group communication. Our
analysis focuses on what modes are utilized by the group in the collaborative observation and conjecturing
activity.

Results
Here, we   present  two  experts   to illustrate how  group   collaborative   observation and conjecturing can be
conceptualized  as  multimodal     communication.    The  first   illustrates how   the group's observations were
accomplished by various modes namely, speech, static images and dynamic visualizations. The second shows
how the group's conjectures were mediated by speech, gesture, and static images and dynamic visualizations.
Moreover, we describe to what extent and how multiple modes shaped the group's thinking about geometric
transformations

Excerpt 1: Collaborative observation mediated by speech, static image and dynamic
visualization

Table 1: Transcript of examining the effect of Function 1.

    Time                       Speech                           Action                       Visual Mediator
[00:05]                                               PST   4  is constructing   a
                                                      circle with radius of 2.
...
[00:36]         PST 4: there goes a circle, there     PST 4 used the touchpad
                goes a circle.                        to move     preimage    point
                                                      A around the constructed
[00:41]         PST 2: on the circle, they are all    circle.
                changed.
[00:47]         PST   1:  On      the  circle,  Yes,
                everything changed.
                                                                                        Figure. 3 Screen shot of the
                                                                                     preimage and image of Function 1
[00:51]         It  appears    to  be  dilation   by  PST 4 used the touchpad
                [inaudible] degree.                   to move     the curse    onto
                                                      the menu, and got ready
                                                      for the next task.
...
[01:21]         PST 1: it is an even dilation.

© ISLS                                                                                                         78
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                     Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

At    the beginning,  PST  4  performed    a series   of drawing   actions.   Following   the given  directions,  PST   4
constructed a circle of radius 2 as the pre-image and defined point A on it. Then, she constructed the image of
point A. After the constructions, she moved the point A on the circle. As point A was moving around the circle,
a circle of radius larger than 2 emerged from the trace of the image of point A (Figure 3).       PST 4 observed    that
the emerging figure on the screen was a circle. Her observation then becomes a shared group observation for
two reasons: first, her speech and the momentary static image of the circle generated were made public at the
small group; second, the observation was taken up by PST 2, as he pointed out that the all the points on the
constructed   circle were changed     to the generated   circle. PST  2's    observation soon  became   a shared  group
observation for that the momentary static image of the circle was public and was accepted by PST 1. Based on
the group collaborative observations of the dynamic visualization, PST 1 conjectured that the momentary static
image     appeared to be  dilation.  Again,  this conjecture   was   accepted   and  refined  by PST  1   based  on   her
observation of the image on the screen.
           In sum, we have shown that group observation and group conjecturing are not only mediated by the
speech from group members, but also the dynamic visualization and the momentary static images. A multimodal
analysis of the data let us conclude that two similar circles as shown in Figure 4 is a realization (Sfard, 2008) of
the mathematical object of dilation in this group. Moreover, it allow us making the claim that as PSTs identify
dilation, they attend to the relationship between the circles, rather than the relationship between a point and its
corresponding image-point.

Excerpt     2: Acceptance            and  rejection      of   conjectures       mediated      by  speech,        image,
dynamic visualization and gesture

Table 2: Transcript of examining the effect of Function 2.

      Time                    Speech                                 Action                      Visual Mediator
  [1:23]       PST 4: Let's see what happened.           PST 4 used the touchpad to
                                                         move  Point  A    in a  circle-
                                                         like path on the plane.

                                                                                           Figure 2.  A   circle like path
                                                                                           was created.
  [01:43]      PST 4: It seems to be reflecting          PST 4 used the touchpad to
               over a line. Do you see that?             move  Point  A    in a  circle-
                                                         like  path,  then   move   the
  [01:46]      PST 1: Yeah                               point   from   left  to  right
  [01:48]      PST 4: But I don't know what line         around a line on the plane.
               it is. It is not x=y.
  [01:49]      PST 1: It is not x=y.                                                      Figure  3.  Screen     record ofexploration of Function 2
  [01:52]      PST 2: So, wait                           PST   2 moved     his  pen  to
               ...                                       computer screen and aligned
                                                         the pen to the emergent line
  [01:56]      PST 1: Doesn't that mean there is         on the screen.
               a point along that line is the same
               x?
  [02:00]      PST 2: So it is like...
                                                                                          Figure 4. Hand and pen as the
                                                                                          emergent line
  [02:03]      PST    1:  not reflective   over   the
               line.
  ...

Following the given directions, PST 4 detached Point A from the constructed circle so that the pre-image could
be any points on the plane. Then, she started moving Point A in a circle-like path on the plane, the trace of the
image point of Point A appeared to be circle-like (Figure 2). Group members were observing the movement of
the point, but nobody offered an observation or a conjecture. PST4 started moving Point A in a line-like path on
the plane randomly. A "reflection line" was emerging as shown in Figure 3. PST # observed that the preimage

© ISLS                                                                                                                79
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                     Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

points seems to be reflected over a line; this observation was was endorsed by PST 1. Then, PST 4 moved the
points regularly around line x=y, which produced a cluster of points around the line x=y such as in figure 3. PST
4 pointed  out  that the reflection  line is not x=y. PST    2 doubted  at her conjecture, then  he highlighted the
reflection line emerging from the generated points by aligning his pen to the emergent line on the screen as
shown in figure 4. As PST 1 keep moving Point A, more and more image points were generated, which do not
fit the line x=y. PST 2's conjecture was rejected by PST 1.
         In sum, we have shown that the acceptance or rejection of group observation and conjecture was not
only mediated by the speech of group members but speech along with the consecutive static images from the
dynamic visualization and group member gestures. Again, the analysis taking consider of multiple modes (i.e.
speech, static images, dynamic visualization, gesture) allow us to conclude that PSTs did not see reflection as
function on the plane, but realized it as reflection-symmetry effect that can be used to describe Function 2.
Moreover, when exploring the effect of Function 2, PSTs moved Points A in three manners: circle-like path, line
path, and swinging around line x=y. These actions indicated that PSTs had the intention to move point A in a
systematical way, however, no perfect straight line movement were observed, such as movement along the x-
axis, or line y=x, which revealed the constraint of the dynamic geometry environment: drawing perfect straight
line, but not constructing straight lines, is not well accomplished by moving figures on computer touch pad.

Concluding Remarks
This paper presents an episode to demonstrate how PSTs collaboratively problem solving involves multiple
modes of communication. In line with other researchers (Evans, Feenstra, Ryon, & McNeill, 2011; Perit Çakir,
Zemel, & Stahl, 2009), we consider that mathematical knowledge building as the coordinated production and
use of  visual, narrative,   and symbolic    inscriptions as multiple realizations of co-constructed  mathematical
objects (Sfard, 2008). A contribution of the current study is to draw researchers' attention to the multimodal
nature of group cognition and to find evidence of group collaboration, group thinking, and limitation of learning
environment through multimodal analysis.       Conceptualizing group cognition as multimodal discourse lead us to
the conclusions on the two expects, which cannot be reached by attend to the verbal mode only.

References
Evans,  M., Feenstra,    E., Ryon,   E.,  &  McNeill, D.   (2011). A  multimodal   approach   to  coding discourse:
         Collaboration,  distributed  cognition,  and geometric    reasoning.  International Journal of  Computer-
         Supported Collaborative Learning, 6(2), 253-278.
Hollebrands, K. F. (2003). High school students' understandings of geometric transformations in the context of a
         technological   environment.    [doi: 10.1016/S0732-3123(03)00004-X].      The  Journal  of Mathematical
         Behavior, 22(1), 55-72.
Kress, G. R. (2001). Multimodal teaching and learning : the rhetorics of the science classroom. London ; New
         York: Continuum.
Perit Çakir, M., Zemel, A., & Stahl, G. (2009). The joint organization of interaction within a multimodal CSCL
         medium. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 4(2), 115-149.
Sfard,  A.  (2008).   Thinking    as communicating:       Human   development,   the  growth   of discourses,   and
         mathematizing. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Stahl, G. (2006). Group cognition : computer support for building collaborative knowledge. Cambridge, Mass.:
         MIT Press.
Steffe, L. P.,  & Thompson,      P.  W.  (2000). Teaching    experiment methodology:    Underlying   principles and
         essential elements. In R. Lesh & A. E. Kelly (Eds.), Research design in matheamtics and science
         education (pp. 267-307). Hillsdale,    NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.

© ISLS                                                                                                           80
