CSCL 2013 Proceedings                 Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

  Collaborative Learning Across Space and Time: Ethnographic
                         Research in Online Affinity Spaces

                    Alecia Marie Magnifico, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
         173 Children's Research Center, 51 Gerty Drive, Champaign, IL, 61820, amagnif@illinois.edu
              Jayne C. Lammers, University of Rochester, Box 270425, Rochester, NY, 14627,
                                       jlammers@warner.rochester.edu
     Jen Scott Curwood, University of Sydney, Education Building A35, Sydney, NSW, 2006 Australia,
                                          js.curwood@sydney.edu.au

         Abstract: In this paper, we further articulate connective ethnography and consider how it may
         add to qualitative studies of collaborative learning in naturalistic, computer-mediated settings.
         Despite their physical   separation, members    of  online affinity         spaces work    and learn
         together--they construct and review artifacts and share their work across sites. To trace these
         processes, we examine the complex artifacts and texts that constitute social practice in these
         spaces. We consider how expanding connective ethnography may meet researchers' needs in
         online contexts and we raise questions about how participants learn in these settings. Finally,
         we outline principles for an affinity space ethnography designed to capture the collaborative
         web of social interactions and audiences inherent to participation in affinity spaces.

Introduction: From New Spaces to New Methods
As young adults move many of their social interactions into online communities, researchers have called for
further study of the literacies inherent in these spaces (e.g. Alvermann, 2008). The Pew Internet and American
Life Project reports that youth participation in such communities is widespread: 73% use online social networks,
38% share original creative work online, and 21% remix their own or others' content (Lenhart, Purcell, Smith,
& Zickhur, 2010). However, Grimes and Fields (2012) point out that these statistics typically consider only a
small part of young people's internet activity: generally, their use of large networks like Facebook. In online
spaces built for and by them, youth reframe and re-imagine content by creating original and transformative
works such as fan fiction, artwork, and machinima. To do so, they work collaboratively, although distance often
precludes face-to-face contact (Black, 2008; Lam, 2000). Members negotiate discourse norms (Lammers, 2013),
form writing partnerships (Magnifico, 2012), disseminate practices (Fields & Kafai, 2009), and review each
others' creations (Black, 2008).
         Some scholars have conceptualized these communities as affinity spaces, or sites of informal learning
where "newbies and masters and everyone else" interact around shared passions (Gee, 2004, p. 85). Online
affinity spaces are loosely-organized arrays of separate, affiliated "portals" (Gee, 2004) connected by topic,
links, and hashtags. Portals include root content sites (e.g. Neopets.com, the Sims wiki), creative archives (e.g.
Fanfiction.net, DeviantArt.com), and social networks (e.g. Facebook, Tumblr). Though the field continues to
theorize affinity spaces (e.g. Hayes & Duncan, 2012), typical research methods do not adequately account for
these online interconnected networks of participants--or the learning that members accomplish together. We
offer this paper as a beginning step in recommending new methods to gain insight into this kind of computer-
supported collaborative learning.
         Tools for structured observation are key methods for studying learning and literacies, particularly in
these evolving settings. At the same time, online field sites are not traditional ethnographic field sites, and their
activity cannot be captured in the same ways because places, researchers, observations, and participants become
complex  in online  contexts (Leander     & McKim,    2003),  particularly        when  there   are multiple  paths to
participation. As such, we first examine connective ethnography's open, descriptive stance towards capturing
"traveling practices" (Leander & McKim, 2003, p. 212) among blended online and offline spaces. Then, we
consider what it  means  to  extend  this framework   as affinity space        ethnography   (Lammers,   Curwood,   &
Magnifico, 2012), and how this step is necessary to study literacy practices across portals. While this step is
modest, we believe it will enable clearer views of learning in the collaborative webs of social interactions,
digital tools, artifacts, and discourses that are integral to affinity spaces.

Theory: Toward an Ethnography of Affinity Spaces
Connective Ethnography
Connective ethnography begins from an open, descriptive stance towards evolving spaces, as well as a desire to
document  resonance  among   online   and  offline contexts. This  method         is rooted  in actor-network  theory
approaches to theorizing activity (Latour, 2005) and shows how practices travel across and among spaces and
activities. The separation between online and physical spaces is deliberately blurred, unlike early research on
digital learning and practice that suggested significant differences between these contexts (e.g. Markham, 1998).

© ISLS                                                                                                              81
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                    Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

Connective   ethnography  has    been  used  primarily to create  detailed   tracings  of  people   and  their  traveling
practices, often using small numbers of participants (Lam, 2000; Leander & Lovvorn, 2006). A handful of
larger studies of face-to-face and online communication in disciplinary communities (Hine, 2007) and practice
initiation in tween gaming groups (Fields & Kafai, 2009) exist as well. Because affinity spaces have become
multi-sited contexts where members collaborate across portals, we argue that describing the travel of members'
practices and artifacts must become central. Fields and Kafai (2009) show how such documentation of tweens'
virtual world usage can be accomplished by analyzing face-to-face video and back-end logfiles. In the following
sections, we ask: how can we "connectively" trace participants' computer-supported collaborations through
affinity spaces when these data streams are unavailable?

Tracing Texts and Artifacts
A typical assumption of ethnography is the face-to-face nature of activity and data collection. In online affinity
spaces, though, communication is mediated through an array of digital tools. As connective ethnographers have
articulated, researchers must    understand  how    practices travel   between  online and   face-to-face    elements of
blended practices to understand computer-supported learning (Leander & McKim, 2003). Here, we extend this
thinking: Researchers must also understand how these activities travel across and through the multiple affiliated
portals that support these actions. To do so, we must study how members work and learn together, often over
substantial physical distance (Lam, 2000; Black, 2008), using text, computer code, and image creation. Tool-
mediated communication is hardly exclusive to online sites (Latour, 2005; Prior, 2008), but texts and artifacts
circulate in different ways from face-to-face customs and rituals. Unlike connective ethnographers of blended
spaces, we    may   not  have    access  to  our participants'   offline  lives beyond     self-reported     experiences.
Consequently, we cannot fully understand how their practices travel. While some may consider this a limitation,
this condition mirrors participants' interactions and the ways in which they navigate online affinity spaces.
Instead of speaking face-to-face, members communicate with complex mixed genres and artifacts (e.g. instant
messages, tweets, Tumblr posts, artwork, videos) (Curwood, 2013). Such texts are necessarily compositional
and communicative--multimodal         practices  of reading,  response,   and  creation   (cf. Prior, 2008)--and     this
complicates   their analysis. Connective    ethnographers  may    broadly  map      these digital   traces, which   travel
between  spaces   as they are    posted  and linked   (Hine,  2007).   While   this method     is a useful   step, online
researchers must also (a) reconstruct artifacts' travel and evolution across portals, and (b) use such findings to
further theorize the collaborative nature of online texts and how they support learning and participation.

Affinity Space Ethnography
With affinity space ethnography, we trace and map the connections among and across members' actions in
diverse portals as they are represented in texts, artifacts, genres, and discourses. The findings generated by this
method will be limited by partial access to participants (in similar ways as their own participation is limited by
partial access to each other). We believe, however, that this work better represents adolescents' online lives and
the new literacies that they nurture through their participation as fans, creators, and collaborators in affinity
spaces. While Steinkuehler (2007) and others have documented "constellations" (p. 184) of multimodal literacy
practices in online activities, and recent research has expanded conceptions of online participatory cultures (e.g.
Ito, et al, 2010) and affinity spaces (e.g. Lammers, Curwood, & Magnifico, 2012; Hayes & Duncan, 2012), little
research exists on how learning circulates among and across these online communities. Discussions of popular
books and movies, for instance, may encompass diverse genres including fan fiction, role-playing games, and
Twitter hashtags (Curwood, 2013). Despite physical separation, members collaboratively construct and review
texts and artifacts, write guides for participation, and share their work across portals. They set boundaries for
community Discourses (Gee, 1996), thereby creating norms and rules for productive participation (Lammers,
2013). Using multiple portals, genres and practices travel among sites and communities as members learn,
create, collaborate, and respond to each other in diverse online venues.

Method: Enacting Affinity Space Ethnography
We  argue    that a  new  approach     for  studying  computer-supported      collaborative    learning in   multi-sited,
technology-mediated settings is necessary. In previous work (Lammers, et al., 2012), we sought to update Gee's
(2004)  discussion  of  affinity spaces, considering   how    affinity spaces  have  evolved   into  groups   of   loosely
affiliated, content-focused   sites. Here,  we  build on  connective    ethnography    to  offer  recommendations     for
enacting affinity space ethnography and illustrate them with the worked example of Curwood's (2013) Hunger
Games affinity space study.
         Sustained, systematic observation in an affinity space is a crucial first step for researchers to make
sense of the culture and practices of a space. Such observation should focus on understanding the organization
of the space, including traveling among and between the various portals to map connections and note how
participants make use of each. Observations using such tools as forum archives can also help affinity space

© ISLS                                                                                                                82
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                   Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

ethnographers learn about a portal's past activities in order to develop sociohistoric understandings. Sustained
observation should also aim to determine the various roles available to participants, to trace how activity is
distributed amongst participants, and to answer questions about what constitutes participation and activity for
different users. To this end, Curwood has spent two years systematically observing participation in numerous
Hunger Games affinity space portals.
          Equipped with a deeper understanding of the organization and culture of an online, multi-sited field,
attention can turn toward analyzing artifacts. To acquire a sense of a space's development, it's important to
track the historical information represented by artifacts over time and across different portals. This analysis can
offer the affinity space ethnographer insight into how participants' foci and interests have changed over time, as
well as how they vary within different portals. The worked example below offers insight into how Curwood
traced and analyzed such artifacts.
          Finally, the affinity space ethnographer engages in repeated contact with participants to fill in the gaps
and learn about their own interpretations. Such contact seeks to strengthen the researcher's understandings of
the culture and practices within the affinity space, and thus must include contact with informants who enact a
variety  of roles identified during   observation. To  gain such  insight  into the Hunger  Games affinity  space,
Curwood has maintained contact with over 30 adolescent participants who reside in the United States, United
Kingdom, Canada, and Australia.

Worked Example: The Hunger Games and Affinity Space Ethnography
Recent years have seen a marked increase in the number of novels published for young adults, as well as
increasing fan conversation, collaboration, and creation in online affinity spaces devoted to these works. For
instance, Suzanne Collins's trilogy, The Hunger Games, has inspired expansive fan activity. Curwood's (2013)
ethnographic study focuses on literacy practices in various Hunger Games portals where participants write fan
fiction, create art, produce  videos,  compose     music,  and design role-playing   games. These portals  can be
classified into three types: (1) root websites specific to The Hunger Games affinity space; (2) fandom websites
that include transformative works from multiple affinity spaces, such as FanFiction.net and DeviantArt.com;
and (3) social media tools that promote interaction within and beyond the affinity space, including Twitter and
YouTube. Each portal serves as a potential entry point into the affinity space, and participants move across and
through portals as they participate in the fandom.
          In order to understand the culture of The Hunger Games affinity space, it is essential to examine how
conversations, texts, and artifacts travel within multiple portals by engaging in sustained, systemic observation.
Through such observations, Curwood met Olivia, one participant whom she has observed across all three types
of portals for 16 months and interviewed four times. We describe Olivia's case to discuss how casual fan
participation leads to deep situated learning over time. At 10 years old, Olivia began to write fanfiction in the
fandom surrounding Collins's Underland Chronicles. Within a week of reading The Hunger Games, Olivia
decided that she wanted to start her own portal, "a text-based role playing game [RPG] devoted to the world of
Panem." Since 2008, Olivia's RPG portal has grown to include her own root website, links to Facebook and
Twitter, and game recap videos on YouTube. Now 17, she discusses her learning: "My site in particular has
changed me as a person and a reader both by helping me develop my writing skills and allowing me to befriend
people from all over... that share a common interest."
          An analysis of Olivia's artifacts over time supports her sense of her own learning. She has participated
as a designer, moderator, and player since the RPG's inception, and her learning is particularly evident in her
creative writing. A textual analysis of Olivia's 12 FanFiction.net stories and 2,600 forum posts suggests that her
understanding   of character  development    and   her use of  descriptive language  have been  positively shaped
through the text-based RPG. For example, in 2008, Olivia's first Hunger Games fan fiction story was written
from the perspective of a minor Hunger Games character, drawing heavily on events and dialogue that appeared
in the original novels. An RPG from 2013 shows that Olivia's style has changed, however. In this game, she
developed an entirely new character, using figurative language, poetry verses, and anecdotes to offer a richly
detailed profile of a young girl. Content analysis reveals that, over time, Olivia's writing has grown increasingly
complex, creative, and improvisational. While she began by relying on existing narratives to tell her stories, she
now innovates within Collins's world of Panem.
          In more traditional connective ethnographies, researchers often navigate online spaces and physical
locations, engage in observations and other face-to-face data collection, and examine artifacts in order to study
how practices and cultures travel across settings. Conducting research exclusively in online spaces challenges
such methodological approaches. To gain insight into the culture of an affinity space, a researcher may need to
participate  in dozens  of   portals, access multiple   social  media tools,  and   examine  multimodal artifacts.
Alternatively, the researcher could follow a participant like Olivia in order to understand how her learning and
texts travel across multiple portals. In order to uncover how affinity spaces function as collaborative learning
environments, Curwood is tracing how Olivia's writing develops through role playing and interacting with other

© ISLS                                                                                                         83
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                 Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

fans across time and space. Affinity space ethnography needs to trace texts and artifacts across multi-sited, ever-
changing portals, without face-to-face access.

Conclusion: Moving Ethnography Forward
As educational  and   social venues   move  to   online settings, researchers must   develop new     methods    of
understanding learning and interaction in these spaces. As the CSCL theme states, we must observe the activity
of online worlds writ large and examine individual participants' artifacts to gain insight into the facets and
travel of "grains of sand." Even where traditional and blended ethnographic observation is impossible, and
complete accounts    of participation unlikely, we  can  map  portals, trace  genres and practices,   and   glean
information about participants' roles and activities. These are the methods and tools by which we attempt to
reconstruct participants' situated and   sociohistoric  learning.  Despite physical  separation,    members    are
apprenticed into online Discourses, and they learn how to take meaningful action in particular portals (Gee,
2004). At 10, Olivia joined a literature-based fandom; at 17, she's an avid reader, writer, and game designer. To
trace and document this learning process, affinity space ethnographers must consider connections among texts
and artifacts in spaces with compositional and communicative histories. As participants move through affinity
space portals, so must researchers follow these traveling practices to understand how actions that may initially
seem disconnected cohere into learning. We offer this discussion of affinity space ethnography as a modest step
and needed expansion of connective ethnography, and as the beginning of a continuing conversation about
online research sites and how researchers can gain explanatory footholds in complex, evolving spaces.

References
Alvermann, D.E. (2008). Why bother theorizing adolescents' online literacies for classroom practice and
   research? Journal of Adolescent & Adult Literacy, 52(1), 8-19.
Black, R. (2008). Adolescents and online fan fiction. New York: Peter Lang.
Curwood, J.S. (2013). Fan fiction, remix culture, and The Potter Games. In V.E. Frankel (Ed.), Teaching with
   Harry Potter (pp. 81-92). Jefferson, NC: McFarland.
Fields, D.F. & Kafai, Y. B. (2009). A connective ethnography of peer knowledge sharing and diffusion in a
   tween virtual world. International Journal of Computer Supported Learning, 4, 47-68.
Gee, J.P. (2004). Situated language and learning: A critique of traditional schooling. New York: Routledge.
Gee, J.P. (1996). Social linguistics and literacies: Ideology in discourses. London: Falmer Press.
Grimes, S.M. & Fields, D.A. (2012). Kids online: A new research agenda for understanding social networking
   forums. New York: Joan Ganz Cooney Center. Retrieved from: http://joanganzcooneycenter.org/Reports-
   38.html
Hayes, E.R. & Duncan, S.C. (Eds.) (2012). Learning in video game affinity spaces. New York: Peter Lang.
Hine, C., (2007). Connective ethnography for the exploration of e-science. Journal of Computer-Mediated
   Communication, 12(2), article 14. http://jcmc.indiana.edu/vol12/issue2/hine.html
Ito, M., Baumer, S., Bittanti, M., boyd, d., Cody, R., Herr-Stevenson, B., Horst, H.A., et al. (2010). Hanging out,
   messing around, and geeking out: Kids living and learning with new media. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Lam, W.S.E. (2000). Second language literacy and the design of the self: A case study of a teenager writing on
   the Internet. TESOL Quarterly, 34(3), 457­483.
Lammers, J.C., Curwood, J.S., & Magnifico, A.M. (2012). Toward an affinity space methodology:
   Considerations for literacy research. English Teaching: Practice and Critique, 11(2), 44-58.
Lammers, J.C. (2013). Fangirls as teachers: Examining pedagogic discourse in an online fan community.
   Learning, Media, and Technology. DOI: 10.1080/17439884.2013.764895.
Latour, B. (2005). Reassembling the social: An introduction to actor-network theory. Oxford: Oxford
   University Press.
Leander, K. M., & Lovvorn, J. F. (2006). Literacy networks: following the circulation of texts, bodies, and
   objects in the schooling and online gaming of one youth. Cognition and Instruction, 24(3), 291­340.
Leander, K.M., & McKim, K.K. (2003). Tracing the everyday `sitings' of adolescents on the Internet: A
   strategic adaptation of ethnography across spaces. Education, Communication, Information, 3(2), 211­240.
Lenhart, A., Purcell, K., Smith, A., & Zickhur, K. (2010). Social media and young adults. Pew Internet &
   American Life. Retrieved from: http://pewinternet.org/Reports/2010/Social-Media-and-Young-Adults.aspx.
Magnifico, A.M. (2012). The game of Neopian writing. In Hayes, E. R. & Duncan, S. C. (Eds.), Learning in
   video game affinity spaces (pp. 212-234). New York: Peter Lang.
Markham, A.N. (1998). Life online: Researching real experience in virtual space. Walnut Creek: AltaMira.
Prior, P.A. (2008). Remaking IO: Semiotic remediation in the design process. In P.A. Prior & J.A. Hengst
   (Eds.), Exploring semiotic remediation as discourse practice (pp. 206-234). New York: Palgrave.
Steinkuehler, C. (2007). Massively multiplayer online gaming as a constellation of literacy practices. In B.E.
   Shelton & D. Wiley (Eds.), The design and use of simulation computer games in education (pp. 187-212).
   Rotterdam: Sense Publishers.

© ISLS                                                                                                         84
