CSCL 2013 Proceedings                 Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

          Designing Soil Quality Mobile Inquiry For Middle School
                Heidy Maldonado1, Brian Perone1, Mehjabeen Datoo2, Paul Franz1, Roy D. Pea1
  (1) Stanford Graduate School of Education and H-STAR Institute, Stanford University, Stanford, California
                                    (2) University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada
  Email: heidym@cs.stanford.edu, bperone@stanford.edu, m.datoo@mail.utoronto.ca, pfranz@stanford.edu,
                                               roypea@stanford.edu

          Abstract: LET'S GO aims to develop, implement, research, and scale a new paradigm to
          foster collaborative student learning in ecological sciences. We integrate geo-positional data
          sensing, participation frameworks    for learner  collaboration,  mobile  inquiry, reflection and
          information visualization  tools  to  create   science learning   collaboratories.  We  describe
          motivations for our project and related research, discuss our experiences designing a pilot set
          of Soil Quality Inquiry activities, and the challenges faced.

Introduction
Learning science concepts and inquiry strategies should appropriate new tools from science--sensors for data
capture, data visualization, low-cost mobiles for field-based science, and geo-tagged digital photos and videos
for documenting field research. Inspired by Design-based Research (Cobb, diSessa, Lehrer, & Schauble, 2003),
we have   designed  classroom    interventions aimed  at developing    theoretical frameworks   for domain-specific
learning processes. Our first objective is to provide interactive educational activities and tools enabling students
to participate in collaborative scientific inquiry as they craft hypotheses, and collect, analyze, compare and
discuss local data while studying environmental and ecological sciences.
          LET'S    GO (Learning   Ecology  with    Technologies  from   Science    for Global  Outcomes)    convenes
partners across disciplinary and geographical boundaries, and academic and commercial interests, sharing a
vision of collaboratories (Bos et al. 2007) for mobile science. Guided by these aims, we design activities which
integrate geo-positional  data sensing, multimedia     communication,    data  visualization and Web    2.0   tools in
specific ecology learning scenarios, using co-design methods with teachers, learners, developers, learning and
domain scientists on topics such as water quality, soil quality, ecosystems and biodiversity.

Inquiry Learning and Mobile Sensing
Inquiry learning is "an approach to learning that involves a process of exploring the natural or material world,
and that leads to asking questions, making discoveries, and rigorously testing those discoveries in the search for
new understanding" (National Science Foundation, 2000), In educational settings, inquiry learning in science is
commonly embodied in project-enhanced science learning, where students engage in authentic, open-ended and
motivating  tasks  extending   over days   and  mediated    by various   tools and  expertise. These    tasks require
collaboration and communication within--and sometimes beyond ­ the classroom, taking advantage of online
data resources (Blumenfeld et al., 1991; Pea 1993, Quintana et al. 2004; Scanlon, Jones and Waycott, 2005;
Tinker & Kracjik, 2002). These conditions are intended to support the social model of teaching and learning
known as "cognitive apprenticeship" (Collins, Brown & Newman 1989) where authentic problem definition and
problem-solving processes are guided by mentors, with learners gradually taking on increasingly complex tasks
and autonomy as support fades.
          More recently, rapid developments in mobile, wireless, and sensor technologies have provided new
design possibilities for augmented learning activities that may be orchestrated across diverse environments such
as schools, nature and science centers/museums (Rogers & Price, 2006; Roschelle & Pea, 2002; Scanlon et al.
2005; Sharples,    Taylor and  Vavoula,  2007).    Building on   this prior work,  we   are  leveraging new   mobile
multimedia technologies, sensors, digital maps and interactive data visualization tools. Opportunities with open
platforms and less costly component technologies make integral use of mobile science learning more broadly
adoptable (Giemza, Bollen & Hoppe 2010, Vogel et al. 2010).

Co-designing for Mobile Science Inquiry Learning
The activities and tools we are designing explicitly support inquiry, integrating sensor data collection from
school sites with a collaborative learning system using locally networked mobile devices. Our approach to
designing the mobile science collaboratory is guided by use of Design-based Research (Cobb, diSessa, Lehrer,
& Schauble, 2003) and co-design methodologies (Penuel, Roschelle & Schechtman 2007).             Our design process
involved  co-design   workshops   teaming  teachers,  experts,  science  educators,  learning  researchers, software
developers  and learners.  We    conducted co-design   workshops   in   Sweden   and   the US  (Spikol  et al., 2009;
Maldonado & Pea, 2010), and piloted activities in both countries to yield feedback for revisions toward a more
flexible curriculum adaptable to the local culture and educational system.

© ISLS                                                                                                              85
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                     Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

        Inquiry activities and assessments were created that matched the standards for a 7th grade level science
class using   field inquiry  practices  and mobile   technologies.  The  school offered   additional  constraints and
possibilities: activities had to fit within the school periods, within the academic curriculum and each teacher's
yearly lesson plan. Equipment, procedures, materials and assessments had to be standardized so as to be able to
be deployed and evaluated several times throughout the day.
        Our co-design team chose five devices for the present trials, based on their usefulness to the students'
outdoor inquiry activities, and the feasibility of incorporating them quickly into the educational flow.
        (1) A smartphone with built-in sensors (camera, GPS), and a mobile client application developed by
the Linnaeus University Celekt team for students' data collection and related observations, using 3G networking
for communication purposes (Vogel et al, 2010).
        (2) PASCO scientific's SPARK Science Learning System with built-in sensor interface and additional
sensors. Its handheld touchscreen science appliance enables data collection and visualization, and connects to
different sensors to measure phenomena such as pH, temperature, humidity, and dissolved oxygen.
        (3) Livescribe's Pulse pen digitizes the users' notes, recording audio in sync with pen strokes. Student
groups  use   this digital  pen for data  collection and recording  discussions during    field investigations. These
conversations   are   later replayed   by the  team   when   reflecting on inquiry    processes  and  report writing.
Researchers can also study how students incorporate their classroom knowledge into the inquiry process.
        (4) A laptop computer to visualize geolocated data by the groups for comparison and discussion across
groups, and to prepare each group's presentation.
        (5) A digital video camera for the teams to document their discussions and observations.

Mobile Inquiry Learning Activities in Schools
Following the success of our Water Quality Modules (Pea, Milrad, Maldonado, Vogel, Kurti, Spikol, 2012;
Maldonado & Pea, 2010), the LET'S GO co-design team chose Soil Quality as the next focal science topic to
address the critical unmet need for Soil Quality lesson plans and activities in classrooms, particularly at the
middle- and high-school level (Collins, 2008). Understanding basic aspects of Soil Quality is necessary for
making decisions on sustainable land uses, at a personal and civic level. Today's students will soon be voting on
issues like soil depletion, food security, soil erosion, sustainability, biofuel, and climate change.
    Our team narrowed the activities' goals to four key concepts about Soil Quality: (1) importance of Soil
Quality to plant and human life; (2) Soil Quality is a scale, not a binary judgment, composed of many micro-
and   macro-properties  of   soil; (3)  existence of macro-  and   micro-organisms    in soil such  as groundworms
(nematodes), which reflect and contribute to Soil Quality; and (4) the interaction of these macro- and micro-
characteristics of the soil have a clear effect on the (plant) life supported by soil, impacting its ability to grow
and propagate, as well as other features such as color.
    We      developed formal    student roles in  terms  of group-worthy   activities (Lotan,   2003): `documentary
filmmaker,' `lab technician,' `reporter,' `data scientist.' Each role contributes a different, significant part of the
inquiry activity. Groups decided on their own rotation pattern for the roles, so that each student in a group
would have the opportunity to fulfill each of the roles and responsibilities on different days. By empowering the
students to record their own video, we hoped to gain an insight into their attention process, as it quickly became
apparent that the students' video focus differed from that of researchers.

The LET'S GO Soil Quality Inquiry Modules
Our final design called for four activities, implemented across three to four classes lasting 90 to 120-minutes.
The   first two inquiry activities  were  conducted   inside class, with  the third and   fourth outdoors on    school
grounds. Students' inquiry processes would be scaffolded heavily during the first module, and gradually these
scaffolds would fade throughout the sessions (Collins et al.,1989). Activities were designed to appeal to the
intended audience in presentation and level of pre-existing knowledge, and to introduce gradually the concepts
and inquiry processes.

    Figure 1: (A) `Is Soil Alive?' Students evaluating the composition of a soil sample in the classroom. (B)
    `PlantSmart Mystery': Students measuring Soil Respiration. (C) Hydrangea plants' color-pH correlation.

© ISLS                                                                                                             86
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                   Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

  Figure 2: 24-hours of PlantSmart sensor readings: (A) Soil Moisture, (B) Sunlight Data, (C) Temperature.

The four LET'S GO Soil Quality activities are:
         (1) Is Soil Alive? Students learn to use sensors to measure soil respiration rates of different types of
soil. They then contrast these results with data obtained through guided observation and evaluation of soil
samples (see Figure 1A) to answer questions such as: What does the soil sample smell like? What color is it?
What is its texture? What is it made of? The goal is to have students link properties of the soil that they can
observe, such as the prevalence of organic matter, with the invisible characteristics of Soil Quality ­ in this case,
soil respiration, and, through this link, to discover the invisible layer of the soil ecosystem.
         (2) Understanding the Effects of pH. the second activity, examines the link between invisible properties
of the soil and the impact on the life sustained by that soil. It addresses two key student misconceptions: first,
how despite the fact that soil pH cannot be directly observed, it has visible effects on the life that grows upon
that soil. Secondly, students are keen to assign the labels of `good' and `bad' to pH values that deviate from the
center of the scale. Yet even pH levels that may not be ideal for sustaining human life can sustain beautiful life
forms.
         We focused our activity around soil samples from differently colored Hydrangea plants (known as
Hortensia). These small flowering bushes are common and inexpensive, and more importantly, several of the
varieties (most notably Hydrangea Macrophylla and Hydrangea Serrata) have the property that the color of their
flowers is affected by the soil pH . An acidic soil (pH< 6) will usually produce flowers with blue coloration,
whereas a more alkaline soil (pH > 6) will produce pink flowers (see Figure 1C). Students were presented with a
wide-range of hydrangea plants from which to choose several soil samples to evaluate their pH. This exercise
offers an immediate view into how a single invisible property of soil directly impacts the life supported by the
soil.
         (3)  PlantSmart    Mystery.    PlantSmart  sensors    are  inexpensive   and  measure    sunlight  exposure,
temperature and soil moisture over time. In this activity, we placed eight of these sensors for 24 hours in
different locations around the school campus. The data was then downloaded to the computer, and each student
group received the information for all eight sensors, labeled with letters (Sensor A, Sensor B, etc). A typical
example of these readings is visible in Figure 2. The students also received a list of GPS coordinates for all eight
sensors labeled numerically (Sensor 1, Sensor 2, etc). From the latter list, each group was `assigned' a sensor.
The   groups' task  was to  design an   inquiry that  would   allow  them to  decide  which of   the sensor   readings
matched  their assigned  sensor   site. To   design   their inquiry experiment,   the students   could choose  which
measures to collect from their assigned location, including collecting measurements with the PASCO sensors
with which they had prior experience (see Figure 1B) for an example of a group working on their `PlantSmart
Mystery' activity).
         One of the intentional challenges student groups faced in this activity was that the PlantSmart sensor
readings are given qualitatively (see Figure 2): for example, temperature is reported on a six-point scale: Cold,
Cool,  Moderate,   Warm,   Hot, Very    Hot. Within   their  group, students had  to  make their   own  judgments   to
transition between the data collected by the PlantSmart sensors qualitatively and the quantitative data they
collected through the PASCO sensors.
         (4) `Can My Site Support Life?', the fourth activity was originally linked with the prior activity during
our pilot deployment, although we have since separated them. The students groups are asked to answer how
their site may support life through an inquiry they design among themselves. We kept the same GPS coordinate
site as for the prior activity, but the focus shifts from gathering data about soil characteristics in the `PlantSmart
Mystery'  activity. For this last  Soil  Quality activity,   we   want students  to move   upwards   in the   level of
abstraction, and make conclusions about Soil Quality of their site based on the soil characteristics. At the end,
each group prepared a presentation for the class, following a template that scaffolded their inquiry.

Next Steps
The four Soil Quality modules we have outlined were experienced by twenty-four students at a local middle
school. We    are currently evaluating   the  results from   this  intervention through video    analysis, as well  as
qualitative and quantitative assessments.

References
Blumenfeld, P., Soloway, E., Marx, R., Krajcik, J., Guzdial, M. and Palincsar, A. (1991) `Motivating project-
         based learning: Sustaining the doing, supporting the learning'. Educational Psychologist, 26: 369-398.

© ISLS                                                                                                              87
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                   Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

Bos, N., Zimmerman, A., Olson, J., Yew, J., Yerkle, J., Dahl, E. and Olson, G. (2007) `From shared databases
         to communities of practice: A taxonomy of collaboratories'. J. Computer-Mediated Communications,
         12: 652-672.
Collins, A., Brown, J. S., & Newman, S. E. (1989) `Cognitive apprenticeship: Teaching the crafts of reading,
         writing, and mathematics', in L. B. Resnick (ed.), Knowing, learning, and instruction: Essays in honor
         of Robert Glaser (pp. 453-494). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Collins, M. E. (2008). Where Have All the Soils Students Gone?. Journal of Natural Resources & Life Sciences
         Education, 37(1), 117-124.
Edelson, D. C. (2002) `Design research: What we learn when we engage in design'. The Journal of the Learning
         Sciences, 11: 105­121.
Edelson, D.C., Gordin, D.N. and Pea, R.D. (1999) `Addressing the challenges of inquiry-based learning through
         technology and curriculum design'. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 8: 391-450.
Giemza, A., Bollen, L. and Hoppe, U. (2010) `LEMONADE: A Flexible Authoring Tool for Integrated Mobile
         Learning Scenarios'. In Proceedings Of Wireless Mobile Ubiquitous Technologies in Education 2010,
         Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
Lotan, R. (2003, March) `Group-worthy tasks'. Educational Leadership, 60: 72-75.
Maldonado, H. and Pea, R.D. (2010) `LET'S GO! To the Creek: Co-design of Water Quality Inquiry using
         Mobile Science Collaboratories', Proceedings of the 6th International IEEE Conference on Wireless,
         Mobile, and Ubiquitous Technologies in Education (WMUTE), pp. 81-87, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
National Research Council. (2000) Inquiry and the National Science Education Standards. Washington, DC:
         National Academy Press.
Pea, R.D. (1993). 'The Collaborative Visualization Project'. Communications of the ACM, 36: 60-63.
Pea, R., Milrad, M., Maldonado, H., Vogel, B., Kurti, A. & Spikol, D. (2012). Learning and Technological
         Designs for Mobile Science Inquiry Collaboratories (1ed.). In: Littleton, K., Scanlon, E., & Sharples.
         M. (Ed.), Orchestrating Inquiry Learning (pp. 105-127). London, United Kingdom: Routledge.
Penuel, W.R., Roschelle, J. and Shechtman, N. (2007) `Designing formative assessment software with teachers:
         An analysis of the co-design process'. Research and Practice in Technology Enhanced Learning 2: 51-
         74.
Quintana, C., Reiser, B.J., Davis, E.A., Krajcik, J., Fretz, E., Duncan, R.G., Kyza, E., Edelson, D. and Soloway,
         E. (2004) `A scaffolding design framework for software to support science inquiry'. Journal of the
         Learning Sciences, 13: 337-386.
Rogers, Y. and Price, S. (2006) `Using ubiquitous computing to extend and enhance learning experiences', in
         M. van t Hooft & K. Swan (eds.). Ubiquitous computing in education: invisible technology, visible
         impact. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Roschelle, J. and Pea, R. D. (2002) `A walk on the WILD side: How wireless handhelds may change computer-
         supported  collaborative learning  (CSCL)'.   The International Journal  of  Cognition  and   Technology,
         1:145-168.
Scanlon, E., Jones,  A. and  Waycott,   J. (2005)  `Mobile technologies:   prospects  for their use  in learning in
         informal  science  settings'. Journal  of Interactive Media in  Education   2005(25).  Online.   Available
         HTTP <http:// jime.open.ac.uk/2005/25>      (accessed 4 April 2010).
Sharples, M., Taylor, J. and Vavoula, G. (2007) `A theory of learning for the mobile age', in R. Andrews & C.
         Haythornthwaite (eds.), The Sage handbook of e-learning research (pp. 221­247). London: Sage.
Spikol, D., Milrad, M, Maldonado, H. and Pea, R. (2009) `Integrating co-design practices into the development
         of mobile science collaboratories'. Proceedings of the 9th IEEE International Conference on Advanced
         Learning Technologies (ICALT 2009), July 14-18, 2009. Riga, Latvia.
Tinker, R.F. and   Krajcik, J.S. (2002)  (eds.) Portable technologies: Science   learning in  context.  New York:
         Kluwer Academic/Plenum Press.
Vogel, B., Spikol, D. Kurti, A. and Milrad, M. (2010a) `Integrating mobile, web and sensory technologies to
         support inquiry-based science learning'. In Proceedings Of Wireless Mobile Ubiquitous Technologies
         in Education 2010, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.

Acknowledgments
The LETS GO project is principally funded by the Knut and Alice Wallenberg Foundation, as part of the
Wallenberg   Global  Learning    Network.  We   also thank Pasco   scientific, Intel Research,   and the  National
Geographic Society for their contributions and partnership in the project. Special thanks to our colleagues at
Linnaeus University (Prof. Marcelo Milrad, Bhaktiar Voguel, Arianit Kurti, and Daniel Spikol), and our other
colleagues from the LETS GO team at Stanford University (Prof. Rodolfo Dirzo, Cindy Wilber, Janelle Austin,
Daniel  Stringer, Tim Reilly, and  Jennifer  Bundy).   We  are  especially grateful  to the participating teachers,
students, and administrators from the schools for their creative engagement in these studies.

© ISLS                                                                                                           88
