CSCL 2013 Proceedings                   Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

Blended Learning Experiences in a Multimodal Setting: The Impact
   of Communication Channels and Learners' CMC Expertise on
                     Perceived Social Presence and Motivation
 Marc Mannsfeld, Social Psychology, University of Duisburg-Essen, Germany, marc.mannsfeld@uni-due.de
   Astrid Wichmann, Institute of Education, Ruhr-University Bochum, Germany, astrid.wichmann@rub.de
  Nicole Krämer, Social Psychology, University of Duisburg-Essen, Germany, nicole.kraemer@uni-due.de
       Nikol Rummel, Institute of Education, Ruhr-University Bochum, Germany, nikol.rummel@rub.de

         Abstract: Virtual learning environments are increasingly used to support online and blended
         learning   settings. Yet, little is known   about   how  different synchronous     communication
         modalities influence students' perceptions of social presence in learning settings. Existing
         laboratory research indicates that social presence is negatively affected when communication
         cues are reduced to text. Using a within-subject design, we investigated whether differences in
         communication modality (1. chat, 2. audio, and 3. audio-video) affect social presence and
         motivation in a blended learning seminar. Results show in contrast to laboratory findings that
         communication   modality     did not  directly affect students' perceptions    of social presence.
         Instead,   expertise  in  computer-mediated    communication    (CMC)    appeared    as  important
         moderating variable that facilitated the perception of social presence as well as motivation in
         the chat modality more strongly than in audio or audio-video. Current results provide new
         insights and practical implications for online learning settings that use synchronous CMC.

Introduction
Virtual learning  environments     (VLE)   as  communication    platforms   constitute  the surrounding    for social
interactions and perceptions through which collaborative online learning takes place. In VLE "the technological
mediation of interaction and communication creates an additional layer of mediation with and through which
learners must interact" (Hillman et al., 1994 cited in Johnson, Gueutal, & Falbe, 2009, p. 547). This layer affects
the mode of communication, perception of physically separated individuals as well as the learning experience as
a whole. Social presence, defined by Short, William and Christie (1976) as the "degree of salience of the other
person in the interaction and the consequent salience of the interpersonal relationships" (p. 65), was recognized
as a fundamental factor to enhance social interaction, which is the major vehicle of social learning in VLE (Tu,
2000). It was found to be positively related to the socio-emotional climate, especially to social dynamic and
motivation (Gunawardena       &   McIsaac,   2004). Nonetheless  only  a few    studies in  the context of  learning
investigate social presence in synchronous CMC, especially in terms of comparing different communication
modalities. By varying synchronous conversation modes (chat, audio, audio-video) in avatar related laboratory
studies (Bente, Rüggenberg, Krämer, & Eschenburg, 2008; Sallnäs, 2002) less social presence was perceived in
conversations via chat in comparison to CMC via audio or audio-video. The goal of the current study was to test
if prior laboratory findings for synchronous CMC modalities (chat, audio, audio-video) can be replicated in a
field experiment within a VLE used for a blended learning seminar. We explored whether communication
modalities affect the perception of social presence and took particularly the factor of expertise with regard to
CMC into account, as it was found to facilitate the reception of social presence in text-based CMC (Mykota &
Duncan, 2007; Wrench & Punyanunt-Carter, 2007). Furthermore, we analyzed the impact of communication
modalities on students' motivation to gain new insights for the improvement of CMC learning settings.

Theoretical Background
Short et al. (1976) stated in their original work that the capabilities of media to transfer nonverbal social cues
determine the degree of social presence. From this line of argumentation, one can infer that communication
modalities that convey more cues lead to a higher degree of perceived social presence. This perspective is in line
with the reduced social cues approach (Kiesler, Siegel & McGuire, 1984) and takes into account that channel
restrictions (e.g. text only) affect the degree of delivered social cues (e.g. via facial expressions, gestures,
intonation of voice) and consequently the amount of perceivable social presence. Researchers questioned the
idea that properties of media are the most salient determining factor for establishing social presence (Garrison,
Anderson, & Archer, 2000; Gunawardena, 1995; Walther, 1992). Others have argued that the perception of
social presence  is interindividually  different and  varies greatly, even  for the same    communication   medium
(Johansen, Vallee, & Spangler, 1988; Lombard & Ditton, 1997). In line with evidence for both perspectives (see
e.g. Lee & Nass, 2005 for a review), Tu (2002) points out: "Social presence is a dynamic variable based upon
the user's perception and the characteristics of the medium." (p. 3) The current study therefore investigated
synchronous  CMC     modalities    as independent    variable, and learners'  expertise    with regard  to CMC    as
moderating factor in relation to social presence.

© ISLS                                                                                                            89
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                  Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

Social Presence and Learners' CMC Expertise
As proposed by Short et al. (1976) it can be expected that the less social cues are conveyed via synchronous
communication modalities, the less social presence is perceived. Subsequent studies (Bente et al., 2008; Sallnäs,
2002) affirmed that social presence is perceived to a lower degree in synchronous communication via chat in
comparison to audio or audio-video, but also showed that audio did not differ from audio-video with regard to
social presence. Therefore we propose:
        H1: The amount of perceived social presence is lower in text-based CMC in comparison to audio or
audio-video CMC.
        Following     Walthers'   (1992)    social information    processing  perspective,  individuals are  able  to
compensate   missing  cues  in CMC    situations   ­ e.g   in  text-based communication    by using and  interpreting
creative constructions like acronyms or emoticons to communicate nonverbal information (Walther & Tidwell,
1995) ­ and can perceive text based CMC situations even as rich as face-to-face communication. The degree to
which users are able to intensify CMC socio-emotionally thereby depends on the acquired experiences and
competences over time with certain communication media (Walther, 1996). Research has shown that CMC
skills have a positive impact on the perception of social presence in text-based communication (Mykota &
Duncan, 2007; Wrench & Punyanunt-Carter, 2007). This indicates that familiarity with CMC modes affects
social information processing and thereby the level of social presence that is perceived in a VLE. As more
naturally produced social cues that can be interpreted automatically are transmitted in CMC via audio (e.g.
sound, intonation  of  voice)  or added   video    (e.g. facial expressions,  gestures) in comparison   to text-based
communication, an interaction effect of learners' CMC expertise and communication modality is expected:
        H2: CMC expertise has a more positive impact on the perception of social presence in text-based CMC
than in audio or audio-video based CMC.
        Moreover, the current study exploratorily assessed if communication modalities influence students'
motivation towards learning via VLE as a major factor with regard to learning. As social presence was found to
be positively related to motivation (Gunawardena & McIsaac, 2004) and research is needed to determine the
extent (Richardson & Swan, 2003), this issue was additionally addressed.

Method
Altogether, 17 students from two German universities took part in a blended learning seminar using Adobe
Connect as VLE. The seminar consisted of 3 face-to-face meetings as well as 9 online sessions, while the latter
were divided in 3 units, each containing three 90 minutes long interactive online sessions that were hold in the
VLE. With the units, predefined synchronous communication modalities (1. chat, 2. audio, 3. audio-video) were
varied over time (within-subject) with a stepwise conjunction of modalities.
        Before the first unit (chat), a pre-questionnaire was administered to measure learners' CMC expertise.
The scale consisted of 4 items that measured the frequency of using online communication tools (e.g. Blogs)
from never (1) to very often (5). After each unit, social presence and motivation tailored towards the perception
of online sessions within the unit were measured as dependent variables on 5-point Likert scales ranging from
completely disagree (1) to completely agree (5). Social presence was measured with the two subscales co-
presence (8 items) and perceived attentional engagement (6 items) adapted from Biocca and Harms (2003) that
were selected because of their perfect applicability in the seminar context. Co-presence is related to the degree
to which one feels that others are together in the same space. Perceived attentional engagement measures the
degree to   which  one  pays   attention/is distracted   as  a  basal, primitive factor for feeling social  presence.
Motivation was assessed via 7 items adopted from the Intrinsic Motivation Questionnaire (Deci, & Ryan, 1985),
measuring enjoyment and perceived value.

Results
Reliability tests for all scales  revealed  satisfactory  to   high internal consistencies  (Cronbach's    > .72). A
repeated measures ANOVA was calculated to test effects of communication modalities on social presence. H1
was not supported as no significant main effect was found, that is, audio or audio-video did not outperform chat
with regard to social presence (Table 1).

Table 1: Means (M) and Standard Deviations (SD) for social presence and motivation in different
communication modalities.

                                    Social Presence                                     Motivation
                               M                         SD                      M                   SD
 Chat                          3.45                      .52                   3.28                  .79
 Audio                         3.58                      .38                   3.43                  .58
 Audio-Video                   3.38                      .52                   3.02                  .91

© ISLS                                                                                                             90
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                   Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

         Regression techniques were applied to test effects of person characteristics on the influence of within-
subject factors (Judd, Kenny, & McClelland, 2001) to analyze the effect of CMC expertise on the perception of
social presence in relationship to different communication modalities. First, it was examined if CMC expertise
moderated the perception of social presence in the chat modality stronger in comparison to audio and audio-
video modalities with more social cues. To test H2, a weighted difference score for social presence (audio +
audio-video ­ 2*chat) was regressed on CMC expertise, which emerged as a predictor on the 10% level of
significance ( = -.598, t = -2.237, p = .052, R² = .283). In line with H2, CMC expertise related more strongly to
the perception of social presence (learners with more CMC expertise felt more social presence) in the chat
modality than in the audio or audio-video modalities. When comparing single conditions with each other, CMC
expertise did not emerge as a significant predictor for the difference scores audio-video minus audio as well as
audio minus chat, but for the difference score audio-video minus chat ( = -.603, t = -2.27, p = .050, R² = .292)
with a similar interaction: CMC expertise moderated social presence in the chat modality more strongly than in
the audio-video modality    whereby    learners with more    CMC     expertise perceived  more social presence  than
learners with less CMC expertise.
         A repeated measures ANOVA was calculated to test effects of communication modalities on students'
motivation. No significant main effect occurred. Additionally the same regression techniques as above were
applied to investigate a possible interaction effect between CMC expertise and communication modalities with
regard to motivation. First, a weighted difference score for motivation (audio + video ­ 2*chat) was regressed
over CMC expertise that predicted the difference score ( = -.604, t = -2.397, p = .038, R² = .301) with a similar
pattern as with regard   to social  presence.   CMC  expertise  moderated      motivation more strongly in  the chat
modality (learners with more CMC expertise perceived more motivation) than in audio or audio-video. By
comparing single conditions with each other, the same interaction occurred for motivation difference scores
between video and chat ( = -.591, t = -2.32, p = .043, R² = .284) as well as audio and chat ( = -.568, t = -2.67,
p = .017, R² = .277), whereas CMC expertise was no significant predictor for the motivation difference score
between audio and audio-video. Thus, in contrast to social presence, CMC expertise moderated the treatment
difference with regard to motivation between audio and chat.
         Correlation analyses, investigating preferences for learning in specific modalities, showed in line with
previous findings that learners who were motivated with audio as communication modality did also like audio-
video (r = .90, p < .001), whereas the motivation values for chat did not correlate significantly with audio or
audio-video.  With   regard  to the   relationship  between    social presence  and  motivation,  analyses  revealed
significant correlations in the chat (r = .55, p = .026) and audio-video modality (r = .60, p = .048), whereas not
in the audio modality.

Discussion
The goal of the present study was to test if prior laboratory findings for social presence can be replicated in a
field experiment within a VLE, and to additionally investigate motivation as well as learners' CMC expertise as
moderating   factor. According   to   our findings,  it is unclear    how  reduced communication   cues  affect  the
perception of social presence in VLE. Present results indicate that CMC expertise is an intervening factor that
supports the perception of social presence and becomes more important if communication occurs via chat in
comparison to audio/video, whereas communication modalities did not directly affect the perception of social
presence.  The  latter fact stands  in contrast  to Short  et  al.'s  (1976) expositions  and previous results  from
laboratory studies (Bente et al., 2008; Sallnäs, 2002), what can be explained by the small sample size, differing
operationalizations of social presence or a sequence effect regarding modalities that was caused by the study
design; but might also be due to the fact that interactions via VLE took place for a longer period of time and
under different circumstances (e.g. to acquire knowledge) compared to the prior results from the laboratory. It is
important to note that results need to be treated with caution, because sequence effects could not be ruled out as
there was  no  possibility  to rotate  CMC  modalities    in a university  course  setting due to practical didactic
constraints. Therefore field and laboratory studies have to be conducted, that control additional factors (e.g.
sequence, interaction time, involvement) which may interfere. However, current findings support in line with
empirical  results (Mykota   &  Duncan,    2007;   Wrench    & Punyanunt-Carter,    2007)  and Walther  (1996)  that
expertise with regard to CMC intervenes in the processing of social information delivered by CMC. In the
current study, learners´ CMC expertise had a more positive influence on the perception of social presence if
communication cues appeared on a text-chat basis in comparison to auditory or audio-visual cues. Even though
the difference in social presence between chat and audio was not predicted by CMC expertise, CMC expertise
seems to become more important if acronyms and emoticons replace naturally produced social cues. The less
social cues are transmitted by communication modalities that can be interpreted instinctively, the more CMC
expertise seems to be needed to perceive others as socially present. Further studies need to investigate which
specific CMC skills and competences are required to perceive a high degree of social presence in a social cue
reduced environment. With regard to motivation the current study gives insights, that it is interconnected to
CMC   expertise in   a similar way  as social   presence.  Interestingly, students who   were motivated in  auditory

© ISLS                                                                                                           91
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                  Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

sessions were also motivated in audio-visual sessions, whereas no connections with regard to motivation in chat
sessions were  found.  This indicates  that preferences for communication   modalities   may  differ depending on
CMC expertise, with learners with less CMC expertise preferring communication modalities with many social
cues. However, as CMC expertise did not just impact the degree to which social presence was perceived but
also the motivation to participate in online sessions, learners' CMC expertise can be stated as an important
prerequisite for successful interactive online seminars on a text basis. Consequently prior trainings for learners
with low CMC expertise to learn to adapt to text-based CMC should be able to support rich text-based learning
experiences that involve social presence as well as motivation.

References
Bente, G., Rüggenberg, S., Krämer, N. C., & Eschenburg, F. (2008). Avatar-Mediated Networking: Increasing
         Social  Presence   and Interpersonal    Trust  in  Net-Based   Collaborations.  Human    Communication
         Research, 34(2), 287-318.
Biocca,  F.  and Harms,    C.  (2003).  Guide   to the  Networked   Minds    Social Presence   Inventory   v. 1.2.
         (Unpublished). Retrieved June 15, 2012, from http://cogprints.org/6743/
Deci, E. L., & Ryan, R. M. (1985). Intrinsic motivation and self-determinaton in human behaviour. New York:
         Plenum.
Garrison, D. R., Anderson, T., & Archer, W. (2000). Critical inquiry in a text-based environment: Computer
         conferencing in higher education. Internet and Higher Education, 2(2), 87­ 105.
Gunawardena, C. N. (1995). Social presence theory and implications for interaction and collaborative learning
         in computer conferences. International Journal of Educational Telecommunications, 1(2/3), 147-166.
Gunawardena, C. N., & Mclsaac, M. S. (2004). Distance education. In D. Jonassen (Ed.), Handbook of research
         for  educational   communications     and  technology    (2nd ed.)  (pp. 355­395).    Bloomington,    IN:
         Association for Educational Communications & Technology.
Johansen, R., Vallee, J., & Spangler, K. (1988). Teleconferencing: Electronic group meetings. In R. S. Cathcart
         & L. A. Samover (Eds.), Small group communications: A reader (5th ed., pp.140-154). Menlo Park,
         CA: Institute for the Future.
Johnson, R. D., Gueutal, H., & Falbe, C. M. (2009). Technology, trainees, metacognitive activity and e-learning
         effectiveness. Journal of Managerial Psychology, 24(6), 545-566.
Judd, C. M., Kenny, D. A., & McClelland, G. H. (2001). Estimating and testing mediation and moderation in
         within-subject designs. Psychological Methods, 6(2), 115­134.
Kiesler, S.,  Siegel, J., &   McGuire,   T.  W.  (1984).   Social psychological   aspects  of  computer-mediated
         communication. American Psychologist, 39, 1123-1134.
Lee, K.-M. & Nass, C. (2005). Social-psychological origins of feelings of presence: Creating Social Presence
         With Machine-Generated Voices. Media Psychology, 7(1), 31-45.
Lombard, M., & Ditton, T. (1997). At the heart of it all: The concept of presence [electronic version]. Journal of
         Computer-Mediated       Communication,         3(2),     Retrieved     April      15,       2012     from
         http://jcmc.indiana.edu/vol3/issue2/lombard.html
Mykota, D., & Duncan, R. (2007). Learner characteristics as predictors of online social presence. Canadian
         Journal of Education, 30(1), 157­170.
Richardson, J. C. & Swan, K. (2003). Examining social presence in online courses in relation to students'
         perceived learning and satisfaction. Journal of Asynchronous Learning Networks 7(1), 68­88.
Sallnäs, E.-L. (2002). Collaboration in multi-modal virtual worlds: Comparing touch, text, voice and video. In
         R. Schröder (Ed.), The Social Life of Avatars (pp. 172-187). London: Springer Verlag.
Short, J., Williams, E., & Christie, B. (1976). The social psychology of telecommunications. London: John
         Wiley & Sons.
Tu, C. H. (2000). On-line learning migration: from social learning theory to social presence theory in a CMC
         environment. Journal of Network and Computer Application, 23(1), 27­37.
Tu, C.-H. (2002). The impact of text-based CMC on online social presence. Journal of Interactive Online
         Learning, 1(2), 1-24.
Walther,  J. B.  (1992).  Interpersonal  effects in  computer-mediated     interaction: A  relational perspective.
         Communication Research, 19(1), 52­90.
Walther,  J. B.  (1996).  Computer-Mediated     Communication:    Impersonal, Interpersonal,  and    Hyperpersonal
         Interaction. Communication Research, 23(1), 3-43.
Walther, J. B., & Tidwell, L. C. (1995). Nonverbal cues in computer-mediated communication, and the effect of
         chronemics on relational communication. Journal of Organizational Computing, 5(4), 355­378.
Wrench,   J.  S.  &   Punyanunt-Carter,     N.  M.  (2007).   The  Relationship   between    Computer-Mediated-
         Communication      Competence,     Apprehension,   Self-Efficacy,  Perceived   Confidence,   and   Social
         Presence. Southern Communication Journal, 72(4), 355-378.

© ISLS                                                                                                         92
