CSCL 2013 Proceedings                  Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

     Educator roles that support students in online environments
                   Caitlin K. Martin, Denise C. Nacu, Nichole Pinkard, Tene Gray, DePaul University
             Email: caitlinkm@gmail.edu, dnacu@cdm.depaul.edu, nicholepinkard@gmail.com,
                                         tgray@digitalyouthnetwork.org

          Abstract: Potential generative outcomes of participation in online learning communities are
          documented, alongside inequities in terms of who is participating. We share a blended multi-
          level approach to identify and explore educator roles played to support 11-to-13-year olds'
          learning, participation, and development in one online learning environment.

Introduction
As online learning environments rapidly become part of the education landscape, new methods to make sense of
what is occurring in these environments are critical. Although web-based systems can automatically collect
enormous amounts of user data, there is much we as a field need to understand about what to examine and how
to analyze what we see to reveal patterns of learning. Positive outcomes of participation in such environments
are documented,    but so too   are inequities in the   ways  different populations   access   and use   such online
opportunities. In this paper, we present a blended approach of community-level automated analytics and more
individual qualitative interpretation to look at educator roles played to support student learning in one online
learning environment designed for middle school.

Online learning environments, outcomes, and inequities
In 2010, over six million students participated in online learning at postsecondary institutions in the United
States, a ten percent growth rate from the previous year (Allen & Seaman, 2011). Recently, massively open
online courses taught through platforms such as Coursera and edX, offer free online classes to students around
the world. The rise is apparent for K12 as well. In 2008, an estimated 75% of public schools had one or more
students enrolled in a fully online or blended course, and 66% estimated that their online offerings would grow
(Picciano & Seaman, 2009). Open source platforms offering teachers a customizable online classroom space are
increasingly successful, including Moodle and EdModo.
          Learning content knowledge is one potential outcome of participation in online learning environments,
as students are introduced to new information and submit assignments. Many environments now incorporate a
variety of interactive and social features allowing students to go beyond retrieval and submission of information,
moving to collaborative production, processing, and understanding. We refer to these spaces as online social
learning networks. Within these networked community contexts, less traditional results have been documented
that are believed by some to be important pieces of the 21st century skillset, including managing information,
directing learning  pathways,   collaborating, discussion  and critique  around  common      artifacts, and building
collective intelligence (Barron, Gomez, Pinkard, & Martin, in press; Jenkins, Purushotma, Weigel, Clinton, &
Robison, 2009).
          But only a subset of people participates in ways that can lead to these positive outcomes (Hargittai &
Walejko,  2008,  Jenkins  et al., 2009).   A new  digital divide has  been   identified not  in terms   of access  to
technology, but  in  terms   of who    has the opportunities,  support,  and  knowledge     to  truly participate.  A
knowledgeable social network is one important piece of this system. Parents and other home connections can be
highly instrumental in guiding learning and participation (Barron, Martin, Takeuchi, & Fithian, 2009) but for
many  families,  parent   technological    knowledge  and   co-participation is  not    the norm    (Warschauer    &
Matuchniak, 2010). There is evidence, however, that informal spaces such as afterschool spaces and community
centers, can provide knowledgeable social networks for young people (Barron et al., in press). Online spaces
have the potential to support and supplement these face-to-face opportunities.

Context: Digital Youth Network
The Digital Youth Network (DYN) is a mix of school, afterschool, and online spaces designed to provide youth
with opportunities to develop traditional and digital literacy within a supportive and interactive community.
Programming is offered through schools and libraries, specifically targeting urban populations.
          Previous research within a school-based implementation of DYN highlighted the central position of
DYN educators for student's technology-related learning, experiences, and development, more so than adults at
home. Educators were aware of their critical position within DYN and revealed complexities and tensions that
went hand-in-hand with this status, including difficulty finding a balance between being a teacher and evaluator
alongside being a friend and mentor (Barron et al, in press).
          iRemix is the DYN     online social  learning environment,  which  has become     increasingly   central as
programming   scaled   up and   face-to-face time has   become   more   distributed. iRemix    has an   interface and
functionality similar to popular online social network communities, and students are able to create a profile

© ISLS                                                                                                             93
CSCL 2013 Proceedings               Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

page, link to peers, and share and critique work. Users, including students and educators, share perspectives and
create dialogue through blogs, forums, and mediated debates. In addition to using iRemix in classes, students are
encouraged to use iRemix as an extension of classroom activities, and personally to develop as individual and
collective participants over time. Given the central role of educators and the increasing reliance on interactions
within the online iRemix space, we set out to document educator activity online to learn more about what was
happening and reflect on potential for redesign.

Methods

Participants
The DYN instance presented here blended face-to-face school day classes and online participation for three
sixth grade classrooms (N=79 students, 46% female) at a public charter K-8 school. The school was located an
urban environment, with 725 students, 99% of whom were African American, and 86% of whom were receiving
free or reduced lunch benefits (one measure of socio-economic status). The DYN classes focused on traditional
and digital literacies and were taught by two teachers who specialized in reading and writing and two teachers
who specialized in media arts. All of the educators and students involved in the classes were required to spend
time on iRemix in addition to their face-to-face classroom time. Two additional adult mentors were responsible
for online interactions only (i.e. they were not in the classroom). In all, there were six educators (50% female).

Coding framework and analysis
Our framework for educator roles online is based on work by Barron et al. (2009) that used case studies of eight
highly technologically engaged middle school students from Silicon Valley to identify influential roles played
by parents. These roles included: Teacher, Collaborator, Learning broker, Resource provider, Learner, Non-
technical support, Employer, and Monitor. Together with DYN educators as our design partners, we examined
and discussed these roles in the context of DYN. First, DYN educators shared verbal examples and reflections
from their own   online and  face-to-face interactions  with  students. Next,  archived digital histories of DYN
educators were explored on iRemix, excerpting screenshot examples and discussing as a group. Through several
cycles of collaborative review and discussion, and category refinement, a set of learning support roles that apply
to adult educators within an online social learning network were defined. These included the existing roles of
Learning  broker, Monitor,  and Resource   provider,    and the  new  roles of Audience,  Encourager, Evaluator,
Friend, Model, and Promoter. In addition, we slightly reconceptualized the role of Teacher and defined an
Instructor role. The full set of roles is summarized in Table 1. The roles of Collaborator (play a role on a group
project alongside youth) and Learner (learn from youth) were important face-to-face interactions discussed by
mentors and will be incorporated into the coding scheme if evidence is found online.
         iRemix was intentionally designed to collect and report use data, including logins and particular actions
(including read (viewing work or posts), create (posting media or starting a blogpost), comment (adding a
comment to posted work or discussion) and rate (formally assessing posted work)). Authors determined what
pre-existing logged actions could be automatically coded as a role and what needed to be interpreted by hand.
All instances of educators reading a student post were automatically coded for the role of Audience. Educator
comments   on  student  work and  educator  posts    to the site were   automatically logged but  needed   human
interpretation of the content to determine the type of role evident.
         For this study, we looked at the online educator activities on the iRemix space during a three-month
class unit, from March 17 through June 20, 2012. There were 2221 actions logged as adult roles during this
time; 1824 actions were automatically coded and 397 actions were determined to need human interpretation.
Two co-authors coded a subset (25%) of the actions that needed human interpretation (educator comments and
posts) and reached reliability of 86.4%. Coding discrepancies were discussed and agreements about coding were
reached to mediate ambiguity in the coding scheme going forward. A FileMaker Pro collaborative database with
a portal into iRemix was used to code the activity instances.

Table 1. Coding scheme for  adult learning support roles online. (A) Indicates automatically coded actions.  (H)
Indicates actions that require interpretation and were coded by hand.
                  Role Definition                                       Examples from iRemix
 Audience. View what youth are doing online             (A) View or read student work
 Encourager. Encourage youth about work or              (H) Comment: Jamie this is pimp, the details from the
 participation                                          shoes to the chain are nice. Great Job!!
 Evaluator. Provide grades, ratings, badges, or         (A) Rate student work
 other formal assessments                               (A) Award or create badge
 Friend. Exhibit personal approachability/              (A) Post a status update
 friendship/mentorship, including social posts, off-    (A) Edit/create profile page
 topic conversation                                     (H) Comment: LOL! I love Boondocks, too!

© ISLS                                                                                                         94
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                     Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

 Learning Broker. Connect youth with learning           (H) Comment: check [how to do this] with Ms.
 opportunities (people, activities, etc.)               Ammond or Mr. Vireo.
 Model. Share own creative work/process                 (H) Blogpost: [Animation created by educator]
 Monitor. Impose or suggest rules of behavior           (H) Comment: This is not appropriate and I don't
 online                                                 expect to see content like this anymore. If I see it again
                                                        you will lose your privileges permanently!
 Promoter. Showcase youth participant work              (A) Feature student work on front page of site
                                                        (H) Blogpost: [Embed class-created e-zine]
 Resource Provider. Provide learning resources          (H) Blogpost: Use this link. [link]
 (how-to guides, links, embedded media, etc.)           (H) Posted document: ExportingFromiMovie.doc
 Instructor. Directly teach a concept or skill or       (A) Create a debate
 provide an assignment. Provide prompts and/or          (H) Blogpost: Create a story based on a character's
 feedback to further student thinking or work           trajectory of choices.  It must be 3 paragraphs and
                                                        include character names, settings and a creative plot.
                                                        (H) Comment: I'd love to see a step by step on how you
                                                        made this piece.

Preliminary results
Educator logins ranged from 19 to 97, with an average of 58 logins during the three-month period. The number
of logins was not an indicator of number of activities enacted with the space. Although we are still working on
hand coding the full set of comments and posts, we provide initial findings to date.

Audience for student work
In today's classrooms, teachers need to deeply understand not only the content, but also the personalities,
interests, and abilities of their students (Darling-Hammond, 2008). DYN educators used iRemix as a window
into student work and what students they were doing outside of the classroom. An overwhelming majority of the
actions logged by educators online reflects the Audience role (1812 instances across educators, representing
82%  of the total role actions logged),    including viewing  student-created   media assignments, profile    pages,
personal blogposts, and interactive discussions. What is not yet clear is the extent to which students were aware
of their adult audience and if it motivated participation on the site.
        There were only 12 instances of automatically coded roles that were not Audience. The Friend role
occurred eight times, reflecting educators updating their profile page or posting a status updates. The Instructor
role occurred two  times, reflecting educators    creating debate activities. The  Evaluator role occurred    twice,
reflecting both creating a new type of badge and a formal rating of student work. These results indicate that
although features exist in iRemix designed to promote and support student and teacher interactions around
learning roles, such as a "Feature" button to push student work out to the home page, these aspects of the site
were not frequently being used. Further research is needed to determine why. Educators may not have been
aware of certain features or may have made deliberate decisions about interaction, such as believing evaluation
of student work to be something best done face-to-face.

Connections with individual students
The online social learning network offered opportunities to support students individually, something that has
been documented to be especially important in urban schools (Brown, 2004), but that is often difficult within the
real-time complexities of  the face-to-face   classroom    environment.   Reading  student  work  (Audience   role),
providing formal assessments (Evaluator role), and commenting on student work (multiple roles) represent roles
played by an educator for an individual student as opposed to the entire group. Although there is evidence of
educators enacting roles for a group of students, such as submitting status updates and posting an assignment or
a resource for the class, the vast majority (97%) of the actions logged online were targeted toward an individual.
Even when the Audience role is removed from the count to reflect those roles that are more interactive, roles
played for individual students remain the most common pattern in the online space (87%). Although we have
not finished coding the comments, the subset that we have coded span seven roles and the majority of comments
reflect two roles in particular: 83% had a segment of the comment coded as Instructor and 55% had a segment
coded as Encourager. A common interaction involves a student posting work and an educator responding with
an encouraging statement followed by suggestions or prompts for additional work or thinking, as in the example
below:
        Student post: Theres nothing as great as a dear old sunset / setting in the west / its as beautiful
        as a rainbow / the sun is so close to the ground / yellow orange pink purple blue / it is so pretty /
        you know that night is coming / a sunset is a sign of night / sunset...

© ISLS                                                                                                          95
CSCL 2013 Proceedings              Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

        Mentor comment: I really like how you compared a sunset to a rainbow. You should add more
        descriptions. Describe how the day is different during sundown. Very nice job, so far.

Gender patterns
Though we have a small sample, patterns were visible that need to be explored in more depth. Female educators
evidenced more online actions counted as a learning support role. Males ranged from 66 to 276 role actions
(M=168.70 SE=117.61) while females ranged from 164 to 783 (M=574.67, SE=117.61).

Implications and future work
This work is part of a larger initiative to understand interactions between members of an online social learning
network over time and we believe findings will be generalizable beyond iRemix. This first study specifically
looks at the different roles that adult educators play to support students in an online environment. After hand
coding logged actions that need  human interpretation   and running analysis   on the full dataset we  intend to
compare patterns of educator and  student activities   to explore impact   of adult roles  on  student work and
participation and look at variation between educators.
        We see important implications for research, design, and practice. Understanding of the roles that are
being played and not played and different generative outcomes that emerge from these direct actions can help us
to design online supports for desired actions and outcomes. This work also offers a language and framework to
share ideas and findings with practitioners during professional development sessions, aiding in discussing and
understanding the complexities of taking on multiple roles intentionality around enacting certain behaviors at
key moments to achieve certain instruction and/or interactive goals. Above all, it is an exploration of the online
learning environment as a space that can provide youth with a knowledgeable social network to support their
learning and development.

References
Allen, I. & Seaman, J. (2011). Going the Distance: Online Education in the US 2011. Sloan Consortium Report.
Barron, B., Gomez, K., Pinkard, N., Martin, C. (Eds) The Digital Youth Network: Cultivating digital citizenship
        in urban communities. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Barron, B., C. K. Martin, L. Takeuchi, and R. Fithian. (2009). Parents as learning partners in the development of
        technological fluency. International Journal of Learning and Media, 1(2), 55­77.
Brown,  D. F. (2004).  Professed Classroom  management       strategies: Reflections  of  Culturally Responsive
        Teaching. Urban Education, 39(3), May 2004, 266-289.
Darling-Hammond, L. (2008). Teacher Learning That Supports Student Learning. In B. Z. Presseisen (Ed).
        Teaching for Intelligence. CA: Corwin Press.
Hargittai, E. & Walejko, G. (2008). The participation divide: Content creation and sharing in the digital age.
        Information, Communication & Society, 11(2), 239­256.
Jenkins, H., Purushotma, R., Weigel, M., Clinton, K., & Robison, A. (2009). Confronting the Challenges of
        Participatory Culture: Media Education for the 21st Century. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Picciano & Seaman, J. (2009). K-12 online learning. A 2008 follow-up of the survey of US school district
        administrators. Report for the Sloan Consortium.
Warschauer, M., & T. Matuchniak (2010). New technology and digital worlds: Analyzing evidence of equity in
        access, use, and outcomes. Review of Research in Education, 34 (179), 179­225.

© ISLS                                                                                                        96
