CSCL 2013 Proceedings                     Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

                      Fostering Math Engagement with Mobiles
                              Lee Martin, Tobin White, Angelica Cortes, Jason Huang
                         University of California, Davis, 1 Shields Ave., Davis, CA 95616
      Email: leemartin@ucdavis.edu, twhite@ucdavis.edu, angcortes@ucdavis.edu, jvhuang@ucdavis.edu

         Abstract: Everyday life is a rich context for mathematical thinking and learning across a wide
         range   of  activities, yet  students' everyday    mathematical     competencies   rarely  see light in
         school. Mobile devices, such as smartphones and media players, can provide a much needed
         technical   infrastructure   for linking   the mathematics    of    school   with students' lives  and
         experiences outside of school. In support of this claim, we present results from a study where
         students   used mobile    devices  to  engage   in mathematical     problem   solving, with  problems
         drawn in part from their out-of-school interests and experiences. Findings suggest that mobile
         devices, properly deployed, can help provide ease the process of making connections between
         the  informal   competencies     that students  bring with    them   to school,   and the  disciplinary
         competencies that schools most hope to foster.

Introduction
Everyday life is a rich context for mathematical thinking and learning across a wide range of activities, from
dieting (de la Rocha, 1985), to sports (Nasir, 2000), to personal finance (Martin, Goldman, & Jiménez, 2009).
Yet students'   everyday  mathematical     competencies     rarely see light  in school.   There are many     calls in the
literature for researchers and educators to bridge the gap between students' out-of-school experiences and the
mathematics of school (e.g., Civil, 2002; Nasir, Hand, & Taylor, 2008). Yet there are a number of pervasive
barriers to bringing  together    the mathematical   thinking   and   learning   that takes place   across these distinct
contexts. Among these barriers are:
    ·    Differences  between     in-school    math practices  (e.g.,  abstract, precise,  content  driven, extrinsically
              evaluated)  and     out-of-school   math   practices    (e.g., concrete,     problem-  and   values-driven,
              intrinsically evaluated) (Esmonde et al., 2012)
    ·    Student and teacher beliefs about "what counts as math" typically privilege in-school content and
              contexts (Abreu & Cline, 2003; Martin & Gourley-Delaney, 2011)
    ·    Lack of teacher knowledge of mathematics in students' lives outside of school (González, Andrade,
              Civil, & Moll, 2001)
    ·    Lack of student skill in mathematizing their out-of-school experiences (cf. Lesh, 2003)

         Typically, the only means for connecting these distinct contexts, and for carrying ideas, artifacts, and
representations across the in-school / out-of-school divide, is to rely on students and teachers. While this can be
successful, in the absence of a dedicated team of researchers or other support staff, efforts will remain largely ad
hoc and idiosyncratic. We argue that mobile devices, such as smartphones and media players, can provide a
much needed technical infrastructure for linking the mathematics of school with students' lives and experiences
outside of school. Mobiles have unique potential to erode the barriers identified above. In support of this claim,
we  present  results from a   two-week     study where   students   used  mobile    devices to  engage  in  mathematical
problem solving, with problems drawn in part from their out-of-school interests and experiences.

Theoretical Framework
Mobile devices such as smartphones and media players are attractive educational technologies for a number of
reasons: they are relatively low cost, have low barriers to use, are increasingly powerful, and are increasingly
ubiquitous in the lives of young people. A number of innovative research and development studies have shown
the power    of mobiles   for    creating opportunities  for  deeper   engagement     with  core   disciplinary  practices
(Roschelle et al., 2010; White & Pea, 2011; White, Wallace, & Lai, 2012). Others have looked at the role of
mobiles in informal mathematics learning outside of school (e.g., Jimenéz et al., 2010). We focus here on the
potential of mobiles to bridge the divide between school math and students' knowledge and experience from
outside of school.
         In doing so, we leverage four characteristic informal digital practices associated with mobile devices.
Specifically, mobiles  enable    1)  capturing  and  collecting photos,   videos,   and  audio;  2) communicating      and
collaborating via text, email, phone, and video chat; 3) viewing, consuming, and analyzing text and media
acquired from the internet or from peers; and 4) representing and creating new media and representations using
a variety of apps (White, Booker, Ching, & Martin, 2012). We see in these four practices parallels with core
mathematical practices of data collection, argumentation, and the creation, critique, and analysis of multiple
representations.

© ISLS                                                                                                                 97
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                  Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

         Although our work is at an early stage of development, we draw inspiration from a thread of research
that  spans the  learning sciences   on   how to   build new,     disciplinary knowledge  from    students' existing
competencies, whether those competencies lie in everyday physics (Bryce & Macmillan, 2005), verbal language
play (Lee, 2012), or videogames (Gee, 2007). We see students' informal digital practices as areas of strength
that provide entry points into mathematical practices. Moreover, because mobiles literally travel with students
as they move across the in-school out-of-school boundary, the digital artifacts that students collect and create
can also move across these spaces.
         Our research is in the initial stages of a design based research cycle. The work presented in this paper
does not represent a "final product," and does not reach the design goal of integrating in-school and out-of-
school mathematical practices. Instead, it offers an exploration of the potential of mobile devices to support
bridge-building between informal and formal mathematical practices, and as such offers a platform for further
research and development.

Methods

Participants and Research Site
The study took place in a diverse urban school which serves a largely low income student body (86% are
eligible for free or reduced price lunch). A mixed-age group of 19 sixth through eleventh graders participated in
the study for one hour per day over a two week period. The school emphasized project based learning in several
areas of  the curriculum,    but mathematics  was   taught   traditionally. Students  participated  in lieu of  their
homeroom period.

Design and Procedure
In overview, the study proceeded as follows. Each student was loaned an iPod Touch for the duration of the
study. They were encouraged to take the devices home with them and to customize content and settings as they
saw fit. We began the study with activities designed to orient students to the devices and their capabilities,
especially  with regard   to the  four characteristic  informal   digital practices  we  identified: capturing   and
collecting; communicating     and   collaborating; viewing,  consuming,     and    analyzing; and  representing  and
creating. During the first week of the study, we placed mathematical content first, focusing students' attention
on linear equations and linear phenomena. We then asked them to collect photo and video examples of linear
variation, using their devices, to bring into the classroom context (see below for more detail). During the second
week, we let students' interests lead. We asked them to conduct a mathematical investigation of their own
choosing, using their devices to collect and analyze data, to collaborate with peers, and to represent their results.

Results
An initial question in our analysis was, how effective were the devices in bridging students' informal (out of
school) and formal (in school) experiences? The devices themselves were part of a school-based intervention:
would students treat them as school-like devices, or would they modify and customize them as they might their
own devices? We found some evidence that students easily bridged the dual purposes and possibilities for the
devices. Of  the 220   photos  that students took  with  the devices, two-thirds    were personal   photos, with the
remainder taken as part of school-based activities. The same ratio held for the 52 videos that students took.
About half of the students customized their device by changing the background photos and/or downloading an
app.
         Second,   we  asked  whether  students  saw   the mobile   devices    and activities as supporting them  in
learning and doing mathematics. In an anonymous survey at the end of the two weeks, students were very
positive about their experience. All students agreed or strongly agreed with the statement, "I learned some new
ways to use an iPod during these activities," and 14 of 15 respondents agreed or strongly agreed with the
statement, "I learned some new ways to use math during these activities." Data from interviews suggest a
similar pattern, where students felt that they learned new ways to use the devices that supported mathematical
thinking and learning.
         We   also looked  for   evidence within   the activities themselves   that students   were able to actively
participate in tasks that asked them to work across the in-school out-of-school boundary. We now turn to a brief
description of one such activity that took place during week one, on day three of the study. Students were given
the assignment of taking their devices home or into the community and taking a photograph of something that
showed a line. When they returned to class, they used an app to send the photo to the researcher's computer
(and to a classmate, if they chose to). The second author, White, who was leading the activity that day, chose a
photograph of window blinds to project onto the whiteboard (see Figure 1). He then used a white board marker
to draw a line superimposed on top of the image, following one of the white lines in the image.
         The front of the room computer and projector were reset to display a shared coordinate plane from the
Graphing in Groups classroom network software on the whiteboard (White, Wallace, & Lai, 2012). In dyads,

© ISLS                                                                                                           98
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                   Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

students loaded the Graphing in Groups client app on their devices. This allowed each student in a dyad to
control one of the two points that jointly define a line. Their task was to construct a line that matched the line
drawn on the whiteboard, representing the line from the image of the blinds (see Figure 1).
          The teacher/researcher (White) then asked students, "What do you notice about those equations that's
different from  these equations,"   pointing  to  equations   from the previous    session   that had  whole  number
coefficients on the x term. One student replied, "They're wholes," and then when prompted to clarify, "they're
fractions." White then began to circle the equations for the various lines that student dyads had made, naming
them as he went and writing them on the board: y = 1/18x + 1.53 ; y = 1/5x ; y = 1/10x + 2.5 ; y = 1/10x + 2.
          The variety of fractional coefficients (less than one) provided a set of near contrasts for students to
compare. These were then, in turn, contrasted with lines with coefficients larger than one. The mapping between
the equations and their graphed lines, represented multiply on screen and on the board, provided the context for
a discussion of the correspondence between slope of a line and the size of a coefficient. Within this instructional
context, students had a context for interpreting the slope (angle of the blinds), and knew the source of the
variants  (themselves and   their  classmates). The  activity culminated  in    a discussion   of the "rise over  run"
interpretation of the slope, an idea that was familiar to some, but not all of the students in the mixed age group.

Figure 1. On the left, a student's photo of blinds, with a line superimposed in green. On the right, a Graphing in
       Groups coordinate plane projected on the board, so that students could try to match the drawn line.

          Three things are evident from this activity. First, there was variation in the lines that students created to
match the drawn line. In some school math contexts, this variability would indicate error, lack of precision, and
need for correction. In this case, the minor variations were not problematic, likely because of the informal nature
of the stimulus (a student's photo) and the approximate nature of the line matching activity. As such, the
variability could then be seen as a resource ­ students generated similar but contrasting exemplars, and the
teacher could help the class to abstract over these variations (in coefficient) to induce the relevant invariant
properties (the correspondence between coefficient and slope). By creating space for student-driven variability,
not only in the lines drawn but also in the photographs taken, there was greater opportunity for abstracting over
cases.
          Second, students had opportunities to contribute to the activities in ways other than speech. Even in this
brief  example, students   contributed  in  three  ways: by   taking and  sharing    photos, by   drawing   lines with
Graphing in Groups, and by raising their hand to speak.
          Third, the activity transitioned easily into a second iteration. For the following day, we asked students
to take a brief (10 second) video of something that they thought was changing in a linear fashion. In small
groups, students segmented their videos into one second increments, measured the displacement of the relevant
object, recorded the time and corresponding displacement in a data table (within a spreadsheet application on
the device), and finally created a graph of the motion. As a whole class, students shared and discussed their
videos and the corresponding tables and graphs. Discussions included whether or not the motion was linear and,
if so, what the slope, intercept, and equation of the line would be. Here the notion of slope was generalized
beyond its visual interpretation (i.e., steepness) to represent rate of change.

Discussion and Conclusion
We make    no claim   that the  activities we present here  represent  an ideal   or   optimal learning environment.
Instead, we argue that our data offer a proof of concept that mobile devices, properly deployed, can help provide
technical infrastructure to   ease the process  of making   connections  between     the informal  competencies    that
students bring with them to school, and the disciplinary competencies that schools most hope to foster. As such,
our findings provide warrants in support of further study of mobiles as bridging devices. Our work in this area
continues  as we  move     to incorporate  more   complex  and  substantive     issues from  students'  lives into the
mathematical work of the classroom.

© ISLS                                                                                                             99
CSCL 2013 Proceedings                   Volume 2: Short Papers, Panels, Posters, Demos, & Community Events

References
Abreu, G., & Cline, T. (2003). Schooled mathematics and cultural knowledge. Pedagogy, Culture & Society,
        11(1), 11-30.
Bryce,  T., &   Macmillan,   K. (2005).  Encouraging   conceptual  change:  the   use of bridging  analogies in the
        teaching   of action­reaction   forces  and the `at rest' condition in  physics.  International Journal  of
        Science Education, 27(6), 737-763.
Civil, M. (2002). Everyday mathematics, mathematicians' mathematics, and school mathematics: Can we bring
        them together? Journal for Research in Mathematics Education. Monograph, 40-62.
de la Rocha, O. (1985).   The reorganization of arithmetic practice in the kitchen.     Anthropology & Education
        Quarterly, 16(3) 193-198.
Esmonde, I., Blair, K. P., Goldman, S., Martin, L., Jimenez, O., & Pea, R. (2013). Math I Am: What we learn
        from stories that people tell about math in their lives. In B. Bevan, P. Bell, R. Stevens & A. Razfar
        (Eds.), LOST opportunities: Learning in out of school time (Vol. 23, pp. 7-27). Netherlands: Springer.
Gee, J.P. (2007). Good video games + good learning. New York: Peter Lane.
González, N., Andrade, R., Civil, M., & Moll, L. (2001). Bridging funds of distributed knowledge: Creating
        zones of practices in mathematics. Journal of Education for Students Placed at Risk, 6(1/2), 115-132.
Jimenez, O., Blair, K., Esmonde, I., Goldman, S., Martin, L., & Pea, R. (2010). "Mathematics at play." In S.
        Goldman      and J.  Pellegrino (Eds.),  Proceedings   of the International   Conference   of  the Learning
        Sciences (ICLS) 2010. Chicago, IL (pp. 352-353).
Lee, C. D.   (2012).  Conceptual    and methodological   challenges to a cultural   and  ecological framework   for
        studying human learning and development. In W. F. Tate (Ed.) Research on Schools, Neighborhoods
        and Communities: Toward Civic Responsibility (pp. 173-203). Rowman & Littlefield.
Lesh, R. A. (2003). How mathematizing reality is different from realizing mathematics. In S. J. Lamon, W. A.
        Parker,   S,  K, Houston    (Eds.)  Mathematical   Modeling:  A  Way    of Life, ICTMA     11, (pp.  37-52).
        Woodhead Publishing.
Martin, L., & Gourley-Delaney, P. (2010). "A photograph-based measure of students' beliefs about math." In S.
        Goldman      and J.  Pellegrino (Eds.),  Proceedings   of the International   Conference   of  the Learning
        Sciences (ICLS) 2010. Chicago, IL (pp. 482-483).
Martin, L.,  Goldman,    S., &  Jiménez,   O. (2009).  The tanda: A   practice at the intersection of  mathematics,
        culture, and financial goals. Mind, Culture, & Activity, 16(4), 338-352.
Nasir, N. S. (2000). "Points ain't everything": Emergent goals and average and percent understandings in the
        play of basketball among African American students. Anthropology & Education Quarterly, 31(3),
        283-305.
Nasir, N.   S., Hand, V., &    Taylor,  E. V.  (2008). Culture and  mathematics    in school: Boundaries    between
        "cultural" and "domain" knowledge in the mathematics classroom and beyond. Review of Research in
        Education, 32(1), 187.
Roschelle, J., Rafanan, K., Bhanot, R., Estrella, G., Penuel, B., Nussbaum, M., & Claro, S. (2010) Scaffolding
        group explanation and feedback with handheld technology: impact on students' mathematics learning.
        Educational Technology Research and Development,58(4), 399-419.
White, T., & Pea, R. (2011). Distributed by design: On the promises and pitfalls of collaborative learning with
        multiple representations. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 20(3), 489-547.
White, T., Booker, A., Ching, C. C., & Martin, L. (2012). Integrating digital and mathematical practices across
        contexts: A manifesto for mobile learning. International Journal of Learning and Media 3(3), 7-13.
White,  T., Wallace,  M.,    & Lai, K.  (2012). Graphing   in Groups:  Learning    About  Lines in  a  Collaborative
        Classroom Network Environment. Mathematical Thinking and Learning, 14(2), 149-172.

© ISLS                                                                                                          100
