        The Organization of Collaborative Math Problem Solving
                     Activities across Dual Interaction Spaces
                                 Murat Perit  Çakir, Alan Zemel, Gerry Stahl
                        Drexel University, 3141 Chestnut St. Philadelphia, PA 19104
                        mpc48@drexel.edu, arz26@drexel.edu, gerry.stahl@drexel.edu

          Abstract.  In this paper we  focus  on  the  organization    of  activities that produce    shared
          graphical  representations on the  whiteboard     of   a CSCL    system  with    dual interaction
          spaces called VMT Chat, and the ways these representations are used in conjunction with
          chat postings as semiotic resources by interactants as they jointly make sense of and build
          upon each other's mathematical statements.
          Keywords: Dual interaction spaces, interaction analysis, shared representations

Introduction
          Dual  Interaction Spaces (DIS),  which  typically    bring   together  two  synchronous     communication
technologies such as a text-chat and a shared workspace, have been widely used to support collaborative
learning  activities online  (Dillenbourg &  Traum,    2006;     Mühlpfordt   &  Wessner,   2005;     Jermann,  2002;
Soller  & Lesgold,   2003).  The way  such   systems   are  designed   as  a combination    of  two   technologically
independent communication mediums bring significant interactional consequences for the users (Stahl et
al., 2006; Mühlpfordt & Stahl, 2007). Despite the popular use of DIS in CSCL applications, there are only a
few studies about how small groups organize their interaction in these environments. Existing approaches
include:  (a)  modeling actions  performed   across both   mediums     and   the problem   space   to seek  relational
patterns among ontological entities (Avouris et al., 2003); (b) employing content analytic methods to study
the correlation   between   planning  moves   and   the success     of manipulations    performed     in the   shared
workspace (Jermann & Dillenbourg, 2005) and (c) the relationship between grounding and problem solving
in DIS environments (Dillenbourg & Traum, 2006). In particular, by framing their analysis along the lines
of Clark and Brennan's (1991) theory of grounding, Dillenbourg & Traum (2006) identify two kinds of
uses of the dual spaces to facilitate grounding at various temporal levels during problem solving sessions,
namely   the  napkin  and mockup   models.   Moreover,   since   participants organized    key  factual  information
relevant to the problem at hand on the shared whiteboard during their experiments, the authors attributed a
shared external memory status to this space and claimed that it facilitated grounding by offering a more
persistent medium for storing agreed upon facts.
          The notion of common ground as an abstract placeholder for registered cumulative facts or pre-
established meanings has been critiqued in the CSCL literature for treating meaning as a fixed/denotative
entity transcendental to the meaning-making activities of inquirers (Koschmann, 2002, p20; Stahl, 2006a,
p354). As an alternative to previously proposed approaches that involve modeling of actions and correct
solution paths, or treating shared understanding as alignment of pre-existing individual opinions, in Stahl et
al (2006)  we   have  begun  to develop   an interactional    perspective  to study   the  intersubjective   meaning
making activities of small groups mediated by DIS environments. In this paper we build on our previous
work on referencing math objects in chat by focusing on the sequence of actions in which participants co-
construct and make use of semiotic resources (Goodwin, 2000) distributed across dual interaction spaces to
sustain  their collaborative problem   solving  work    on  open    ended  math   tasks    (Stahl, 2006b).   We  also
compare the affordances of both mediums based on the ways their contents were used as semiotic resources
by the interactants.

Analysis
          The data excerpts we used in this paper are selected from the time-stamped logs of collaborative
problem-solving sessions sponsored by the Virtual Math Teams (VMT) project. VMT is an NSF funded
research  program    through  which   researchers   at the    Math   Forum    and  Drexel   University   investigate
innovative   uses of  online collaborative environments       to support   effective  K-12  mathematics      learning.
During   these sessions participants interacted through     a tool  called VMT    Chat,    which   provides  a shared
drawing area, a text-chat window, and a tool for explicit referencing that allow users to visually connect

                                                        102                                                      CSCL 2007
their chat postings to prior postings and/or to objects on the board (Mühlpfordt & Wessner, 2005). In the
following subsections we present a summary of our overall findings1 about the ways both spaces were used
as semiotic resources by small groups of students as they collaboratively co-constructed and made sense of
mathematical arguments in the VMT Chat environment.

Availability of the Production Process
          Whiteboard and chat contributions differ in terms of the availability of their production process. In
the chat area, participants can only see who is currently typing, but not what is being typed until the author
decides to send his/her message. A similar situation applies to atomic white board actions such as drawing
a line or a rectangle. However, the construction of most shared diagrams includes multiple atomic steps,
and hence the sequence of actions that produce these diagrams is available for other members' inspection.
Hence, the whiteboard affords an animated evolution of the shared space, which makes the visual reasoning
process manifested in drawing actions explicit due to its instructionally informative nature.

Mutability of Chat & Whiteboard Contents
          The two   interaction  spaces  also  differ in term  of the  mutability   of their contents. Once        a chat
posting is contributed, it cannot be changed or edited. Moreover the sequential position of a posting cannot
be altered later on. If the content or the sequential placement of a chat posting turns out to be interactionally
problematic, then a new posting needs to be composed to repair that (Garcia & Jacobs, 1998). On the other
hand, the object-oriented design of the whiteboard allows users to re-organize its content by adding new
objects and by moving, annotating, erasing, reproducing existing ones.

Chat vs. Whiteboard Contributions as Referential Resources
          Chat postings and objects posted on the whiteboard differ in terms of the way they are used as
referential resources by the participants as well. The content of the white board is persistently available for
reference and    manipulation,   whereas   the chat content  is  visually available  for reference for  a  relatively
shorter period of time. This is due to the linear growth of chat content which replaces previous messages
with  the most   recent  contributions  at the  bottom   of the  chat window.     Although   one can make         explicit
references to older postings by using the scroll-bar feature, the limited size of the chat window affords a
referential locality between postings that are visually proximal to each other. This visual locality qualifies
the whiteboard as the more persistent medium as a semiotic resource, although both mediums technically
offer a persistent record of their contents.

Past and Future Relevancies Implied by Shared Drawings
          As part  of an  ethnomethodological      study of  cognitive  scientists' whiteboard   use during        design
meetings  in  a  face-to-face setting, Suchman     observed,   "...while  the whiteboard   comprises   an  unfolding
setting for  the work at  hand,  the  items on  the board   also index   an horizon  of  past and future  activities"
(1990, p317). VMT Chat's whiteboard serves a very similar interactional role, in the sense that what gets
done now informs the relevant actions to be performed and messages to be posted subsequently, and what
was done previously can be reproduced or reused depending on the circumstances of the ongoing activity.
Moreover,    the drawings  on    the board have   a figurative  role in addition  to their concrete  appearance        as
illustrations of specific cases. The particular cases captured by concrete, tangible marks on the board are
often used   as  a resource   to investigate   and  talk about  general   properties of  the  mathematical        objects
indexed by them.

Discussion
          In this  study we   attempted  to highlight    how small   groups   use shared representations   and       chat
messages    together  as semiotic    resources in  mutually  elaborating    ways  during  their  collaborative       math
problem solving activities in the VMT Chat environment. The complex relationships between the actions
that took place across both interaction spaces made it difficult for us to describe what we have observed by
using either  the  mockup   or   napkin models    offered   by Dillenbourg    &  Traum   (2006).  Instead, we        have
observed that in the context of an open-ended math task groups exhibit each type of organization during

1 Due to space limitations we could not include excerpts that illustrate the findings reported in this manuscript

                                                         103                                                         CSCL 2007
brief episodes in the course of their entire session depending on the contingencies of their ongoing problem
solving work. For instance, during long episodes of drawing actions where a model of some aspect of the
shared task is being co-constructed on the whiteboard, the chat area often serves as an auxiliary medium to
coordinate the drawing actions (i.e. mockup model); whereas when a strategy to address the shared task is
being  discussed   in chat,  the whiteboard   is mainly   used to  quickly  illustrate the ideas  stated in text  (i.e.
napkin  model).    Moreover,  we    have  observed  that  the  whiteboard   not only   serves  as a  kind  of  shared
external memory space to keep a note of the agreed upon facts, but also provides semiotic resources that
participants rely  upon   as they   make  sense  of the   unfolding  sequence  of actions.  The   availability of the
contributions posted on both spaces constitute an evolving historical context in which participants decide
upon relevant steps to pursue next and make sense of new contributions in relation to the semiotic resources
persistently available on the shared visual field.

References
Avouris,   N., Dimitracopoulou,     A.,  Komis,  V. (2003).    On  analysis of collaborative   problem   solving:  an
         object-oriented approach. Computers in Human Behavior, 19, 147-167.
Clark, H., & Brennan, S. (1991). Grounding in communication. In L. Resnick & J. Levine & S.
         Teasley (Eds.), Perspectives on socially shared cognition (pp. 127-149). Washington DC:
         American Psychological Association.
Dillenbourg, P. (2005). Dual Interaction Spaces. Workshop presented at the International Conference on
         CSCL, Taipei, Taiwan.
Dillenbourg,   P., and   Traum,   D.  (2006).  Sharing    Solutions: Persistence  and   Grounding    in  Multimodal
         Collaborative Problem Solving. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 15(1), 121-151.
Garcia, A., and Jacobs, J. (1998). The interactional organization of computer mediated communication in
         the college classroom. Qualitative Sociology, 21(3), 299-317.
Goodwin, C. (2000). Action and Embodiment Within Situated Human Interaction. Journal of Pragmatics,
         32, 1489-1522.
Jermann, P. (2002). Task and Interaction Regulation in Controlling a Traffic Simulation. Paper presented at
         the International Conference on CSCL, Boulder, CO.
Jermann,   P.,  Dillenbourg,     P. (2005).   Planning    congruence  in  dual    spaces.  Paper  presented    at the
         International Conference on CSCL, Taipei, Taiwan.
Koschmann, T. (2002). Dewey's contribution to the foundation of CSCL research. Paper presented at the
         International Conference on CSCL, Boulder, CO.
Mühlpfordt, M., & Stahl, G. (2007). The integration of synchronous communication across dual interaction
         spaces.   Paper  presented   at  the international conference   on Computer     Support  for Collaborative
         Learning (CSCL 2007), New Brunswick, NJ.
Mühlpfordt, M., and Wessner, M. (2005). Explicit Referencing in Chat Supports Collaborative Learning.
         Learning.    In T.  Koschmann,    D.  Suthers  &   T. W.  Chan   (Eds.), Proceedings    of the  CSCL   2005
         Conference    on   Computer     Supported  Collaborative    Learning  The  Next   10  Years,   pp  460-469.
         Mahwah, NJ: Lawerence Erlbaum Associates.
Soller, A.,  Lesgold,    A.  (2003).    A computational     approach   to   analyzing   online knowledge      sharing
         interaction. Paper presented at the Artificial Intelligence in Education, Sydney, Australia.
Stahl, G. (2006a). Group Cognition: Computer Support for Building Collaborative Knowledge. Cambridge,
         MA: MIT Press.
Stahl,  G. (2006b).   Sustaining    group  cognition   in a   math  chat environment.    Research   and  Practice  in
         Technology Enhanced Learning (RPTEL), 1(2), 85-113.
Stahl, G., Zemel, A., Sarmiento, J., Cakir, M., Wessner, M., & Mühlpfordt, M. (2006). Shared referencing
         of mathematical objects in chat. In S. A. Barab, K. E. Hay, and D. T. Hickey, (Ed.), Proceedings
         of ICLS2006, the 7th International Conference of the Learning Sciences, volume 2, pp 716­722,
         Bloomington, IN: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Suchman,   L.  A.  (1990).   Representing     practice in cognitive  science.  In  M.   Lynch,  S.  Woolgar,   (Ed.),
         Representation in Scientific Practice. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

                                                          104                                                   CSCL 2007
