     Fostering Knowledge Building Using Concurrent, Embedded and
 Transformative Assessment for High- and Low-Achieving Students
                                           Carol K.K. Chan and Eddy Y. C. Lee
              The Faculty of Education, The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong, China
                                    ckkchan@hkucc.hku.hk, eddy.yclee@gmail.com

         Abstract: We describe the design of a knowledge-building environment and examine the roles of
         knowledge building principles and portfolios as scaffolds in fostering collaboration for students of
         different achievement levels.       Students assessed their contribution in Knowledge ForumTM using
         rubrics and  they    wrote electronic    portfolios and  group   reviews   to  assess both  individual  and
         community progress. We used a 2 x 2 design (knowledge-building principles x achievement) with
         four classes of  9th  grade  students    (n =  141)  working    on Knowledge    Forum.   We  obtained   the
         following   results: (1)   Students   scaffolded    with knowledge-building     principles   showed  more
         participation and conceptual understanding than students working on Knowledge Forum with no
         principles; the effects were more pronounced for low-achievers compared to high-achievers, (2)
         Students' portfolio scores predicted domain understanding over and above the effects of academic
         achievement,    and  (3) Analyses     of knowledge-building      discourse  and  portfolios  showed    how
         students made progress in their collective knowledge advances.

         Keywords: knowledge building, collaborative inquiry, assessment, electronic portfolio.

Introduction
          There is now much interest in examining collaborative inquiry and specifically how computer-mediated
discourse can promote learning and understanding (Koschmann, Hall, & Miyake, 2002). With major shifts from
individual towards social views of learning (Paavola, Lipponen & Hakkarainen, 2004; Sfard, 1998), Bereiter and
Scardamalia proposed that schools and classrooms should be re-structured to foster a social process of progressive
knowledge    building guided   by   the   `Knowledge-Building      Community'    Model    (Bereiter,  2002; Scardamalia   &
Bereiter, 2006). The theoretical ideas of this model, namely, `intentional learning' (Bereiter & Scardamalia, 1996),
`the process  of  expertise'  (Bereiter   &   Scardamalia,   1993)  and    `schools  as knowledge-building    communities'
(Bereiter &   Scardamalia,    1996)   are mediated   in a  computer  learning  environment     called Knowledge   ForumTM
(Scardamalia  &   Bereiter,   1994).  Students    pose  questions, theories  and  explanations,   and  use  graphics  in  the
computer  database   as  they  engage     in collaborative   problem-centred   inquiry.  The   epistemology  of  Knowledge
Building, supported by the software, Knowledge Forum, aims at helping students view knowledge as an object of
inquiry, and improving the knowledge of the community.            Scardamalia (2002) has postulated a set of knowledge
building  principles for characterizing    the dynamics   of  knowledge     building emphasizing  the  need  for students to
pursue and improve ideas for collective advances as in a research community.

          Decades of research have shown the roles of knowledge building in advancing student understanding (e.g.,
Hakkarainen, 2003; Scardamalia, Bereiter & Lamon, 1994; Zhang et al., in press). Although there has been much
progress, there continue to be major challenges to the recognition and assessment of collective knowledge building,
a major theoretical issue in research on computer-supported collaborative learning (CSCL) and a key pedagogical
issue for teachers implementing knowledge building.          In addition, there is a general belief that knowledge building
and related sorts of high-level learning goals of metacognition and epistemic agency are only attainable by high
achievers rather than the mediocre and low-achieving learners. Such beliefs persist despite research indicating the
role of higher-order  thinking    for low-achieving     students  (e.g., Zohar &  Dori,  2003)   and  they  form barriers to
teachers engaging in knowledge building in their classrooms. We need to examine how knowledge building can be
assessed in classrooms and how assessments can be used to guide improvements in knowledge building. We are
particularly  interested  in  examining      the  notion   of  concurrent,   embedded     and   transformative   assessment
(Scardamalia, 2002), emphasizing students' epistemic agency in assessing their own and community progress.               We
believe that student assessing their own knowledge building can take epistemic agency to a high form, thus serving
the dual roles of assessing and fostering collaboration.     We also sought to examine if collective knowledge building
focusing on community progress might         be relevant for students of diverse backgrounds.

                                                              105                                                  CSCL 2007
         We continue with our ongoing research program proposing that "assessment" in CSCL should serve the
dual roles of characterizing and fostering knowledge building, and that students can play major roles in assessing
their collective understanding (Lee, Chan & van Aalst, 2006; van Aalst & Chan, 2007). Due to epistemological
changes  and    new   understandings      about   learning,    the form,  content    and  use  of  assessment     should  aim   at
understanding     stemming     from the   student's point   of view  (Shepard,  2000).   Since knowledge      construction  is an
ongoing process, evidence of learning, should, therefore, be provided by learners themselves based on knowledge-
advancement criteria.       In our  earlier studies  we  have   examined   the  characterization  and    fostering of knowledge
building through the use of e-portfolio in Knowledge Forum -- Students were asked to identify clusters of notes that
best illustrate   knowledge     building    episodes  guided    by  some  principles;   we  found    these   knowledge-building
portfolios could both characterize and foster knowledge building (Lee et al., 2006; van Aalst & Chan, 2007).

         The   present   paper   continues   this   line of inquiry  addressing     the problem   of  assessing    individual  and
collective knowledge      advances     in fostering  collaboration   for  students   of different  abilities. There   are several
refinements    in our design.    First we   aimed   to   extend our  work   to  see  how  knowledge      building  and reflective
assessment  could     work   for students    of different   achievement   levels,   thus addressing   problems     of barriers to
implementing knowledge building in classrooms.              We included students with different achievement groupings to
examine    more   clearly   how  knowledge-building       pedagogy    might   influence   students   of  different  backgrounds.
Second, we used reflective assessment more intensively -- In the previous studies students were asked to produce
electronic portfolios documenting high points in knowledge building.                In this study, from the start, students were
engaged in using depth of inquiry and explanation rubrics; they were asked to produce both portfolios and group
review  journals   to capture   the best  knowledge-building       incidents, thus  exploring both   individual   and community
progress more deeply. Third, we tracked more closely student growth and knowledge advances in the community
through  analyzing a major inquiry thread in student discourse.

         This   paper  describes     our    continuing   work   in exploring   and   refining the  design     of student-directed
assessment in characterizing and fostering collaboration.           We investigated specifically several Knowledge Forum
classrooms  examining       students   assessing  their  own    discourse with   or  without  knowledge-building       principles.
Building on earlier work, we expected that using peer assessment and making assessment criteria explicit would
help students     engage    in more    knowledge    building   and   domain   understanding.      We    also  examined    whether
knowledge-building     portfolio   assessments    could  also  work  for  students   of different abilities.  There were  several
objectives: (1) To examine if students using knowledge-building principles in writing notes and portfolios showed
more participation and conceptual understanding compared to their counterparts, and to examine such effects on
students with     different achievement     levels, (2)  To  examine   the    roles of  knowledge-building    and   portfolios on
domain understanding, and (3) To investigate growth in the community and to examine how knowledge building
principles can characterize and scaffold collective knowledge advances.

Method

Participants
         The participants were 141 students studying in four grade-nine Geography classes in a regular high school
in Hong  Kong.    The  students    at  this school  studied from    English   textbooks  and  wrote   in English   in Knowledge
Forum. The students were taught by an experienced geography teacher with over 15 years of teaching experience; he
also had several years of experience using Knowledge Forum. The teacher taught all 4 classes. Students in Grade 9
were streamed into different classes by academic achievement based on school examination results. This study used
a 2 x 2 design (knowledge-building principles x achievement); the four classes all used Knowledge Forum and they
included   (a)  High-Achieving      with    Knowledge-Building      Principles,  (b)   High-Achieving     with   no   Knowledge-
Building   Principles,  (c)    Low-Achieving     with  Knowledge-Building       Principles and    (d) Low-Achieving       with no
Knowledge-Building Principles.

Design of the Learning Environment
         Knowledge Forum was implemented in the geography curriculum in the second semester of the year (Feb-
May).   The teacher integrated knowledge-building pedagogy with the school curriculum; several curriculum units
were taught including "Oceans in Trouble: Scarcity and Economic Development", "Rich and Poor: Poverty and
Economic Development", "Saving Our Rainforest: Sustainability and Economic Development". Teachers conducted

                                                                106                                                     CSCL 2007
class discussion during school      and students    were asked  to deepen    their understanding  of  the course materials
through the use of KF after school. We briefly describe the design of the knowledge-building environment:

1. Cultivating a Collaborative Culture. Before the implementation of Knowledge Forum, all students were provided
with learning experiences to familiarize them with collaborative learning. Such learning experiences are particularly
important for Asian students who are more used to the didactic mode of teaching. Several group learning activities
were included, for example, group discussion, jigsaw and collaborative concept mapping.
2. Developing knowledge-building inquiry on Knowledge Forum. Knowledge Forum was implemented formally in
the four classes in February. The teacher constructed the "Welcome View" with different topics for discussion and a
view on assessment which had two sub-views, "Group Review Journal" and "Portfolio" (A view is a discussion
area). The teacher designed the Knowledge Forum views to promote knowledge building while aligning the topics
with the school curriculum. Students worked on Knowledge Forum as they generated questions, posed alternative
theories and hypotheses, brought in new information, considered different students' views, and reconstructed their
understandings. Problems emerging from the computer discourse were discussed in class.
3. Deepening knowledge building discourse, view management and rubrics. It is common that forum discussion
tends to be scattered and fragmented so students need to be scaffolded to deepen their inquiry. Over time, the teacher
worked with students and identified several sub-themes, note clusters, and questions that needed further inquiry.
Clusters of notes were moved into "rise-above" views to help focus the discussion. Several weeks after beginning
their work on Knowledge Forum, students were taught how to assess their own notes with the rubrics for depth of
inquiry and explanation to help them write better notes.
4.  Portfolio   Assessment  and    knowledge    building   principles.  For  concurrent, embedded      and  transformative
assessments, students were required to work in groups to complete an electronic "Group Review Journal" in which
they had to evaluate the quality of the online discourse of their classmates in one of the "view" on Knowledge
Forum.  Also,   each student   was  required to produce    an electronic portfolio  consisting of several  best clusters of
notes. For both group reviews and portfolios, students in two classes were given a set of principles as criteria for
writing and    assessing their notes whereas    the other  two  classes just selected notes on   their own.   The  teacher
instruction for the knowledge-building portfolio was as follows (see Lee et al., 2006):

          You have to select four best notes together with a summary note that explains why and how you have
          selected these notes. Use the `references' and `scaffolds' and `note reader' to write notes and complete the
          portfolio. One note is defined as a cluster of notes.    The four notes selected will include notes posed by
          yourself as well as your classmates. You need to write a summary for each selected note. The summary
          note should explain the reasons for choosing that particular cluster. You need to organize the notes to help
          the readers understand the selected work, for example, give a theme of the selected notes and state which
          principle(s) can be identified. Use the guide on knowledge-building principles to help you with note writing
          and note selection.

          Students were asked to submit the portfolio guided with a set of knowledge-building principles. A brief
description is given of these principles adapted from Scardamalia's more complex system (see van Aalst & Chan,
2007): (1) Working at the cutting edge.   This principle is related to epistemic agency, and it is based on the idea that
a scholarly community works to advance its collective knowledge. For example, scientists do not work on problems
only of personal interest, but on problems that can contribute something new to a field. (2) Progressive problem
solving/Ideas Improvement. The basic idea is that when an expert understands a problem at one level, he or she
reinvests learning  resources  into  new learning.  In the  scholarly  community,    we  often find  one  study raises new
questions that  are  explored  in follow-up  studies.  (3) Collaborative  effort/Community     knowledge.   This principle
focuses on  the   importance   of  working   on shared   goals  and values   in developing  community      knowledge.    (4)
Monitoring     personal  knowledge/epistemic    agency.    This  principle   is based   on the   idea  that metacognitive
understanding is needed for knowledge-building work.          Specifically, it requires students to have insight into their
own learning processes. It is similar to progressive problem solving in that it documents the history of ideas or
problems--but now the focus is placed on metacognitive processes. (5) Constructive uses of authoritative sources.
This principle focuses on the importance of keeping in touch with the present state and growing edge of knowledge
in the  field. To make    knowledge   advancement     requires  making   references,  building on,  as well  as  using and
critiquing authoritative sources of information.

                                                            107                                                  CSCL 2007
Data Sources
Analytic toolkit and database participation
           The Analytic Toolkit (Burtis, 1998), a software designed by The Knowledge Building Research Team at
The   University  of Toronto,  provides  an overview   of student   participation using information   on database   usage.
Several quantitative indices include: (a) Number of notes written, (b) Number of notes read, (c) Number of scaffolds
used; scaffolds are thinking prompts (e.g., my theory, I need to understand) to guide writing and collaboration, (d)
Words per note that might reflect quality of responses; (e) Percentage of notes linked to other notes,      (f) Percentage
of notes with keywords that can help others to search the notes, (g) Percentage of notes read and (h) Build-on trees
indicating the number of notes in a discussion thread.
Depth of inquiry and depth of explanation
           Computer notes on Knowledge Forum in a major inquiry thread were examined for depth of inquiry and
explanation, based on cognitive research on problem-centred inquiry (Chan, Burtis & Bereiter, 1997) and an earlier
study (Lee et al., 2006). Students' responses were coded on a 7-point scale to distinguish the levels of depth of
inquiry, and students' questions were coded on a 4-point scale.      These levels ranged from fragmented responses to
paraphrasing information to inferences to explanatory inquiry. Inter-rater reliability is currently being established.
Knowledge-Building Electronic Portfolios
           Students were asked to produce an e- portfolio where they identified incidents of knowledge building in the
discussion; some were provided with principles depending on the condition. Typically the portfolio consisted of 2
components ­ (1) students needed to identify a cluster of notes that illustrated knowledge building and (2) they
needed to write a short explanatory statement explaining why the selected notes illustrated knowledge building. We
employed the scheme of portfolios (Lee et al., 2006) in rating the portfolios with a 6-point scale. For inter-rater
reliability, 35% of portfolios was scored by a second rater and the inter-rater reliability was 0.90.
Conceptual understanding
           To assess students' conceptual understandings, students in all classrooms were administered this writing
task: `Discuss ONE of the following statements: (1) Marine pollution is mainly caused by overpopulation, and (2)
The   root of the world   problems, such  as  poverty, overfishing,  marine  pollution  and  deforestation,  is the use of
technology.' All the students' essays were scored with a 7-point scale used in school assessment.

Results

Differences on Participation, Collaboration & Conceptual Understanding across Classes
Participation on Knowledge Forum across Classes
           Overall participation and thread length. We examined students' overall participation in Knowledge Forum
using The Analytic Toolkit. The average numbers of notes written were 13.18, 12.95, 7.78, and 6.73 for classes of
High-Achieving    with    Knowledge-Building  principles,  High-Achieving    with   no  Knowledge-Building      principles,
Low-Achieving with Knowledge-Building principles, and Low-Achieving with no Knowledge-Building principles
respectively. We also examined the discussion threads across classes. The ATK program generated four categories
for size of thread ­ (i) small (2-5 notes), (ii) medium (6-20 notes), (iii) large (21-40 notes), and (iv) very large (>40
notes). The findings showed that the two kb principle classes had 75 small clusters, 40 medium clusters, 3 large
threads and 1 very large thread (with 102 notes). The two no-knowledge-building principles classes had 69 small
threads, 45 medium threads, and 1 large thread. The thread lengths suggest substantive interaction among students.
           Participation  in Knowledge   Forum  (ATK   Indices).    We  examined   student   participation in Knowledge
Forum based on several ATK indices including number of notes written, percentage of notes read, keywords, links,
and revision. We first examined whether there were differences across classes for the whole period. A two-way
MANOVA        (principles x  achievement) showed    significant differences across  classes, F(8, 131) =   15.1, p  <.001.
Univariate  analyses  showed   that there were main    effects  for knowledge-building  principles for   the  participation
(ATK) indices of `linked notes', F = 4.36, p<.04, `No. of View Worked in', F = 25.1, p<.001, and `Percentage
Keywords', F= 19.01, p<.001 favoring students in the knowledge-building principles classes. We also obtained main
effects for   achievement    groupings on the ATK    participation  indices of `Scaffolds',  F  = 7.64,    p< 0.01, `Note
Created', F = 5.03, p>.03, and `Words per note', F = 12.2, p<.01 with high-achievers outperforming low-achievers.
           Changes and Growth in Participation (ATK Indices). We examined whether there were increases over time
in students' Knowledge Forum participation. We divided up the whole period of instruction into two roughly equal
time intervals called Period 1 and Period 2 and computed the gain scores (Table 1). Two-Way (principles x
achievement) MANOVA on gain scores showed overall significant differences, F (8, 130) = 2.26, p <.05. Univariate

                                                           108                                                   CSCL 2007
analyses showed that classes with knowledge-building principles had significantly higher gain scores than their
counterparts on `Keyword', F=10.1, p<.002, `Notes Linked', F=8.15, p<.005, `Scaffolds', F=7.96, p<.005, `Views
Worked', F=5.6, p<.002, and `Words per note', F=4.74, p<.04. These results indicated that students in classes using
knowledge building principle made more gains than their counterparts without the principles. As well, results
indicated significant interaction effects (principles x achievement) for gains in `Keyword', F=17.4, p<.001, `Notes
Linked', F=12.01, p<.001, `Percentage of Notes Read', F = 11.72, p<.001, and `'Views Worked in", F= 8.4, p<.01.
Examination of mean scores indicated that the gains for classes using knowledge-building principles over their
counterparts were mainly present for Low-Achieving students using principles. There were no differences in gains
of ATK participation indices for achievement groupings. These results suggest that the effects of knowledge-
building principles on gains in ATK participation were found mainly among low-achieving students (Table 1)

Portfolio Scores and Domain Understanding Across Classes
         Portfolio Ratings. Students obtained portfolios scores of 3.67, 3.16, 2.27 and 2.04 for classes of High-
Achieving  with  Knowledge-Building    principles,   High-Achieving   with no  Knowledge-Building       principles, Low-
Achieving   with  Knowledge-Building     principles, and  Low-Achieving      with no    Knowledge-Building   principles
respectively.  To  make  the differences more  distinct,  we  grouped portfolio   ratings into low-level and high-level
portfolios for analyses. Two-way     ANOVA    showed     marginally  significant  effects favoring knowledge-building
principles classes, F = 3.75, p=.056.  There were also main effects for achievement groupings, F= 19.4, p<.001
favoring high-achievers over low-achievers.

Table 1: Participation on Knowledge Forum for classes in period 1 and period 2.

                           Words per    No of        No of        No of          No of         % Linked %
                           note         Notes        Scaffolds    Views          Notes Read    Notes     Keywords
                           P1    P2     P1    P2     P1     P2    P1     P2      P1     P2     P1    P2  P1   P2
 Without       Low         49    22.7   210   29     2.7    0.2   1.2    0.4     71.6   17.7   58    34  60   33
 Knowledge- Achieving
 Building      High        55    92.3   361   161    8.7    5.5   1.4    1.5     175.7 114.3 65      65  44   46
 Principles    Achieving
 With          Low         27    37.9   136   146    2.9    3.5   1.4    1.9     19.1   41.1   37    63  41   77
 Knowledge     Achieving
 Building      High        45    164.9 320    202    6.0    5.9   1.6    1.6     99.3   74.3   57    51  55   47
 Principles    Achieving
         Domain Understanding. The means of conceptual understanding scores based on the writing task were 5.3,
5.4, 5.4, and 3.6 for High-Achieving with Knowledge-Building principles, High-Achieving with no Knowledge-
Building principles, Low-Achieving with Knowledge-Building principles, and Low-Achieving with no Knowledge-
Building   principles respectively.  To  examine     differences  across classes, a    two-way  ANOVA     (principles  x
achievement) was conducted on writing scores. Results indicated there were main effects of knowledge-building
principles favoring classes with principles F(3, 135) = 10.2 p<.01. There were also main effects of achievement
favoring High-Achieving classes F(3, 135) = 9.9 p<.01. In addition, there was an interaction effect of principles x
achievement,   F(3, 135) = 10.6  p<.0.01 indicating   the effects of the principles    were more  pronounced for    Low-
Achieving students using Knowledge-Building principles.

Relationships among Participation, Portfolios and Domain Understanding
         We examined the relations between students' ATK participation with their conceptual understanding for all
students   working  on  Knowledge    Forum.   Participation   was  measured    by   ATK     measures. To  simplify    the
presentation, the Analytic Toolkit indices were combined using factor analysis. Two factors were obtained, Factor
One called ATK Knowledge Building Inquiry Index (i.e. note created, scaffold, no. of note read, views worked in,
percentage  read,  word  per note)  explained 41%    of the variance, and  Factor   II called ATK  Knowledge  Building
Visual Organization    Index (keyword  use, note   link) explained  16.7%   of the  variance.   Correlation shows that
quantitative and qualitative measures of knowledge building were related -- ATK Inquiry was related to portfolio (r
= .53, p<.001); domain understanding was significantly correlated with ATK Inquiry Index (r = .22, p< .05) and
with portfolios (r = .34, p< .01). A multiple regression analysis was conducted to examine the roles of knowledge

                                                          109                                                  CSCL 2007
building measures   with prior academic  achievement   entered    first, followed by   ATK   Inquiry  Index, followed by
Portfolio scores. Results indicated that academic achievement (Grade 8 scores) contributed significantly to domain
understanding. When ATK participation scores were entered, there were small additional variances and the changes
were not significant. When portfolio scores were entered, there was an increase in an additional 5% variance and the
changes were significant (Table 2). These findings suggest that over and above academic achievement, portfolio
scores contributed significantly to domain understanding.

Table 2: Multiple regression of academic achievement, participation, and portfolios on conceptual understanding.
                                                  R                 R2                     R2 Change
Academic Achievement                              .35               .12                    .12***
Forum Participation                               .36               .13                    .009
Portfolio Scores                                  .41               .17                    .04*

Characterizing and Tracking Individual and Collective Knowledge Growth
Collective Knowledge Building and Inquiry Thread
         Quantitative Analyses.  To examine   further  how     students  collaborated  and   how  they made   knowledge
progress, we selected the largest note cluster, consisting of 102 notes of 19 students' responses and questions for
assessing knowledge-building discourse. Knowledge building is the creation and improvement of ideas in which
ideas are evaluated, revised and tested. Members contribute their problems and different ideas to the database driven
by their personal as well as communal interests; they contribute notes and read, build on, rise-above and reference
each others' notes. Using  the system  from  Zhang  et    al (in press), analyses of   notes in this large inquiry thread
showed there were 79 conceptual comments (7%) in which 32, 24, 8, 16 and 1 notes can be classified into the
following categories: (1) deep  ideas, (2) stated alternative    ideas,  (3) questions for peers, (4) providing resource
materials for inquiry, and (5) rise-above synthesis note.

         We also examined whether the quality of students' responses improved over time. Students' questions were
coded on a 4-point scale for depth of inquiry, and their responses were coded on a 7-point scale to distinguish the
levels of depth of explanation. Results showed that there were 22 `depth of inquiry' and 94 `depth of explanation'
notes. Analyses showed that 68 % of the notes were high-level questions (Level 3 - 4) and 32.6% were high-level
explanatory responses (Level 4 - 5). A high level of questions may have the potential to trigger investigation and
exploration and knowledge building discourse needs to be sustained by a deeper level of explanation. To examine
growth over time, we broke down the notes further into two periods to see the changes in the quality of the notes
(Table 3). Analyses revealed that there was a decrease in the number of low-level inquiry and explanation notes but
an increase in the posing of high-level inquiry, and explanation notes in period 2. The results indicated that this
group of students engaged progressively in a deeper level of knowledge building.

Table 3: Changes in depth of inquiry and depth of explanation over time for an inquiry thread.

                                     Depth of Inquiry                                  Depth of Explanation
                            Low-Level               High-Level                  Low-Level               High-Level
Period 1                         4                           5                      34                       17
Period 2                         1                         10                       15                       31
          Qualitative Analysis of Discourse. We further analyzed the largest note cluster (102 notes), identified in
terms of the knowledge building principle of Progressive Problem Solving/Ideas Improvement to see how
knowledge building evolved.    Students' improvable ideas and growing collective knowledge can be illustrated in a
schematic representation showing how new questions and ideas emerged. Figure 1 shows how a simple problem of
overfishing evolved and grew with diverse ideas focusing on the controversy about using DNA (Use of DNA
Technology as an alternative). The discourse continued to deepen and improve when students discussed DNA in
terms of different aspects (ecological, ethical, economic), and led to further problems and solutions (Need to look
for alternate effective solutions) and redefinition of the cause of overfishing (Who should be responsible?). Analyses
of the discourse showed how a simple problem generated by students (overfishing) became an object of inquiry in
this community. Here the schematic representation captures the evolution of ideas and knowledge progression in this
community of inquirers as students opened up new issues and concerns. The note cluster illustrated how diverse
ideas helped to spark progress and how the discourse evolved and improved with new problems and new ideas
emerging with different students contributing to collective knowledge advances.

                                                           110                                                  CSCL 2007
                               PROBLEM:
                                 Overfishing

                                  IDEA
                      Fish protection using a reserve area

                                 IDEA
                                Use of DNA

Safety Issue:EcologicalDiverse IdeaImpactsEconomicIssue:Diverse Idea          EthicalIssue:Violation of
                                                                              Nature?

                                 Rise Above

           Fish quantity                                  Will increasing
           vs quality                                     fish stocks benefit
                                                          our economy?
                  Rise                               Rise
                  Above                              Above
                              Alternate Idea
                                Alternate Effective
                                   Solutions:
                                  Legislation or
                                   Education?

 Debate

                                NEW PROBLEM
                            Who should be responsible?
                  GOD? More Developed Countries? Less Developed
                               Countries?      Humans?

Figure 1. A schematic representation of emergent problems and ideas in an inquiry thread.

                                           111                                                CSCL 2007
Knowledge Building Portfolio and Group Review
        We included excerpts from a student's portfolio guided by knowledge-building principles to show how
students reflected on collective knowledge building in their own discourse (Figure 2). Not surprisingly, many
students chose the cluster on `overfishing' illustrating knowledge growth. As the portfolio entry shows, the student
documented the collective growth of knowledge in the community and explained why he thought it illustrated
progressive problem solving; he examined different levels of contribution from his classmates using the rubrics and
reflected metacognitively on his own contribution and understanding.

        Sub-Theme Because of overfishing, fish stock fluctuates and they affect the fishermen and food
        supply badly in some developing countries. Our classmates suggest that we can try to apply DNA
        to  the fish so as to change          their DNA   to let  them   reproduce       faster to solve  the problem.    This
        cluster is discussing the advantages and disadvantages of using DNA to fish in order to discuss the
        [possibility] of using DNA to solve the problem of overfishing.                     Progressive Problem Solving
        This cluster consists of many notes, they always pose notes providing better [ideas] and further
        supplementary explanations of the information. They discuss all the advantages and disadvantages
        of using DNA to [see if they] can solve the problem. They give further room for readers to think
        about....   For example            1 Changing    DNA     isn't a  solution.      This   classmate   has  raise[d] the
        disadvantages of changing DNA at first, after reading other notes, he even [found] other notes
        [dealing  with]  the disadvantages          of  changing  DNA.            2 About  the  disadvantages   of changing
        DNA of the fish. Classmates make good use of raising questions to improve their theory. Raising
        questions continually can help to improve ideas and give further supplementary explanations of
        the idea....Although this is a good cluster, there are still some good and bad questions.....Example
        of good answer:      3 DNA~Good/Bad This note has 2 features, he [describes] a possible situation
        of changing fish DNA [and] even shows his personal view of changing DNA. However, he can
        make a further explanation [and] his prediction would be better....What I have learned.                    From this
        cluster,  I have learned  there        are   many  methods     to  solve     the problem    of overfishing  not   just
        reducing the population....

                    Figure 2. An example of a portfolio notes showing use of principles and rubrics.

Discussion
        We have designed an assessment approach to characterize and to foster collective knowledge advances in
Knowledge   Forum.   Primarily  we           turned over agency   to   the students,      asking   them  to assess the    community's
knowledge advances in the computer discourse, using rubrics, group reviews and portfolios. Our findings indicate
that the students provided with knowledge-building principles performed better than those without principles on
ATK participation, portfolios and domain understanding; the effects were more pronounced for low achievers than
for high achievers on several measures. Portfolio scores predicted domain understanding over and above the effects
of academic achievement. Discourse analyses and portfolios helped characterize knowledge building as progressive
inquiry and  idea improvement.   These         analyses  also    provide  insights    about   how   such  concurrent,  embedded   and
transformative assessment might scaffold both collective and individual advances.

Characterizing and Fostering Knowledge-Building
        We    have   replicated and          extended    earlier findings   on       roles of   knowledge-building     portfolios  for
characterizing and fostering knowledge building (Lee et al., 2006; van Aalst & Chan, 2007). The present results
showed the roles of knowledge-building principles and portfolio assessment on knowledge building and domain-
related understanding.   Consistent with earlier work, we found that the knowledge-building                      portfolio is a useful
artifact to capture and characterize collective knowledge advances. Each portfolio is not an individual work ­ it is
based on the collective efforts of students tracking their own growth in their understanding of certain ideas.                  These
portfolios have  pedagogical  benefits        and   they might   also  help address      theoretical   issues of how   we  can  assess
collaboration and    group   cognition         (Stahl,  2006).    Primarily,        knowledge-building      portfolios consisting  of
contributions   from  various members           in  the  community     might help      to  illuminate  the  nature and    dynamics  of
knowledge building focusing on idea improvement. More importantly, these e-portfolios that assess and document
students' growth over a sustained period of time are somewhat different from the common approach of analyzing

                                                                  112                                                        CSCL 2007
collaboration based on minute-to-minute moves. The way these portfolios show a growth trajectory over time may
provide another approach for examining how new ideas can be created, refined and sustained in collaboration.
        Our results indicated that students using knowledge-building principles to assess their own and community
work performed better than those without the help of knowledge-building principles. These findings suggested that
helping students to recognize knowledge building episodes and to explain them might be important to help them
engage in  more   knowledge   building.   When  they browsed    the database  they  were  better  able to  identify good
examples and become more metacognitive. Students engaged in examining their own and community knowledge
advances might be more likely to engage in co-construction and thus developed deeper understanding of domain
knowledge. This study examined portfolios and we refined their use, helping students to assess both individual and
group contributions using rubrics of depth of inquiry/explanation and group reviews. We noted that students made
reference to individual notes using rubrics as well as group progress in portfolios. Students discussed, evaluated and
rated each of the exemplary notes as well as the cluster as a whole and considered knowledge building in the context
of how  different notes   or ideas  improved    collectively in sustaining   knowledge   building   discourse. Portfolio
assessment  extended  with   rubric evaluation  helped  the  students to   identify individual work    and community's
progress as well as to help them reflect metacognitively on   their own understanding

Tracking Knowledge Growth in the Community
        As knowledge building focuses on improvable ideas, this study also provides some ways to show how we
tracked student growth. ATK indices showed that students made gains and those using the principles made more
gains over time. We also examined whether students had made knowledge advances focusing on the analyses of a
large inquiry thread. We rated each note in the cluster using rubics of inquiry and explanation so as to explore the
relationship between individual understanding and collective knowledge building. Rating of the notes suggested that
students wrote deeper questions and explanations in later parts of the discourse compared to earlier phases.
        We also attempted to employ a schematic representation to trace idea improvement episodes in online
discourse. Findings show that the inquiry thread that we have examined consists of a large proportion of high-level
inquiry and explanatory responses. Conceptual comments could generate more ideas, sustaining the inquiry for
alternative and diverse ideas for reaching a deeper level of understanding for the community (Zhang et al., in press).
Analysis indicates that students scaffolded by knowledge-building principles could generate more high-level inquiry
and explanatory questions and responses. The schematic representation we have produced illustrates aspects of how
new ideas and new problems emerge in the knowledge building community. One simple problem of overfishing
aroused immense interest in students who worked on the idea of using advanced technology as a solution. In the
event of debating over the feasibility of changing DNA of fish, new ideas emerged and new problems came into
existence as "Who should be responsible? God? More developed countries (MDCs) or Less developed countries
(LDCs)? Or Humans?" Questions centred on problem-based inquiry would engage students in knowledge-seeking
inquiry. They formulated questions around problems; they began to identify difficulties with their understanding,
and constructed explanations to guide their inquiry.

Knowledge Building and Student Diversity
        This   study also  showed   that, guided by  knowledge     building principles, students,   both high- and  low-
achievers, engaged   in productive  knowledge    practices.  Most  interestingly, there were   some   interaction effects
indicating that knowledge building principles had more effects for students in Low-Achieving classes on gains in
participation and domain   understanding.      This  extends  our  earlier work,  suggesting   that knowledge   building
principles and  portfolios can benefit    both students of   high-  and low  achievement   levels.   These  findings  are
consistent with research on higher-order thinking for low-ability students (Zohar & Dori, 2003) and recent work on
knowledge building for high and low achievers (Niu & Van Aalst, accepted).

        Many teachers believe knowledge building and other forms of high-level instruction would be difficult for
low-achievers.  The contextual background in Hong Kong, with streaming of students into high- and low-ability
groupings, provided us an opportunity to examine whether knowledge building principles could be applicable for
low achievers. We did find that high-achievers outperformed low-achievers on portfolios, possibly due to the more
complex nature of the task. Nevertheless, for Forum participation, we found low-achievers gained more than high-
achievers when they were scaffolded by knowledge-building principles. We even found that low-achievers benefited
more than high-achievers on domain understanding when provided with principles.          Such findings are interesting
because often teachers will see student ability as barriers. Knowledge building focuses on collective work rather
than individual competence. Similar to other cognitive models, such as fostering a community of learners focusing

                                                          113                                                  CSCL 2007
on students as teachers (Brown & Campione, 1994),         the emphasis on collective progress in knowledge building
might provide another pedagogical model to help work with students of diverse abilities.
         In sum, we extended our earlier work examining portfolio assessments and demonstrated more clearly the
roles of knowledge-building principles using group review journals, portfolio and rubrics.         Students constructed
their collective understanding through analysing the online discourse, and group review journals and portfolios were
used to mediate the interaction between individual and collective knowledge advances. Our study has shown that
concurrent and embedded assessments are useful for both high- and low-achieving students when given appropriate
scaffolds. When students are provided with the principles, they became more aware of what productive discourse
entails; the principles are scaffolds for their knowledge-building progressive inquiry. How individual and collective
agency can be supported by assessment in the knowledge-building community are important research issues that
need to be investigated further.

References
Bereiter, C., & Scardamalia, M. (1993). Surpassing ourselves: An inquiry into the nature and implications of the
         nature of expertise. Chicago: Open Court.
Bereiter, C., & Scardamalia, M. (1996). Rethinking learning. In. Malden, MA, US: Blackwell Publishers.
Bereiter, C. (2002). Education and mind in the knowledge age. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Burtis, J. (1998). Analytic Toolkit   The Ontario Institute for Studies in Education. University of Toronto.
Chan, C.K.K., Burtis, J., & Bereiter, C. (1997). Knowledge building as a mediator of conflict in conceptual change.
         Cognition and Instruction, 15, 1-40.
Chan, C.K.K., & van Aalst, J. (2004). Learning, assessment and collaboration in computer-supported environments.
         In J. W. Strijbos, P.A. Kirschner, & R.L. Martens (Eds.), What we know about CSCL and implementing it
         in higher education (pp. 87-112). Dordrecht; Boston: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Hakkarainen, K. (2003). Emergence of progressive-inquiry culture in computer-supported collaborative learning.
         Learning Environments Research, 6, 199-220.
Koschmann,    T., Hall,   R., &   Miyake,   N. (2002). CSCL2:     Carrying  forward   the   conversation. Mahwah:   NJ:
         Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Lee, E., Chan,    C.K.K., &   van Aalst, J. (2006).  Students  assessing their  own  collaborative knowledge   building.
         International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 1, 277-307.
Niu, H., &    van Aalst,  J. (accepted). Is knowledge  building  only  for  certain students?  An  exploration of online
         interaction patterns in two grade 10 social studies courses. Canadian Journal of Learning and Technology.
Paavola,  S., Lipponen,   L.  &  Hakkarinen,   K. (2004).  Models  of  innovative   knowledge   communities    and three
         metaphors of learning. Review of Educational Research, 74, 557-576.
Scardamalia, M. (2002). Collective cognitive responsibility for the advancement of knowledge. In B. Smith (Ed.),
         Liberal Studies in a Knowledge Society (pp.76-98). Chicago: Open Court.
Scardamalia, M. & Bereiter, C. (2006). Knowledge building: Theory, pedagogy and technology. In R.K. Sawyer
         (Ed.), The   Cambridge    handbook    of the learning  sciences   (pp. 97-115).    New York:   NY:  Cambridge
         University Press.
Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (1994). Computer support for knowledge-building communities. The Journal of the
         Learning Sciences, 3, 265- 283..
Scardamalia, M., Bereiter, C., & Lamon, M. (1994). The CSILE project: Trying to bring the classroom into world 3.
         In. K. McGilly (Ed.), Classroom lessons: Integrating cognitive theory and classroom practice (pp. 201-
         228). Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Sfard, A. (1998). On the two metaphors for learning and the danger of choosing one. Educational Researcher, 27
         (2), 4-13.
Shepard, L. A. (2000). The role of assessment in a learning culture. Educational Researcher, 29 (7), 1-14.
Stahl, G. (2006). Group cognition: Computer support for building collaborative learning. Cambridge, MA: MIT
         Press.
van  Aalst, J., &   Chan, C.   K.  K. (2007).  Student-directed  assessment    of  knowledge   building using  electronic
         portfolios. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 16, 175-220.
Zhang, J.   W., Scardamalia,   M., Lamon,    M.,  Messina, R.,  & Reeve,    R. (in  press). Socio-cognitive dynamics of
         knowledge    building    in  9-  and  10-year-olds.   Journal   of  Educational     Technology   Research  and
         Development.
Zohar, A.,  &   Dori, Y.  J.  (2003). Higher   order  thinking skills and  low-achieving    students: Are they mutually
         exclusive? Journal of the Learning Sciences, 12, 145.

                                                           114                                                  CSCL 2007
