        Evaluating the Quality of Dialogical Argumentation in CSCL:
                    Moving Beyond an Analysis of Formal Structure
    Douglas Clark, College of Education, Payne 203F, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ 85287-0911, USA,
                                                  Douglas.B.Clark@asu.edu,
   Victor Sampson, College of Education, Payne 203F, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ 85287-0911, USA,
                                                   victor.sampson@asu.edu
          Armin Weinberger, Ludwig-Maximilans-UniversitСt, Leopoldstr. 13, 80802 Munich, Germany,
                                                armin.weinberger@psy.lmu.de,
  Gijsbert Erkens, Research Centre Learning in Interaction, Utrecht University, Heidelberglaan 1, 3584 CS Utrecht,
                                                   NL, G.Erkens@fss.uu.nl

         Abstract:    Over     the   last decade,   researchers   have    developed    sophisticated   online  learning
         environments to promote argumentative discourse between students. This symposium examines
         some    of  the  diverse    ways    researchers   have  attempted     to  examine   how    students  engage   in
         argumentation       and to   assess  the effectiveness   of  CSCL     environments     in fostering productive
         argumentation.      The   papers    presented  as  part of  this  symposium     will   focus on  four different
         categories of analytic frameworks: (1) nature and function of contributions within the dialog, (2)
         nature   of reasoning,      (3)  conceptual    quality, and   (4) patterns   and   trajectories  of participant
         interaction. Example analytic frameworks from each category are presented in detail rich enough
         to   illustrate their   nature   and  structure.  Synthetic   discussions    of each    category  consider    the
         frameworks      in  light  of the   underlying   theoretical  perspectives   on    argumentation,   pedagogical
         goals, and online environmental structures.

Supporting and Promoting Argumentation in CSCL Environments
         Online learning environments that engage and support students in dialogic argumentation provide excellent
opportunities for students productively to propose, support, evaluate, critique, and refine ideas. Over the last decade,
a  number   of  sophisticated    environments     have    been   developed     to support   students  engaging    in this   type of
knowledge-building       discourse.  Measuring    the   nature and  quality    of the dialogic   argumentation    that takes place
within these environments, however, has proven challenging. This is due in part, to the context-specific nature of
argumentation (Andriessen, Baker, & Suthers, 2003). As a result, argumentation quality cannot be defined solely on
the basis of what it is; it must also be defined by what it is used for, who does it, and how it unfolds. Thus, in order
to facilitate research   and    the  development    of  new    CSCL    environments,     the  papers  presented   as   part of  this
symposium     highlight  the   foci,  affordances,  and    constraints of  several    different  analytic methods    for assessing
dialogic argumentation that are currently available to researchers. In addition to providing an overview of available
methods,  a   major  goal    of  this  symposium    is  to  highlight  the  benefits   and   limitations  of using   the   different
frameworks    for assessing    the  quality  of argumentation    in  different    contexts. The  different contexts  that   we will
examine include: (a) the object (or subject) of the discussion, (b) the purpose for engaging in the discussion (e.g., to
persuade  or  to  co-construct   a   better  solution), (c) the  norms    that will govern    how    participants will distinguish
between  ideas   (e.g.,  fit with   evidence   or plausibility),  and  (d) the    medium    (the types  of tools  that  have   been
incorporated into the environment to support argumentation).

Analytic Frameworks Presented
         Early   work    measuring     students'  argumentation     within  CSCL      environments    relied heavily   on   analytic
frameworks that emphasized argument structure and the presence or absence of different structural components of
an argument as a way to assess quality (e.g., Toulmin, 1958). However, over the last decade, researchers interested
in supporting and promoting argumentation as part of CSCL environments have developed a broad range of methods
to assess   the  nature   or  quality     of dialogic   argumentation     that better  reflect   the  context-specific   nature  of
argumentation.    These   methods     have   enabled   researchers  to focus   on   specific  aspects  of  argumentation    and  to
evaluate the impact of specific pedagogical goals or tools as a way to foster productive argumentation in CSCL
environments. In order to facilitate the comparison of these analytic frameworks, all of the papers presented as part
of this symposium evaluate the same short segment of student argumentation (see Table 1). The students in the
example are arguing within a customized asynchronous threaded discussion forum about their interpretations of the
data they have collected in an earlier part of the project (Clark & Sampson, 2005). At the heart of their argument is
the scientific principle of thermal equilibrium.

                                                                 11                                                      CSCL 2007
Table 1: A short sample of dialogical argumentation to facilitate comparisons.

          Individual                                        Comment
           Fran:      I think objects in the same room remain different temperatures because some
                      objects are good conductors and some are bad. This determines how much heat
                      energy is allowed in and out of the object.
           Amy:       I disagree; I think all objects in the same room are the same temperature.
                      Conductivity only determines how quickly an object will reach room temperature.
           Fran:      No, good conductors let in more heat energy than poor conductors, so objects that
                      let in more heat will get hotter. For example, when I put a piece of metal and a
                      piece of plastic in hot water the metal was a higher temperature after 30 seconds.
           Amy:       I guess you're right. Maybe objects are different temperatures.

        How should researchers of CSCL environments interpret our student example in terms of argumentation
quality? In answering this question, researchers must choose a valid and reliable analytic method that (a) takes into
account the context-specific nature of argumentation and (b) is compatible with     their theoretical perspectives on
argumentation, pedagogical goals, and the structure of their online learning environment. For example, researchers
interested in promoting argumentation where individuals attempt to negotiate meaning by "proposing and accepting
information in an effort to modify and build on each other's knowledge" are likely to adopt different pedagogical
goals and online structures than researchers who are trying to promote argumentation where individuals attempt to
"convince each other of their own viewpoint" (Andriessen, Erkens, Van de Laak, Peters, & Coirier, 2003, p. 82).
These differences not only influence the nature of the argumentation that takes place between the participants in a
CSCL environment but also affect what counts as a productive conversation.

        The  analytic  methods  discussed  in this symposium      were chosen   to represent a   range  of promising
approaches for analyzing dialogic argumentation in online learning environments. The selection process focused on
each method's capabilities for assessing dialogic argumentation within online environments independent of whether
or not the method had been originally developed for application in online or offline environments. As previously
mentioned, the categories of analytic focus include (1) nature and function of contributions within the dialog, (2)
nature of reasoning, (3) conceptual quality, and (4) patterns and trajectories of participant interaction. Each of the
papers presented  in this symposium   focuses   on one of   these  categories  and uses the  example    of dialogical
argumentation provided above to illustrate the constraints and affordances of the different frameworks. Each paper
then concludes with a discussion of the suitability of the frameworks for examining the quality of argumentation in
different contexts. The purpose of this discussion is not to identify some frameworks as being "better" than others;
rather it is intended to provide researchers with a way to choose a framework that is compatible with their theoretical
perspectives on argumentation, pedagogical goals, and the structure of their online learning environment.

Analytic Frameworks that Focus on the Nature and Function of Contributions
within a Dialog in CSCL Environments
Gijsbert Erkens
Research Centre Learning in Interaction, Utrecht University

        Analytic frameworks that focus on the nature and function of participants' contributions examine the types
of dialog in which students engage as well as the proportion of conceptually and argumentatively productive dialog.
An example of this type of framework has been developed by deVries, Lund, and Baker (2002) to examine ways to
promote epistemic dialogue in online learning environments. As defined by deVries, Lund, and Baker, epistemic
dialog (1) takes place in a collaborative problem-solving situation, (2) can be characterized as argumentation or
explanation, and (3) concerns the knowledge and concepts underlying the problem-solving rather than the execution
of problem-solving actions. The analytic framework specifies four main categories (explanation, argumentation,
problem resolution and management) subdivided in a total of 13 different coding categories. To foster epistemic
discourse  between   students,  deVries,  Lund,  and  Baker    integrate  structures  that  promote    collaboration,
asynchronous communication, dynamic visualizations, socio-cognitive structuring, and awareness heightening tools
into the CONNECT environment. In this environment, students work together in order to produce a piece of text that
explains a puzzling phenomenon through a process of collaboration and negotiation.

                                                         12                                                 CSCL 2007
         Another  example    of  this type  of    framework   is  Rainbow.   Rainbow,     which  was   developed     by Baker,
Andriessen, Lund, van Amelsvoort, and Quignard (submitted) to analyze computer-mediated pedagogical debates,
comprises seven principal analytic categories. The primary focus is on the epistemic nature of the contributions that
students make during collaboration. The framework was developed to allow the researchers to investigate what it
means for participants to achieve conceptually deeper levels of interaction. At the most basic level, the Rainbow
framework    distinguishes  between   assignment-related      activity and  outside-activity   (any   interaction  that is   not
concerned with carrying out the prescribed task). From there, Rainbow differentiates assignment related activity as
either task-focused or non task-focused. Non task-focused activity is categorized as either social relation (interaction
that is concerned  with   managing    students'   social relations with   respect  to the task)  or interaction   management
(interaction concerned     with managing    the      interaction itself). Task-focused    activity  is categorized      as task
management (management of the progression of the task itself), opinions (interaction concerned with expressing
opinions  with regard to   the  topic under debate),     argumentation    (expression  of arguments    and counterarguments
directly related to a thesis), and explore and deepen (interaction concerned with arguments and counterarguments
linked together, their relations, and the meaning of the arguments themselves including elaboration, definition, and
extension). Baker and colleagues ground the rationale for each of these seven categories carefully in the research on
collaborative learning, task-oriented dialogues, verbal interactions, and argumentation theory.

         Janssen, Erkens,   Jaspers,  &  Kanselaar    (2006)     have developed    a  Dialogue  Act   coding framework      that
focuses on the communicative instead of the epistemic nature of the contributions within a dialog. The framework
first identifies the communicative function of each utterance typed by the students during their online collaboration
and  communication.    The   five   main  communicative       functions    include:   argumentative    (indicating   a  line of
argumentation  or  reasoning),   responsive    (e.g.,  confirmations,     denials, and  answers),   informative   (transfer  of
information), elicitative (questions or proposals requiring a response), and imperative (commands). The framework
specifies twenty-nine different dialogue acts within these five main functions. Seven of the twenty-nine focus on
argumentative dialog. Dialogue Acts are recognized by specific `discourse markers' that indicate the communicative
function of the utterance, i.e. the use of the connective `because' signifying an argumentative reason. The use of
discourse markers  facilitates  the   reliability of the framework     in hand  coding,   but  offers also the  possibility  of
automatic coding.

Analysis of the Sample Argument
         From the perspective of deVries, Lund, and Baker's framework, the example represents desirable epistemic
discourse  because    all four  contributions     to the  discussion   can   be    characterized as   either explanation     or
argumentation. As previously mentioned, de Vries, Lund, and Baker suggest that explanation and argumentation are
"potentially powerful  mechanisms     by which     students   can  collaboratively   construct new  meaning"    (2002,   p.64).
Similarly, Janssen, Erkens, Jaspers, and Kanselaar's framework and Dialogue Act coding system indicates that the
student example represents an extended sequence of argumentation and is therefore of high quality. The student
example also represents quality argumentation from the perspective of the Rainbow framework because the example
involves conceptual deepening and exploration of the topic.

Constraints and Affordances
         Frameworks with a focus on the nature and function of contributions within the dialog focus by definition
on ongoing discourse. They are therefore best suited for coding synchronous forums or asynchronous forums rather
than environments focusing on the juxtaposition of a small number of crafted responses or the interpretation of
dialogic artifacts. That said, however, frameworks such as Rainbow can be adapted to other formats as discussed by
Baker and colleagues. Of the three frameworks discussed, de Vries, Lund, and Baker's framework is noteworthy for
its consideration of  the types of  discourse     moves  that students  may  make;    the Rainbow     framework   is grounded
theoretically and is parsimonious enough to simplify application and analysis. Both focus on the epistemic nature of
task-oriented discourse. Janssen, Erkens, Jaspers, and Kanselaar's framework focuses on the communicative nature
of task-oriented discourse and offers potential in terms of its automated capabilities, but is inappropriate for judging
the quality of contributions.   In sum, these frameworks provide different approaches for researchers interested in
assessing the  nature of  student's   contributions  and  the overall  effectiveness   of online environments     designed   to
encourage substantive discussions about the knowledge and concepts underlying problem solving. An overview of
the suitability of these three frameworks for assessing argumentation in different contexts is provided in Table 2.

                                                              13                                                     CSCL 2007
                              Well defined problem
                                                   with one solution
                                                                      Complex problem with
                                                                                           multiple solutions
                                                                                                               Wicked problems with
                                                                                                                                    no right answer
                                                                                                                                                     Reach consensus or
                                                                                                                                                                        persuade others
                                                                                                                                                                                         Learn more about the
                                                                                                                                                                                                              topic
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Develop a solution
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Empirical
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Plausibility or Logic
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Moral or ethics
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Easily accessible and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          accessed information
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Asynchronous
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             communication
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Representations of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               subject matter
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Dynamic visuals of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  student arguments
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Socio-cognitive
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     structuring
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  heighteningAwareness
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              tools
Table 2: Suitability of the analytic frameworks that focus on the nature and function of contributions

                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Nature of the Argumentation
                                Subject of the                                                                                                                          Goal of the                                                                   Rules for                                                                                                             Medium
                                                   Discussion                                                                                                           Discussion                                                         Judging Ideas                                             Tools used in the Environment

        Framework

 deVries, Lund, & Baker(2002): Epistemic Dialogии                    иии                                      иии                                    ии                                 иии                         иии                   ии             ии                       ии               ии                                           ии                          ии                                 ии                                    и                            ии
 Baker et al. (submitted):Types of Contributionsиии                  иии                                      иии                                    ии                                 иии                          ии                   ии             ии                       ии               ии                                           ии                          ии                                 ии                                    и                            ии
 Janssen et al. (2006):Dialogue Acts Scoringии                       иии                                      иии                                    ии                                 иии                          ии                    и             и                        и                ии                                          иии                          ии                                 ии                                    и                           иии
Note: иии indicates that the framework is well suited for use in this context, ии indicates that this framework can be used in this context but
provides no specific affordances, и indicates that the framework may be inappropriate for this type of context without some modification

Analytic Frameworks that Focus on the Nature of Reasoning during
Argumentation in CSCL Environments
Victor Sampson
College of Education, Arizona State University

        Analytic frameworks                        that               examine                                                                       the                 epistemic                                     nature                          of students'                                 reasoning                                                               focus                              on                   the                               types                    of
reasoning students use   to support                                   their                                    claims                                                   or              to                    challenge                     the          claims                   of               others.                                       Both                        Jimenez-Aleixandre,
Rodriguez, & Duschl (2000) and Duschl (2000) have developed analytic methods designed to address this question
using Walton's (1996)    argumentation                                                                        schemes                                                   for              presumptive                                                  reasoning                    as              a                      theoretical                                                          framework.                                                            Walton
suggests that dialectical argumentation is grounded in burden of proof, presumption, and plausibility rather than in
structural form alone. Walton details twenty-five different argumentation schemes that focus on how presumptions
are brought forward in arguments as kinds of premises or as kinds of inferences that link premises to conclusions in
a context of argumentative dialog. Examples of these schemes include an argument from evidence to hypothesis
(e.g., the data we gathered indicates...) and an argument from analogy (e.g., this is just like...). The function of
these schemes is to shift the weight of presumption from one side of a dialog to the other. An opposing voice can
then respond with questions or statements that shift the weight of presumption back upon the original participant.
Analysis with this type of framework focuses on categorizing the types of reasoning employed within an argument.

        Jimenez-Aleixandre,     Rodriguez,                                                                                          &               Duschl's                                                  framework                               apply                     a standard                                                     Toulmin                                          model                                               (e.g.,                       data,
warrants, and qualifiers) to identify instances when students attempt to support their ideas during small group and
whole class discussions.   Once                    these                                   instances                                                 are                                identified,                                       they        examine                     how                students                                                              elaborate,                                              reinforce,                                                 or
oppose the ideas of each other by classifying claims and warrants using epistemic operations based on Walton's
categories of presumptive reasoning. Analysis then compares the proportion of these instances to the total about of
dialog and the types of epistemic moves that are most often used during the discussion or debate. More recently,
Duschl (in press) has developed an innovative way to apply Walton's framework to scientific argumentation in the
classroom. Duschl first narrows Walton's twenty-five categories down to the nine categories that they found to have
strong relevance to scientific argumentation in the classroom. Distinguishing between even these nine categories,
however, proves difficult in coding students' work. Duschl and his group therefore collapsed the nine categories into
four categories including requests for information, expert opinion, inference, and analogy. They then apply these
coding categories at the level of the reasoning sequence, which is approximately at the level of each of the students'
comments in our example. Analysis then focuses on the number and proportion of each of these epistemic discourse
types in students' discussions.

                                                                                                                                                                                                               14                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     CSCL 2007
Analysis of the Sample Argument
        The potential benefits of examining the epistemic nature of contributions to a discussion or debate become
evident when the student example is analyzed using Jimenez-Aleixandre et al. and Duschl's frameworks.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Rather
than simply documenting that the students are making claims and supporting their ideas with data, warrants, or
qualifiers, these frameworks enable us to identify the nature of their reasoning.                                                                                                                                                                                                                   For example, Jimenez-Aleixandre et
al's framework suggests that these students are attempting to justify their ideas with reasons that focus on causality,
consistency, and appeals to instances rather than relying on plausibility or appeals to authority. Similarly, Duschl's
framework suggests that the students are relying on desirable epistemic moves such as inferences from evidence to
hypothesis (the metal was a higher temperature after 30 seconds) and inferences from cause to effect (conductivity
determines how   quickly  an  object                                   will                                    reach                                  room                                temperature)                                        in        order                     support                                   or                   refute                            an                                idea.                                 The              student
example therefore represents fairly high quality argumentation from the perspective of these frameworks.

Constraints and Affordances
        Frameworks that focus on the epistemic nature of reasoning are designed to provide valuable information
about how  students    determine                    `what                              counts'                                                        as                 warranted                                      knowledge                                               and how               students                                                                    determine                                                                which                        ideas
should be accepted, rejected, or modified. Rather than assessing conceptual quality of students' contributions, this
focal category revolves around the types of reasoning that students use when they propose, support, evaluate, and
challenge ideas. In    terms of specific                                                                       affordances                                                               and                         constraints,                       Jimenez-Aleixandre,                                                                                          Rodriguez,                                                                            &  Duschl's
framework  is  valuable  because                    it                integrates                                                                     an                  assessment                                    of                  reasoning                            type                with                    structural                                                                quality.                                             In               practice,
however,  differentiating    between                                   students'                                                                      epistemic                                                      operations                         can                      prove                difficult,                                                                  but                                this                 framework's
consideration of the nature of students' reasoning and argumentation structure may prove particularly fruitful for
those interested in scaffolding students as they engage in argumentation. Duschl's framework, in turn, is noteworthy
for its distillation and synthesis of Walton's framework into a manageable discipline-specific coding scheme.

        Overall, these   frameworks                                                    (and                                          this             categorical                                                     focus                  for        analysis)                                   apply                                        well                             for                 those                              interested                                                in
helping students to improve their discourse skills, reasoning, and ability to evaluate arguments by helping students
learn specific discourse  goals                     (e.g.,                             securing                                                         commitments                                                                       from         an opponent                                    or                                         undermining                                                          the                                  opponent's
argument) and effective strategies to help them meet these goals (e.g., justifying claims with evidence, requiring
opponents  to  justify their claims                                   with                                     evidence).                                                                These                        frameworks                          also                      are              applicable                                                                   to                  almost                                               any              type                   of
environment structure because they focus on a core attribute of all argumentation. Generally speaking, they focus on
frequency counts so they are better suited to environments supporting free flowing dialog, such as asynchronous and
synchronous discussions rather than the micro analysis of smaller segments. One advantage of this categorical focus,
however, involves the relative content independence afforded in comparison to frameworks focusing specifically on
the conceptual quality of ideas. Frameworks focusing on the epistemic nature of reasoning therefore require little
modification when applying them across related topic areas. An overview of the suitability of these two frameworks
for assessing argumentation in different contexts is provided in Table 3.

Table 3: Suitability of the analytic frameworks that focus on the nature of reasoning

                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Nature of the Argumentation
                                Subject of the                                                                                                                           Goal of the                                                                   Rules for                                                                                                                   Medium
                                                    Discussion                                                                                                           Discussion                                                         Judging Ideas                                             Tools used in the Environment

        Framework

 Jimenez-Aleixandre et al.
 (2000): Structure and          ии                                     ии                                       ии                                    ии                                  ии                          ии                   иии          иии                      ии                  ии                                           ии                               ии                                 и                                       и                          и
 Nature of Reasoning
 Duschl (in press):
 Application of Walton to       ии                                     ии                                       ии                                    ии                                  ии                          ии                   иии          иии                      ии                  ии                                           ии                               ии                                 и                                       и                          и
 Dialogic Argumentation

                                                                                                                                                                                                                15                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            CSCL 2007
                               Well defined problem
                                                    with one solution
                                                                       Complex problem
                                                                                       with multiple solutions
                                                                                                                Wicked problems with
                                                                                                                                     no right answer
                                                                                                                                                      Reach consensus or
                                                                                                                                                                         persuade others
                                                                                                                                                                                          Learn more about the
                                                                                                                                                                                                               topic
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Develop a solution
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Empirical
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Plausibility or Logic
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Moral or ethics
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Easily accessible and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            accessed information
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Computer mediated
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    communication
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Representations of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      subject matter
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Dynamic visuals of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         student arguments
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Socio-cognitive
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            structuring
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Awareness
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   heightening tools
Analytic Frameworks that Focus on Conceptual Quality in CSCL Environments
Douglas Clark
College of Education, Arizona State University

        Analytic frameworks that focus on conceptual quality examine the content or substance of the contributions
that are made during a discussion. Clark and Sampson's framework (2005), for example, focuses on analyzing the
relationships between     levels of  opposition that take  place  during   discourse episodes   and  the nature, conceptual
quality, and grounds quality of constituent student contributions. Kuhn and Udell's (2003) framework, on the other
hand, focuses   on  the logical   coherence   and  the relevance  of the   arguments  generated   by  students as a  way  to
measure the   conceptual     quality of  the ideas  proposed by   students.  The  content  component     is domain-specific,
involving specified  hierarchical    sets of arguments  for  (pro)  and against  (con) the  topic being  debated  (which  is
capitol punishment in their study). The lowest level comprises Nonjustificatory Arguments, which have little or no
argumentative force. The middle tier comprises Nonfunctional Arguments, which focus on tangential aspects of the
problem rather than core issues. At the highest level, Functional Arguments address core aspects of the problem.
This type of focus is especially well-suited for online environments where students' are encouraged to debate and
discuss issues without clear "right" or "wrong" answers (such as capital punishment). In addition to these dialogic-
oriented frameworks, excellent rhetorical-oriented frameworks by Sandoval and others exist.

Analysis of the Sample Argument
        The   application    of  Clark   and  Sampson's   framework     to the  example   of  argumentation    indicates the
discourse is oppositional in nature because it involves a distinct rebuttal against the grounds of an idea as well as a
rebuttal against the thesis of an idea. However, in terms of conceptual quality the argumentation is considered poor
because the   students  reach  an inaccurate   conclusion.  Moreover,   this episode  illustrates how  students  can  distort
evidence to match claims. In this example, Fran convinces Amy to abandon her normative idea that objects sitting in
the same room are in thermal equilibrium by providing inappropriate evidence in support of a non-normative idea.
From  the perspective     of Kuhn    and  Udell's  framework,    we would    view the  example    as exceedingly  short  but
representing quality argumentation. The arguments presented by Fran and Amy are functional in terms of conceptual
quality, which indicates that these students address key aspects of the problem. Moreover, the discourse moves used
by the students in this example heavily emphasize argumentative moves (e.g., challenging the ideas of others) rather
than exposition (e.g., proposing or clarifying one's own ideas).

Constraints and Affordances
        Overall, the analytic frameworks that focus on conceptual quality are well-suited for online-environments
for those interested in the relationship between argumentation and learning. For example, when the pedagogical goal
of an online environment is to help students learn how to engage in argumentation (e.g., proposing, justifying, and
challenging ideas), the analytic framework can focus on the structure of students' contributions to the discussion and
still be sufficient. However, if the goal of the online environment is to provide an opportunity for students to learn
from argumentation (e.g., develop a more in-depth understanding of the content that is being discussed), the analytic
framework  must    also be   able to examine    the normative quality   of students'  ideas  in order to assess  the overall
effectiveness of the environment. In choosing an analytic framework, researchers must determine the importance of
the relationship between     the normativity  of  a comment   and   the relative time  of its contribution.  Non-normative
content at the onset of dialog followed by increasing normativity by the conclusion of the dialog might represent
something entirely different than the reverse trajectory. Kuhn and Udell address the temporal issue by measuring the
normativity of students' arguments before and after the dialog, for example, but do not examine the trajectories
within the dialog itself.

        A focus on conceptual quality of contributions or products fits well with environments that include easily
accessible and indexed knowledge bases and enriched representations of focal subject matter because these types of
functionalities are often    integrated into online  environments    designed  to help students   achieve   specific content
learning goals that are associated with the databases and enriched representations. In addition, environments that
integrate asynchronous communication and awareness heightening tools can also benefit from this type of focus. By
examining the content of student ideas and how students interact with each other, researchers can better support
students as they attempt to negotiate meaning or validate ideas in online environments. One challenge, however, is
that rubrics with a focus on normativity become very topic-specific and thus require significant modification for

                                                              16                                                   CSCL 2007
                                Well defined problem
                                                     with one solution
                                                                        Complex problem with
                                                                                             multiple solutions
                                                                                                                 Wicked problems with
                                                                                                                                      no right answer
                                                                                                                                                       Reach consensus or
                                                                                                                                                                          persuade others
                                                                                                                                                                                           Learn more about the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                topic
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Develop a solution
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Empirical
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Plausibility or Logic
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Moral or ethics
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Easily accessible and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            accessed information
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Computer mediated
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    communication
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Representations of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      subject matter
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Dynamic visuals of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         student arguments
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Socio-cognitive
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            structuring
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Awareness
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   heightening tools
application across contexts. An overview of the suitability of these two frameworks for assessing argumentation in
different contexts is provided in Table 4.

Table 4: Suitability of the analytic frameworks that focus on conceptual quality

                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Nature of the Argumentation
                                 Subject of the                                                                                                                           Goal of the                                                                   Rules for                                                                                                                  Medium
                                                     Discussion                                                                                                           Discussion                                                         Judging Ideas                                            Tools used in the Environment

         Framework

 Clark & Sampson (2005):
 Conceptual Quality of          иии                                     и                                        и                                       иии                               ии                          и                    иии            и                       и                 иии                                         иии                              иии                                 и                                     и                            ии
 Comments
 Kuhn & Udell (2003):
 Argumentation Quality           ии                                    иии                                       и                                       иии                              иии                          и                    ии            иии                     ии                 иии                                         иии                               ии                                 и                                     и                            и
 and Types of Comments

Analytic Frameworks that Focus on Patterns and Trajectories of Participant
Interaction during Argumentation in CSCL Environments
Armin Weinberger
Knowledge Media Research Center (KMRC), TЧbingen

           Analytic frameworks focusing on patterns and trajectories of participant interaction consider argumentation
as a  primarily social  activity.                    Examples                                                    of                                   frameworks                                                      with                  that        focus                     are               Leitсo                                       (2000),                           Hogan,                                                 Nastasi,                                       and
Pressley (2000), Baker (2003), and Weinberger and Fischer (2006). Leitсo (2000) considers a specific sequence of
argumentation to be particularly fruitful for knowledge building. Based on Piaget's (1985) work and his idea of
socio-cognitive conflict, Leitсo envisions argumentation as a social activity in which students confront each other
with opposing views and build knowledge by resolving this conflict in a specific manner. In what Leitсo calls a
knowledge building cycle, students (1) construct an argument, which consists of a position and its justification, (2)
construct a counterargument in response to the first argument, and (3) create a reply that captures the participants'
immediate and secondary reactions to the counterargument. Through these patterns of argumentation, the initial
arguments may be preserved, revised or withdrawn. Leitсo argues that these patterns of argumentation optimally
shape the process of social knowledge construction.

           Hogan, Nastasi, and Pressley's (2000) framework examines discourse components, interaction patterns, and
reasoning complexity. The framework focuses on (1) how students work to improve weak or incomplete ideas, (2)
the patterns of verbal interactions that take place between individuals in scientific sense-making activities, and (3)
the relationships between discourse patterns and the sophistication of scientific reasoning in discussions. Analysis
begins with the assignment of macro-codes to the major modes of a group's discussion at the level of conversational
turns. Macro-codes include Knowledge Construction, Logistical, and Off-Task. Micro-codes are then assigned at the
level of   statement or  phrase   including                                                                     Conceptual,                                                                Metacognitive,                                                 Question-Query,                                                                        Nonsubstantive,                                                                                           and                          Other.
Micro-codes   include   multiple                     subcategories.                                                                                   Researchers                                                      then                  create        discourse                                  maps                                        illustrating                                                        the                                  patterns                                of
interactions  between   students  based                                                      on                 these                                    codes.                                                 Patterns                    of interaction                            include                                                    consensual                                                          (where                                 a               student
proposes   an idea and   another                     student                                                    agrees),                                 responsive                                                     (where                          a student                     asks                                  a                    question                                             and             another                                               student
answers), and elaborative (where students discuss and revise each others ideas). Researchers next assess reasoning
complexity and compare this information to the interactional patterns.

           Baker's framework    examines                                                                        the                   standpoints                                                                adopted                       by         individuals                                during                                        argumentation,                                                                                          how                          ideas
change over time, and the pragmatic function of language. The framework focuses on argumentation as a way to
facilitate collaborative learning.                                     According                                                                      to the                              framework,                                         argumentation                                          transforms                                                                    the                 epistemic                                              status                                of

                                                                                                                                                                                                                 17                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          CSCL 2007
solutions  by establishing   relations   between  the   proposed  solutions  and  other  knowledge    or  by   promoting   the
negotiation of new meaning. The epistemic status indicates to what extent solutions are being approved. Arguments
strengthen the epistemic status of a solution. Counter-arguments weaken the epistemic status of a solution. As a
discursive activity, argumentation establishes relations between possible solutions and other sources of knowledge.
As a dialogic activity, argumentation incorporates aspects of formal and pragmatic dialectics. Through the analyses,
this framework measures the strengthening and weakening of the epistemic status of various claims as well as the
progression of dialectic moves.

         Weinberger and Fischer's (2006) framework examines the process through which knowledge is constructed
as students engage in argumentation in online environments. Their framework assesses argumentation along four
independent dimensions. The participation dimension analyzes the amount of participation by each student and the
heterogeneity  of  participation   within  the   learning  group.  The   epistemic   dimension     identifies how    and  what
theoretical concepts students use in their argumentation them in terms of the environment's learning goals. On the
formal argumentative dimension, Weinberger and Fischer analyze the construction of single arguments through a
simplified version of Toulmin's scheme (1958) as well as through the argumentation sequences outlined in Leitсo's
(2000) work. Finally, on the dimension of social modes of co-construction, Weinberger and Fischer analyze the
transactivity of students' arguments (Teasley, 1997), i.e. to what extent students refer to the arguments and operate
on the reasoning of their learning partners. Different ways to build consensus correspond with different degrees of
transactivity. Students can establish consensus by agreeing with the ideas proposed by their peers (relatively low
transactivity), integrating peers' arguments into their own line of argumentation (relatively high transactivity), or by
engaging in a conflict-oriented negotiation of different perspectives (relatively high transactivity).

Analysis of the Sample Argument
         From  the   perspective   of   Leitсo's framework,   our   student  example   represents   a  complete    knowledge
building cycle. The episode begins with Fran contributing her initial argument. Amy then counters by bringing the
truth of the claim into question. Fran replies by dismissing Amy's counter argument which enables Fran to preserve
her initial viewpoint. In this case, Amy accepts Fran's ideas and withdraws her initial viewpoint. From Leitсo's
perspective, both this type of outcome and outcomes that result in a revised argument represent successful outcomes
of argumentation. Hogan, Nastasi, and Pressley's framework would describe the sample argument as an elaborative
interaction pattern. They    suggest  that elaborative  interaction patterns  are   characteristic of quality  argumentation
because they prolong discussions and lead to higher levels of reasoning. Although there is no elaboration present,
the student example's macro-code represents Knowledge Construction from the perspective of this framework. The
example also represents fairly high quality argumentation from the perspective of Baker's framework. Although
brief, the discourse changes      the epistemic  status of Idea  A  (objects  remain  different    temperatures)  and Idea  C
(objects  become   the  same    temperature)  which   indicates  productive   argumentation.    Applying      Weinberger   and
Fischer's framework shows that the learners participate homogeneously (participation dimension). With respect to
the epistemic dimension,     both  Fran  and Amy   engage   in   on-task talk and   construct relations   between    the target
conceptual space (rather than prior knowledge) and the problem space. However, some of the concepts are being
applied inadequately. On the formal argumentative dimension, Amy and Fran build relatively complete arguments
and argumentation sequences. Finally, on the social modes of co-construction dimension, Amy and Fran clearly
engage in conflict-oriented consensus building as they refer to each other's contributions and attempt to negotiate
meaning.

Constraints and Affordances
         This analytic category increases the unit of analysis from an individual comment or fragment to an entire
knowledge building cycle. As such it allows us to focus on the actual processes of co-construction of knowledge
rather than focusing on frequency counts of elements that correlate to desirable interaction. Leitсo, for example,
emphasizes the social nature of knowledge building as opposed to online contexts in which students hardly interact
with the activities of their learning partners (e.g., by composing elaborate, essay-like replies in discussion boards).
This approach thus emphasizes the coherence of argumentative talk between students. One interesting dichotomy,
however,   involves  the presence     or  absence of  a   pedagogical  goal   state within the  framework      to  inform  the
development   of   practice. In   other words,   does the  framework   provide   a  road map   for  instruction   in terms  of
desirable  student practice?  For   example,  Baker's   analytic  framework   provides   ways   to  track the  evolution   and
change in status of the ideas discussed by students and how (or if) they are challenged, but the framework provides
us less concrete guidance for instruction. What do we want students to know or to be able to do? Other frameworks
are more   prescriptive in   this regard.  Weinberger   and Fischer  (2006)   have   applied  different kinds   of computer-

                                                              18                                                     CSCL 2007
                               Well defined problem
                                                    with one solution
                                                                       Complex problem with
                                                                                            multiple solutions
                                                                                                                Wicked problems with
                                                                                                                                     no right answer
                                                                                                                                                      Reach consensus or
                                                                                                                                                                         persuade others
                                                                                                                                                                                          Learn more about the
                                                                                                                                                                                                               topic
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Develop a solution
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Empirical
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Plausibility or Logic
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Moral or ethics
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Easily accessible and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           accessed information
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Computer mediated
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   communication
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Representations of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     subject matter
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Dynamic visuals of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        student arguments
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Socio-cognitive
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           structuring
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        heighteningAwareness
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    tools
supported collaboration scripts to successfully facilitate learners' interaction with respect to the single dimensions of
their framework.  Their   line of                   research                                                    indicates                                                                that                  especially                    scripts                            that facilitate                                                  transactivity                                                                          of                learners                                  in
CSCL   environments,  have     also                  facilitated                                                                     individual                                                                knowledge                      acquisition                                          (Weinberger,                                                                  Stegmann,                                                                Fischer,                                  &
Mandl, in press).

         This type of analytic focus may be applied across most collaborative online argumentation environments
independent of  environment     structure                                                                      or                    the              nature                                                   of    the                  artifacts      created,                                  because                                       this                             analysis                                              can                                focus                    at
microgenetic scales as well as broad scales. Increased complexity of application accompanies this increased power,
however. The challenge of this analytic category manifests itself in terms of increased amount and complexity of
work required to reliably apply these types of analyses across larger samples. An overview of the suitability of these
four frameworks for assessing argumentation in different contexts is provided in Table 5.

Table 5: Suitability of the analytic frameworks that focus on patterns and trajectories of participant interaction

                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Nature of the Argumentation
                                Subject of the                                                                                                                           Goal of the                                                                   Rules for                                                                                                                  Medium
                                                    Discussion                                                                                                           Discussion                                                         Judging Ideas                                            Tools used in the Environment

         Framework

 Leitсo (2000):Knowledge Buildingии                                   иии                                      иии                                   иии                                 иии                         иии                   ии           ии                       ии                 ии                                          иии                               ии                                 и                                     и                              и
 Hogan et al. (2000):Interactional Patternsиии                        иии                                       ии                                   иии                                  ии                          ии                   ии           ии                       ии                 ии                                          иии                               ии                                 и                                     и                              и
 Baker (2003): How ideaschange ии                                     иии                                      иии                                   иии                                    и                        иии                   ии           ии                       ии                 ии                                          иии                               ии                                 и                                     и                              и
 Weinberger & Fischer
 (2006): Co-construction       ии                                     иии                                       ии                                   иии                                 иии                         иии                   ии            и                        и                 ии                                          иии                               ии                                 и                                    иии                             и
 of knowledge

Synthesis
         In this symposium we consider several frameworks for analyzing dialogic argumentation in online learning
environments. These analytic frameworks vary significantly in terms of their focus and affordances. (Each presenter
in our symposium will go into greater detail about each focal category.) Although most of the frameworks discussed
here would assess the student example as representing fairly desirable argumentative discourse, they each do so for
very different reasons. In building online environments to support argumentation, researchers therefore need to be
clear and specific in terms of their theoretical commitments about argumentation and the pedagogical goals they
wish  to foster (and  concomitantly                                    measure)                                                                      through                                                   the    environment.                                              These               decisions                                                       are                              foundational                                                                      in the
subsequent adoption or development of an appropriate analytic framework.

         Another  issue   that  becomes                                                                        apparent                                                   when                                       reviewing                         these                     frameworks                                                      involves                                                           the                                   potential                                 to
synergistically integrate multiple categories of analytic focus within a single framework. Although each paper in this
symposium   examines    a single                    focal                                   category,                                                 all                                of                    the    frameworks                         consider                                   additional                                                                   foci                beyond                                               their                        focal
categories. By coordinating the analyses of multiple categories simultaneously, we can potentially learn more about
students' performance in terms of each individual category. Integrating other analyses within the analysis of the
patterns and trajectories of participant interaction seems the most promising. Most of the other categories of analytic
focus correlate frequency counts of various components as correlational markers for argumentation quality. Careful
tracking of participant interaction and the evolution of ideas would align our analyses more directly, and therefore
potentially more validly, with the processes of argumentation we wish to foster. The challenge, of course, rests in
the increased accompanying complexity of conducting such analyses.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                  19                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        CSCL 2007
         Online learning environments offer strong affordances for grappling with these challenges and realizing
these gains. Online learning environments incorporate the potential to closely log students' actions and interactions.
As we develop technologies to more carefully track and analyze student data, we will have the capability to track
interactions and quality more accurately in real time. Based on this information, we could then modify supports for
argumentation in real time. DШnmez, Rosж, Stegmann, Weinberger, and Fischer (2005) have made early progress in
this regard by harnessing latent text analysis technology to score the quality of students' argumentation products.
Similarly, the Multiple Protocol Episode Analysis system (Janssen, Erkens, Jaspers, & Kanselaar, 2006) can score
extended dialogs and messages using a complex rules system instantaneously. In both of these examples, analyses
were not conducted in real time, but the potential is staggering. As we develop more sophisticated methods for
analyzing argumentation, we should therefore continue to monitor the possibilities for embedding these analytic
methods  directly   as real time  functionality within   online   learning environments.   These    analytic   models  would
therefore not only improve our research capabilities but also facilitate higher levels of interactivity and customized
scaffolding  for   students engaging   in argumentation   in   our   schools.   The  discussion  at the  conclusion   of our
symposium     will also  consider  the   implications of the   frameworks     beyond   research  in  terms    of these other
applications.

References
Andriessen,   J., Baker, M.,  &  Suthers, D. (Eds.).  (2003).  Arguing   to   learn. Confronting  cognitions   in computer-
         supported collaborative learning environments. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Baker, M. (2003). Computer-mediated argumentative interactions for the co-elaboration of scientific notions. In J.
         Andriessen,    M.  Baker  &   D.  Suthers  (Eds.), Arguing     to learn:    Confronting  cognitions   in computer-
         supported collaborative learning environments (pp. 47-78). the Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Baker, M., Andriessen, J., Lund, K., van Amelsvoort, M., & Quignard, M. (submitted). Rainbow: A framework for
         analyzing     computer-mediated    pedagogical   debates.     International   Journal   of  Computer     Supported
         Collaborative Learning.
Clark, D. B., & Sampson, V. D. (2005). Analyzing the quality of argumentation supported by personally-seeded
         discussions.   Paper   presented at the    international conference    on   Computer    Support   for Collaborative
         Learning (CSCL '05), Taipei, Taiwan.
deVries, E., Lund, K., & Baker, M. (2002). Computer-mediated epistemic dialogue: Explanation and argumentation
         as vehicles for understanding scientific notions. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 11(1), 63-103.
DШnmez, P., Rosж, C. P., Stegmann, K., Weinberger, A., & Fischer, F. (2005). Supporting CSCL with automatic
         corpus    analysis technology.   Paper presented   at  the  International   Conference   on  Computer    Supported
         Collaborative Learning - CSCL 2005, Taipei, TW.
Hogan, K., Nastasi, B. K., & Pressley, M. (2000). Discourse patterns and collaborative scientific reasoning in peer
         and teacher-guided discussions. Cognition and Instruction, 17(4), 379-432.
Janssen, J.,  Erkens,  G.,  Jaspers, J.,  &  Kanselaar,  G.  (2006,   June/July).    Visualizing participation   to facilitate
         argumentation. Paper presented at the 7th International Conference of the Learning Sciences, Bloomington,
         IN.
Jimжnez-Aleixandre,    M.   P., Rodrьguez,  A.  B., & Duschl,     R. A. (2000).  "Doing    the lesson"  or "doing   science":
         Argument in high school genetics. Science Education, 84, 757-792.
Kuhn, D., & Udell, W. (2003). The development of argument skills. Child Development, 74(5), 1245-1260.
Leitсo, S. (2000). The potential of argument in knowledge building. Human Development, 43, 332-360.
Piaget, J. (1985). The equilibrium of cognitive structures: The central problem of intellectual development. Chicago:
         University of Chicago Press.
Teasley, S. (1997). Talking about reasoning: How important is the peer in peer collaboration? In L. B. Resnick, R.
         SСljШ, C. Pontecorvo & B. Burge (Eds.), Discourse, tools and reasoning: Essays on situated cognition (pp.
         361-384). Berlin: Springer.
Toulmin, S. (1958). The uses of argument. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Walton, D. N. (1996). Argument structure: A pragmatic theory. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
Weinberger, A., & Fischer, F. (2006). A framework to analyze argumentative knowledge construction in computer-
         supported collaborative learning. Computers & Education, 46, 71-95.
Weinberger, A., Stegmann, K., Fischer, F., & Mandl, H. (in press). Scripting argumentative knowledge construction
         in  computer-supported    learning  environments.   In   F. Fischer,   H.  Mandl,  J.  Haake   &  I.  Kollar (Eds.),
         Scripting  computer-supported    communication     of  knowledge     - cognitive, computational   and    educational
         perspectives.

                                                            20                                                      CSCL 2007
