                       Creativity, Collaboration and Competence:
                 Agency in Online Synchronous Chat Environment
               Elizabeth S. Charles, Dawson College, 3040 Sherbrooke W, Montreal, QC H3Z 1A4,
                                              echarles@dawsoncollege.qc.ca
                 Wesley Shumar, Drexel University 3141 Chestnut Street, Philadelphia, PA 19104,
                                                    shumarw@drexel.edu

         Abstract:  Agency    is potentially   an important   concept  for  CSCL  as  researchers  think  about the
         effectiveness of online learning environments and the ways they encourage groups to take active
         control of their learning activities. This paper reports on several sessions of mathematics problem
         solving in  the VMT     Chat  environment.    The   VMT    Chat is a   synchronous  chat and    whiteboard
         space for students to collaboratively define and work on problems that are open-ended and that
         encourage    students   to define    the questions     themselves. We    draw   on  the  anthropological,
         psychological and sociological traditions and their concept of agency in order to produce a robust
         analysis of several segments of student work in the VMT Chat.           Our analysis suggests that there
         are structural features to the VMT Chat environment that encourage "agentic behavior" on the part
         of students. This has important implications for learning and the structure of pedagogic activities.

Introduction
         This paper looks at the mathematics problem-solving behavior of students in the Math Forum's VMT-Chat
environment.   The VMT project is a project that is attempting to provide an online synchronous environment for
small groups of students to work on math problems together.          The project has not only designed a whiteboard/chat
environment  for students  to  work   in  but  also  does  research on various   aspects of  online collaborative  problem-
solving.

         Computer supported learning comes in many forms and hybrids. There is the notion of computer supported
collaborative learning (CSCL), computer-supported community-based learning (CSCBL), and so on. Enactments of
such learning opportunities apply to students from primary school to university; they refer to formal and informal
learning such as after-school and community centre programs; and to online, face-to-face or to some blend of these.
In all cases the one constant is the use of computer tools and artifacts to create activities for intellectual exploration
and promotion of social interaction (Stahl, Koschmann & Suthers, in press). These activities are designed to engage
students in learning through jointly negotiating and planning how to proceed, generating questions and exploring
possible problem  solutions   together,   in the  process  modeling   and   scaffolding  learning for  each other.  In short,
instruction and learning is viewed as a group initiative and not a teacher lead effort, hence, supporting and sustaining
productive interaction is crucial. A major design consideration should be the promotion of students' agency over the
processes by   which  knowledge     and  ideas are   created and  improved,   sometimes   referred  to as epistemic  agency
(Scardamalia, 2002). In fact, Scardamalia and Bereiter (1994) describe the release of agency as a guiding principle
in the design of their knowledge building communities (KBC). But what do we know about this phenomenon? How
do we know that our computer supported learning environments are harnessing (marshalling) the potential of the
powerhouse   individual  and   group   attribute?   What   does   agency look   like when    we  take  a close  view   of the
interactions between individuals? What can we learn from a close examination of this phenomenon that may help
design future collaborative environments (both online and face-to-face) or may help promote the development of
agency in less agentic groups?

         In this paper we use the concept of agency to frame our analysis of some recent data in the VMT-Chat
environment.   We are interested in thinking about agency as a concept because we would argue that students and
groups with a greater sense of competence and self-efficacy will have the potential to make greater progress in their
mathematical learning.    Agency    as  a concept    helps us   understand  the relationship between   structural (including
technological) constraints  and     human    action.  This   in turn can   inform  our  thinking  about   the strengths   and
weaknesses of this kind of online project for a sense of identity, competence and self-efficacy.

                                                              115                                                  CSCL 2007
The Research Setting
        Virtual Math Teams (VMT) is a five-year NSF funded project starting in Fall 2003 designed and run by
researchers at Drexel   University  and   The Math   Forum     (http://mathforum.org). Its aim  is  to create  an online
environment to promote and support the knowledge building and math discourse between groups of individuals who
enjoy doing math but do not generally have opportunities to meet and work with like-minded learners. To achieve
these goals, VMT researchers designed a software environment called VMT-Chat, which provides chat rooms for
small groups to meet on the Web to communicate about math and engage in joint problem solving, mediated by a
whiteboard, chat logs and associated referencing pointing tools all archived for future referrals. By bringing learners
together, the VMT environment and tools challenge participants to engage in collaborative activities that call for
jointly negotiating goals, meaning of the shared tasks while constructing problem solutions (e.g., explaining and
defending own ideas) and jointly regulating the group's progress.

Structure/Agency
        Before we start let us briefly situate agency within the CSCL literature. Most notably, the notion of agency,
specifically epistemic agency, has been the focus of work conducted by Marlene Scardamalia and her colleagues
(e.g., Scardamalia & Bereiter, 1991; Scardamalia, 2000; 2002). In the course of observing students' use of CSILE
and Knowledge Forum, she coined the term epistemic agency to describe the acts of initiative taken by students
(very young in some cases) to present their ideas and negotiate a fit between personal knowledge and those of others
"using contrasts to spark and sustain knowledge advancement rather than depending on others to chart that course
for them." (e.g., Halewood, Reeve, & Scardamalia, 2005, p.2). In taking on the responsibility for aspects of learning,
such as, goal setting, motivation, evaluation, and long-range planning, students demonstrate their epistemic agency.
As  such, Scardamalia    (2000)   views   epistemic agency   as  one   of the   two major  components      of productive
engagement. From the collaborative learning perspective, epistemic agency implicates the students' willingness to
see themselves as a member of a community, hence their community identity. Which, along with epistemic agency
is seen as mutually constituting the students engagement in community discourse (Brett, 2002). We will return to
this line of reasoning below.

        As a particular case of the larger Western pre-occupation with determinism verses free will, sociology and
the social sciences since their inception have tried to think through the relationship between structure and agency.
One interesting perspective on the structure/agency binary is the thought of the British sociologist Anthony Giddens.
For Giddens   structure is a product of the pattern  of practices that social actors engage  in. Therefore    structure is
emergent out of human activity.   Further there are different levels of structure that emerge out of different forms of
human practice, signification, legitimation and domination. Signification has to do with the production of meaning,
legitimation the production of moral order through norms and values and domination of course is produced through
the exercise of power (Giddens, 1979; 1984).

        These  above    types of structures are produced   by  human   activity but once  they exist  they then work    to
constrain future human action.    Therefore the structure produces patterns of activity that, in the French sociologist
Pierre Bourdieu's terms, becomes habitual action structured through activity of the past but then used to structure
and classify future activity as well as things in the world. This dialectic used by both Bourdieu and Giddens is one
way to overcome the primacy of either structure or agency and succeeds in showing how dialectically they are the
product of each other.  Giddens adds a further dimension to structure and that is that people are conscious of their
practices and so they engage with structure in a self-conscious effort to reproduce it or change it.   So that there is a
reflexive quality to agency.  While Bourdieu is also aware of this self-consciousness he is much more interested in
the way that most human practice is habitual or semi-conscious.      Bourdieu is aware of the fact that social actors
often have a "strategy" for "playing the game" of life, but they are also often in his mind "shooting from the hip"
(Bourdieu, 1990).

        Giddens and Bourdieu's understand of the relationship between structure and agency is very useful for our
analysis of the VMT.    From the beginning the VMT project has been a design-based development project.           And so
the practices of students   using earlier generations   of the chat environment     (even  starting with just  AOL  IM)
influenced design decisions for future environments.    The goal of the design team has been to enable future activity
that the participant sought to engage in and to constrain activity that seemed to detract from the productive working
together of the problem-solving teams.    But further the activity of the participants themselves solving a problem and
interacting with the technology begins to build up a kind of small group structure that then carries through to the

                                                           116                                                  CSCL 2007
remainder   of the session   and may   influence   future  work   sessions  of the same   group.    So looking at the micro
interactions of structure and agency for a particular problem solving team can help us understand how collaborative
problem solving works in this environment and how to further support the team work.

Creativity/Imagination/Identity
         In  a major   article on agency,    Emirbayer     and   Mische   (1998)  offer a  critique of  the Giddensian     and
Bourdieuian position.   Essentially they argue that the focus of Bourdieu and Giddens is too much on structure and
the production  of habitual  action  and  not  enough    on the  creative  emancipatory   potential of human    agency.    The
conflict between Giddens and Bourdieu on the one hand and Emirbayer and Mische on the other represents a very
important paradox in social theory.    On the one hand social theorists have to account for the dramatic patterning of
human action and the way much human behavior can be predictable.             On the other hand one must also account for
the production of new culture and the process of cultural change.         These two realities are difficult to contain within
the same theory and theorist tend to emphasize one pole or the other.

         Our hope is to view agency as an act of creativity, which draws these two perspectives closer. Thus our
definition of creativity does not fit with the standard psychological definition. We would argue that much of social
life is constrained structures that themselves are the product of past action both conscious and habitual and that these
constraints are something that social actors must indeed face.       But on the other hand as we will discuss below there
are creative potential for social actors to engage with those structures in new ways.        We feel that online services like
the one the VMT is constructing in fact facilitate the creative and imaginative when students attempt to deal with the
constraints around learning math.

         Emirbayer   and   Mische  want   to  emphasize    the   creative dimensions   of human    agency.   For  them    these
dimension have a future focus and are tied up with creativity, imagination, improvisation etc. This notion of identity
dovetails nicely with the work of Bandura (2001) and Dorothy Holland and her colleagues (Holland et al., 1998).

         Bandura's (2001) model of agency offers a way to take the above characterizations into consideration and
describe them in a developing comprehensive theory. This theory articulates a model of agency composed of four
key components,    which   account   for  cognitive,   affective and  psycho-social  characteristics:  (1) intentionality, (2)
forethought, (3) self-regulation, and (4) self-efficacy. Agency is more than a mere self-regulating activity, rather it is
involves planning, reasoning, monitoring progress, and reflecting on beliefs about one's capabilities. Viewed in this
light, agency can be both a quality of actions produced by an individual as well as the interactions produced by a
group of individuals.   In other words,   when    working   collaboratively  as a  group, these   four characteristics can  be
transposed into jointly shared actions or enterprise. As a collective production, intentionality is jointly negotiated,
forethought is jointly shared, members engage in co-regulation of progress, and the group develops a sense of co-
efficacy or belief in a collective capability (Charles & Kolodner, submitted). In this manner self-regulation and self-
efficacy become more than cognitive acts, but social and culturally driven ones as well, in fact, Bandura claims that
self-efficacy promotes a "prosocial" orientation. Taken as a whole, these collective productions implicate changes to
identity ­ possibly shifts from individual identity to group identity (i.e., team member or even member of larger
discipline-specific member).

         According   to Holland   et  al. (1998),  agency   is intimately  related to,  and  mediated  by,  identity.  In turn,
identity is shaped through activity in social practice and is the principle way in which individuals come to "care
about and care for what is going on around them" (Holland, et al., 1998, p. 5). Thus agency and identity are mutually
constitutive systems    that play  out    in two   forms:   (1)  acts of   improvisation;    and, (2)  acts of   self-directed
symbolization.  Improvisations    are  actions    that are  independent   of structural   or cultural  constraints. They   are
mediated  by   one's "sense  and  sensitivities," what   we might   also  describe as  awareness   of  perceived  need to  act.
Symbolization   refers  to the  human     ability to create imaginary     worlds,  "figured  worlds."  It  allows learners  to
participate in activities and use language, signs and symbols, to organize themselves and others in exploratory ways.
What Gee (1992) refer to as the disposition to engage in "pretending."

         Taking all these theoretical ideas into consideration, we will now move to the analysis of VMT data in an
effort to show some of the creative moments of agency and how the VMT system creates an opening for students
who  are constrained   by  the   norms   of  classroom   mathematics    to really  open   up  and think   about  and  practice
mathematics in new ways.

                                                              117                                                   CSCL 2007
VMT Data Analysis
         The   data  snippets that we   are about   to look  at are part of  a set of  conversations that   a group of  four
students1 engaged in around a series of open-ended problems. Six other similarly composed groups participated in
this pilot study. We   selected  this group  because   of their attendance  record,  which  allowed  us  to better track  the
progress due to individuals' agency, or lack therefore.      The students meet for the first time in the chat environment,
thus had no prior histories together. They had four one-hour sessions working with and getting to know each other
over several weeks.     The full transcripts of these conversations are very long.      Here we look at just a couple of
moments in this much bigger problem solving activity. Before moving forward, we briefly describe the assigned
tasks the students focused on during the featured segments.

The Assigned Tasks
         The   "stick"  challenge  starts with  an  identification of pattern  and  construction of  mathematical   rules to
describe   the growth   of a  graphical   pattern. For  example,   in the first session,   students are  provided  with   the
representation below (see Figure 1) and asked to account for the growth in numbers of sticks used and squares created
when  N=4,     N=5,  and so  on.   In the  second   session, which   we  discuss,  the students  continue to  work  on   this
problem,   but  this time   they  are asked  to    extend their reasoning to   include creative  problem  solving   such  as
constructing   other mathematical  problem    related  to the   problem with   the sticks. For instance, they  are asked  to
consider other arrangements such as triangles, hexagons, 3-D figures, like cubes with edges. As well, they are asked
to analyze their patterns using different methods such as induction, recursion, graphing, tables, and so on.

                                       Figure 1 ­ Example of the initial sticks task.

         A typical example of what the whiteboard looks like at the end of session 1, and the beginning of session 2
is below (see Figure 2). From this point, students negotiate the meaning of concepts such as recursion, coordinate
drawings of graphical representations and jointly construct mathematical formulas to account for the patterns they
identify. (NB. the formula on the whiteboard is ((1+N)*N/2 + n)*2).

1 Due to the design of the study, the participants were anonymous therefore we do not have exact ages for the
individual students but they were approximately 12-14 years old.        This design also ensured that the students had no
prior history together.

                                                              118                                                  CSCL 2007
                          Figure 2 ­ Segment of Team B's whiteboard, Session 2

        The grid world challenge starts off with a situations where the students are asked to imagine they live in a
world where one can only travel along the lines of a grid     - for example, driving in a city   like Manhattan or
Philadelphia. They are asked to construct solutions for the shortest path between two points, A and B, remembering
to stay along the grid. The are then asked to extend this reasoning by creating relationships between points when A
is at (x1, y1) and B is at (x2, y2). For instance, a solution used by Team 5 in their fourth session (see Figure 3). Such
problems encourage students to define and calculate grid distances, define analogs to shapes defined in Euclidean
geometry. In doing so, students engage in reasoning with mathematics as a creative enterprise.

                                Figure 3 ­ Snapshot of grid world whiteboard.

                                                        119                                                CSCL 2007
Case Studies

          We   believe that synchronous    online chat    environments, designed  specifically to  engage  participants  in
learning, are special in that they require individuals to take on certain kinds of agency, which may have implications
on how and why they learn. This agency is demonstrated in a variety of ways, most noticeably in student's self-
efficacy, in their intentionality related to negotiation of the goals to be achieved, and in their co-regulation of the
progress of activities leading to the attainment of those goals.

          This is different from traditional classroom learning (and perhaps other forms of online learning such as
teacher   lead e-learning), and  even  perhaps   what   we generally see  in face-to-face small   group problem    solving
because   of the   unique features of  the environment.    These  features include  purposeful    equalizing of  positional
identities (true sharing of authority because of the anonymity of participants ­ histories are developed within this
setting), the  linear  nature of   the  conversation   (only one   voice at  a  time), the  "engraved"   nature   of   time
(conversations and artifacts are archived and retrievable), and the cultural practices that are necessitated or made
possible  by   the technological tools  (e.g., pointing back  with the  referencing tool; waiting  to respond    until after
reading a posting). We propose that to function within these structures may require or encourage/promote a certain
sense of agency.

          Take the following excerpt as an example. It is the second of 4 sessions with three students (Quicksilver
and bwang8 and Aznx) working on a math problem involving sticks. In the beginning it is clear that Quicksilver and
bwang8 are capable of working together to find the solution to the problem presented. They engage in small linear
acts of   building  on the  others ideas or    questions, each time  reflecting an  interplay  of planning   the next  step
(intentionality) and regulating how it fits the intended goal (i.e., solve the problem). What comes out of these small
linear actions is a sense of shared achievement and moving forward. For others, such as Aznx, however, it appears
that their sense of agency may be related to time to reflect on the archival structures of the environment.

591       Quicksilver       08.04.03:       you guys can add on

592       Quicksilver       08.04.08:       i just put the basic

593       Quicksilver       08.04.20:       Maybe share our results?

594       Aznx              08.04.53:       We technically had the same result.

595       Quicksilver       08.05.07:       Whaddya mean?

596       Quicksilver       08.05.21:       oh as yesterday?

597       Aznx              08.05.31:       Yeah.

598       Aznx              08.05.36:       And today.

599       Quicksilver       08.05.40:       Still...

600       Aznx              08.05.43:       Well today was really a discussion.

601       Quicksilver       08.05.46:       we should say that'

          His  general contribution  to the group    changes significantly once  he positions  himself  as   someone   who
makes observations such as the one above and has capabilities the group will need (i.e., he is good with words). In
this occasion he expresses a high degree of self-efficacy and takes on an active role in constructing the artifact to be
posted on the group's wiki.

609       Aznx              08.06.55:       Wait, who is submitting?

610       Aznx              08.06.57:       bwang?

611       bwang8            08.06.59:       tell them the intervals between levels

                                                             120                                                 CSCL 2007
612    Aznx                08.07.06:       or quicksilver, or me?

613    bwang8              08.07.08:       sorry, i am bad with words

614    Quicksilver         08.07.14:       So am i

615    Aznx                08.07.15:       Not to worry.

616    Aznx                08.07.21:       We should write it out

617    Aznx                08.07.22:       here

618    Quicksilver         08.07.24:       Aznx to the rescue lol

        Here is a second example from a group of students working on a different problem called grid world where
students explore the geometry of a world where everyone must always follow the grid and there is no movement in
the space that is off the grid. In this example "meet_the_fangs" and "dragon" have been working on the problem and
developing   some    more sophisticated  ideas about  how     to solve the particular   problem  of  navigating   the grid.
"Estrickmcnizzle" and "gdog" were quite quiet for a long time when they finally interrupted the interaction with
"estrickmcnizzle's" comment "we aren't getting anything done."

218  estrickmcnizzle,       20:50 (19.05): we arent getting anything done
219  meet_the_fangs,        20:50 (19.05): any suggestion?
220  estrickmcnizzle,       20:51 (19.05): i dont know, maybe just a more simple problem
221  estrickmcnizzle,       20:52 (19.05): less time consuming
222  gdog,                  20:52 (20.05): drop the questoin
223  dragon,                20:51 (19.05): I think I know the answer...
224  gdog,                  20:52 (20.05): more simpel one that i can understnad plz :)
225  meet_the_fangs,        20:52 (19.05): ask the mod to put up thequestions
226  meet_the_fangs,        20:52 (19.05): or we can do the summer one

        Estrickmcnizzle's    comment    opened  the  group    to thinking  about  the   problem,   and possible   solutions,
differently. It also gave the two quieter  members   of   the group  different jobs  to do  in relationship to posting the
group's solution and how to share those results with the VMT staff and other groups.

Discussion
        Clearly,   the unique features  of the online chat    and whiteboard   tools  influence  the patterns  of practices
engaged in by the social actors in VMT, thus implicating the structure emerging from this social setting. In this case
the structures  produced  through the   interactions of   the students  involved   act  to negotiate   and co-regulate the
production of meaning, the norms and values of the jointly created figured world, as well as the exercise of power,
what Giddens refers to as signification, legitimation and domination respectively.

        Traditionally   the structure of the classroom,   and    what  agency  is expressed,   are transposed  from   other
similar sittings. Thus the constraints of past experiences may significantly limit what actions students take. In these
relatively new online chat environments, however, such structures, if they exist, are borrowed from purely social
experiences (e.g., chat rooms, blogs). Thus in many cases the signification and legitimation are all newly developing
practices, and domination may not play a central role ­ at least not initially. Furthermore, with malleable structures
there are malleable constraints, which offer greater opportunities for improvisations ­ the creative and unexpected
making of dialogic turns. When we think of how these adaptive structures relate to agency in collaborative activity,
we see collaborative group learning in a different light.

                                                           121                                                    CSCL 2007
           In the examples we've given you, we show that learning can be described as creative and improvised acts
of agency ­ both individual and collective. The online chat and whiteboard environment appear to free the students
from   the other  kinds  of social  constraints  that exist  in their worlds   and  give them     opportunity   to make     creative
problem solving decisions. It may also be that the types of students who are drawn to these settings are those that
more   familiar  and comfortable    with   these newer   social constraints.  In  the first example   it is  a problem   that   asks
students   to think about   the   relationship between   the numbers   of  sticks one  uses    to make   squares   and  then  what
happens when one puts those squares into different shapes.          This is a very open-ended kind of problem that might be
very intimidating in a typical classroom setting. But in the VMT chat the students are creatively playing off of one
another in order to make some insights about the sticks and squares problem.             They are able to take up a sense of
agency as they play with the problem and help to define what new questions to ask.                In the second example we see
one pair of students having the agency to stop the more "knowledgeable" students and ask them to engage in a set of
questions they can all understand.     Again this is a remarkable breaking with traditional classroom norms.

           Pulling back, agency, in some respects, requires individual and collective actions. When individuals begin
to interact in coordinated or shared states of intentionality, forethought, self-regulation and self-efficacy, there is the
converging      and  emergent     values   and    beliefs  ­  sensibilities   and   awareness      of   interdependencies,      and
interconnectedness.   Interdependencies     are   characterized  by   the development       of mutual    accountability    and  co-
regulation    ­ socially negotiated    responsibilities,  expectations   and  standards  from     which  everyone    is evaluated,
including   oneself.  Interconnectedness    is   characterized  as  the   development    of    mutual benefit   ­  awareness     of
distributed   capabilities, i.e., that everyone   does   (may)  benefit   from  the   noticings   (attending), problem      solving,
reasoning and reflections of individuals; and the awareness of the development of a shared culture, resources and
social history   ­  ways  of asking    questions, producing     solutions to  the math   problems.      So   again in   the second
example the students work together to define the questions they want to answer.              There is a pressure to collaborate
and a scaffold to encourage all to speak and play with the problem.

           Returning to Bandura's (2001) proposal that group achievement are the products of, and produced by, the
interactive,  coordinated,  and   synergistic  dynamics   of  members'    transactions,  and   not  merely   by  the  individual's
intentions, knowledge, and skills, recall that transactions are an ongoing dynamic process that brings about a state of
interconnectedness    and   interdependency    (transformational    process). Thus,   because   of transactional   dynamics,    the
interconnectedness and interdependency of individuals with shared beliefs in their collective power and efficacy can
result in the perceived group-level emergent property described here as a sense of collective agency. In the brief
examples shown, we see the interplay between individual and group.             The VMT chat is a space that in some senses
is liberated from the social constraints of a physical space.       With virtual bodies and minds students have the tools to
play off of each other and enjoy the creativity of that play.       This potential for a open and free interaction encourages
individuals   to be agentic,  but  it also encourages    the group  to feed   the individuals   and to   get students   to  act like
mathematicians, asking questions of the worlds they have created.

Conclusion
           When one looks at the larger passages of interaction one sees this dance of creativity and agentic behavior
more clearly.    Our brief examples have been drawn from larger sessions where groups of students work in 3 or 4
sessions of about an hour to two hours.         These sessions largely involved the same participants and so a sense of
community was created among the students who worked together.                In this larger set of data one can really see the
ways that groups take up problems, define them, attempt to answer them, explain their answers and move on to new
problems.

           The VMT chat then has created something very unique.           It has created an online world where students take
control, define problems, respond to each other and then attempt to answer these problems.                 In this way they look
more like professional mathematicians, in training, than students in a classroom.            We would suggest that the VMT
Chat environment has the potential to overcome the structural constraints that one might see on social action from a
Giddensian    or Bourdieuian      perspective.  These  constraints   are  to some   extent  avoided   because   the  environment
creates a collaborative space that can be defined by the participants and does not readily reproduce the hierarchies or
power relations in traditional school settings. Though it can also be argued that eventually a certain kind of social
network will develop based on the social interactions possibly producing hierarchies and power relationships.

           Further, the social action that students engage in, in the VMT environment, creates new structural realities
for their further work in that space. As Giddens suggests there is a self-conciousness to this social action and the

                                                                122                                                      CSCL 2007
social action that is encouraged  is creative  and draws   upon   the participants'  imaginations   to  see knowledge
production as a fun, interesting and possible activity for ordinary people. Further understanding how to harness this
agentic behavior and leverage it for deeper learning will be a next step for this research.

References
Bandura, A. (2001). Social-cognitive theory: An agentic perspective. Annual Review of Psychology, 52, 1-26.
Bourdieu, Pierre (1990) The logic of practice. Translated by Richard Nice. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Charles, E.S. & Kolodner, J.L. (to be submitted to Cognition and Instruction). "In this classroom we are scientist"!
         Development   of agency: The  affective  side of scientific reasoning.  An  extension   of paper presented at
         annual meeting of AERA, Montreal, 2005.
Emirbayer & Mische (1998) What is agency? American Journal of Sociology, 103(4), 962-1023.
Gee, J.P. (1992). The social mind: Language, ideology, and social practice. New York: Bergin & Garvey.
Giddens,  Anthony   (1979) Central   problems  in  Social Theory:    Action, Structure and     Contradiction in  Social
         Analysis. London: Macmillan.
Giddens, Anthony   (1984)  The Constitution of Society. Outline   of the Theory  of Structuration.  Cambridge:   Polity
         Press.
Halewood, C., Reeve, R. & Scardamalia, M. (2005). Knowledge Building in Junior Kindergarten: Gaining Agency
         Over Ideas and Process. Paper presented at the American Educational Research Association (AERA),
         April, Montreal, QC.
Holland, D., Lachicotte Jr., W., Skinner, D., & Cain, C. (1998). Identity and Agency in Cultural Worlds. Cambridge,
         MA: Harvard University Press.
Scardamalia, M. (2000). Can Schools Enter a Knowledge Society? In M. Selinger and J. Wynn, eds., Educational
         Technology and the Impact on Teaching and Learning (Abingdon, RM), pp. 5-10.
Scardamalia, M. (2002). Collective cognitive responsibility for the advancement of knowledge. In B. Smith (Ed.)
         Liberal education in a knowledge society (pp. 67-98). Chicago: Open Court.
Scardamalia, M. & Bereiter, C. (1991). Higher levels of agency for children in knowledge building: A challenge for
         the design of new knowledge media. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 1(1), 37-68.
Scardamalia, M., Bereiter, C., & Lamon, M. (1994). The CSILE project: Trying to bring the classroom into World 3.
         In K. McGilly (Ed.), Classroom lessons: Integrating cognitive theory and educational practice (pp. 201­
         228). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Stahl, G. (2005). Group cognition: The collaborative locus of agency in CSCL. Paper presented at the international
         conference on Computer Support for Collaborative Learning (CSCL '05), Taipei, Taiwan.
Stahl, G., Koschmann, T., & Suthers, D. (in press).    Computer-supported collaborative learning.      To appear in R.
         Keith Sawyer (Ed.), Cambridge Handbook of the Learning Sciences.       NY: Cambridge University Press.

Acknowledgments
We wish  to acknowledge   the entire team of  researchers on  the VMT    project at Drexel   University and  in various
international centers. In particular we wish to thank Gerry Stahl for his support and acknowledge the efforts of his
graduate students, Murat Cakir, Johann Sarmiento, Ramon Toledo and Nan Zhou, for their part in collecting these
data and helping us navigate the VMT systems.

                                                         123                                                   CSCL 2007
