     Towards a Community Incubator:          The ICAP Design Framework for Social Constructivist
                                           Educational Designers

                        Der-Thanq "Victor" Chen, Ph.D.(victor.chen@nie.edu.sg)
                        David Wei Loong Hung, Ph.D. (david.hung@nie.edu.sg)
             National Institute of Education, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore

        Abstract.   This paper highlights the often-mentioned mismatch between the more social
        constructivistic oriented pedagogy and the traditional instructional design model.    Such a
        framework is important as a design process relevant to the work of CSCL.        Any attempt
        trying to apply the traditional Instructional Design approaches (e.g., ADDIE) to social
        constructivist learning in CSCL contexts such as the community of learners approach is
        fundamentally   flawed     because the two  stem   from different assumptions of knowledge
        and  philosophies of pedagogy.     Based   on a modified  Activity   Theory, we propose     the
        ICAP  (Identity,  Community,       Activity and    Personal) design   framework  for     social
        constructivist oriented     approaches  to  educational  design   as an  alternative to     this
        mismatch.   A case example of how ICAP is applied to designing a postgraduate degree
        program is reported.

Introduction
        It is now widely acknowledged that most existing instructional design models are not suitable for
designing instruction which is based on the social constructivist approaches (Jonessan, 2000; Reigeluth,
2004). Traditional instructional design models regard the role of the teacher as that of an expert and
knowledge being transmitted from the expert to the novice.    This is accomplished via carefully packaged or
designed instructional activities.  The focus is on the teacher and the content to be delivered. Under this
type of conception to learning, it makes sense to analyze the content and the task involved in the knowledge
to be taught and design instruction accordingly to deliver the knowledge.    However, recent proliferation of
learning as knowledge construction, place students are at the center on the stage, and the process of
learning becomes important.  Contents or knowledge is therefore not as prescriptive or definite as it used to
be. Meanings are constructed by individuals and they can be different from that of the teacher.      Analysis of
the content of the tasks, therefore, does not really inform the design of this type of instruction.
Furthermore, the community-based approaches emphasize the social interaction dimension of learning
where individuals learn in the context of a community of learners or practice.  The traditional wisdom of
analyzing the content and designing the instruction become almost irrelevant in this context.
In this paper we propose the ICAP design framework as an alternative to the predominant educational
design processes known as the ADDIE processes (Chen, Hung & Wang, 2006).          Social constructivist
approaches, which uphold the importance of collaboration among peers, authenticity to learning activities
and the emergent nature of knowledge construction, are suffering from an apparent lack of a design
framework.  In Chen, Hung & Wang (2006), we argue for congruency between learning theories and their
epistemologies and the design process.
        Activity theory is one conceptual framework which can tease out the activity processes within
social constructivist interactions. Activity theory provides a framework or community-based learning
where learners and experts can co-work together, establishing shared knowledge, in authentic tasks through
the use of appropriate technologies, learning resources, and tools. Note that there are a number of variations
to Activity Theory. The variation of Activity Theory in this paper is our re-conceptualisation based on
Cole and Engeström's (1991) proposal.      Activity Theory (to be introduced below) and the above-proposed
four dimensions constitute a powerful way for designing community-based learning activities.

Activity Theory
        Cole and Engeström (1991) conceive an activity as follows (see Figure 1). This activity system
below encompasses Wenger's notion of language, implicit and explicit, rules, roles, and tools. However,
language is not explicitly reflected in the activity structure but it is core to the dialog and interactions
surrounding the constructs of any activity. The notion of dialog through language is exemplified through
the Bakhtinian notion of contextual genres and voice peculiar to the specified community of practice.
Complementing the Vygotskian and Bakhtinian perspectives, genres and language peculiar to that
community would become internalized through dialog.
        An "activity" is undertaken by human actors motivated towards an object (or goal) and mediated
by tools and the community. Activities are distinguished from each other according to their objects. It is the

                                                      1
                                                       124                                                    CSCL 2007
object that shapes the actions of participants within that particular community, and over time, forming the
dispositions and identity of the members of the community. Broadly speaking, if the object of a profession
is to make advancements in a particular domain, then the actions within that community are engineered
towards achieving that particular goal. The division of labor (or roles) and tools involved in mediating
toward that goal assists in shaping the identity of those members who use the tools and perform their roles
and functions. It is the transformation of the object into an outcome that motivates the existence of an
activity. In short, the tools, rules, and roles within the activity system mediate the actions and processes by
members in the community. The subject exists in a community which comprises of other individuals and
subgroups that share the same object.   From a Vygotskian perspective, these (psychological) tools play a
crucial role in identity formation. The relations between the subject and community are mediated by the
community's collection of mediating rules such as explicit and implicit regulations, norms and handbooks
that encourage and constrain actions and interactions within the activity system. Thus, these tools
(including the communities' signs and symbols) and rules (experienced as the participants engage in their
functions) become internalized over time and form part of the learners' identity. Identity is a crucial part of
the design process in lieu of content which is the emphasis in ADDIE.
       We re-conceive an activity system or structure in the context of identity formation within
communities of practices (please note the bold marking in the figure). Instead of `subject' we adopt the
entire members of the community as `subjects in the community'. These subjects are always in constant
(implicit and explicit) recognition of their `identity', for example, as academics in the University setting.

Towards a Design Framework for CoP
       We recommend a design framework that focuses on four levels.           At the Identity level, when a new
community is formed, identity be identified and subjects with common interests, but with complementary
backgrounds recruited first. However, this does not mean that the identity is static for new comers to
appropriate. Rather, it should be seen as a starting point for an ongoing evolving process. Subsequent
developments and interactions within the community with the gained experience and implicit institutional
knowledge over time will shape the community identity and regulatory rules.      Enabling tools are
subsequently designed for general purpose interactions.
       At the community level, ground rules are set before the commencement of any activities.        These
ground rules regulate how members interact with one another, how various activities contribute to the
attainment of the community vision and how a specific community interacts with other related
communities.  Again, tools are designed to enable these interactions.
       At the activity level, when we design community-based activities, objects for specific activities
must be spelled out clearly. It must have a clearly defined associate outcome.   In addition, it must meet the
criteria of situatedness, commonality and interdependency.      Only after that, activity-related rules can be
articulated and roles assigned. The employment of supporting tools only come after all the above are
appropriately delineated and aligned.
       At the personal level, there are personal "agendas" for individuals participating in an activity.
Participants also need to set their own "rules" for this particular activity and how this interacts with other
activities that they are involved at the same time.   They also need to integrate all different roles they play in
different activities
       Note that there are no roles at the community level, because roles only make sense when people
are engaged in community-based activities.  For example, when we refer to the CEO of a company, we
immediately associate that role with a number of activities that this person has to be involved.   Without
those associated activities, one cannot even be seen as a CEO.    These roles exist regardless whether the
associated activity is underway or not. But, these roles are functional only when these people are engaged
in activities that require the presence of this role.

A case example of designing a degree program based on the CoP approach
       We now apply the framework to designing university degree programs.          The design at the
community level can be likened to the design of a degree program, whereas the design at the activity level
are largely within individual courses.  Our recent experience in setting up a Postgraduate Diploma in
Applied e-Learning is a good example to illustrate how this framework.
       One realization we have is that one course cannot form a community and that's why most attempts
to adopt CoP/CoL into the course failed. Fundamentally, for a community to survive and sustain, the
members cannot be fixed and there should not be time limits.      Otherwise, once the key people lost
interests/momentum, the group dies in no time. A course cannot be a community because there are fixed
people and the lifetime is finite. Once the assessment is due.   That's it. Not more interactions.

                                                        2
                                                         125                                               CSCL 2007
         So, the community should be at the program level (at least) or higher (e.g. the whole university).
If we ever want to adopt this CoP philosophy in schools or universities, we need to run a program like a
community.  Students can come and go, but the program (community identity) stays.       Each individual
courses within the program, then becomes activities.
         One feature of such a program is that students are constantly involved in the community.   This
participation is part of the core (compulsory) course that they have to take. As part of the core, they have to
work with a senior on the senior's internship projects. As they become senior, they work with new comers
on the internship of their choice. This is to model the process of legitimate peripheral participation.
         Students are also required to develop their pathway through the program as part of this core
course.  This core is then extended to the internship course. There should not be clear distinction between
the two. Each student will be assigned a supervisor to guide him/her.     There will be plenty of opportunities
for them to learn from each other and work with practitioners (through the various projects). The optional
"courses" are different projects/activities that they will be involved. All learning is situated/project-
based/problem-based/community-based!
         Assessments will be done via portfolios.  A competency checklist will be introduced as a tool for
determining quality of their learning. Students will have to make a public presentation about their portfolio
as part of the assessment. A panel of lecturers will be involved to assess.  Table 1 shows design activities
and outcome of the design at each level when applying the design to a university degree program.
Level              Design activity (Infrastructure)                            Outcomes
                  Community identity identified            Philosophy, Visions, Beliefs documented
Identity          Subjects recruited                       Student profile, graduate profile,l ecturer profile
                                                           Internship partners profile
Community         Ground rules set                         Pathway analysis, course structure, graduate
                                                           competency check list, code of conduct,
                                                           interaction with other communities
                  Tools designed and employed              Tools support the above
                  Object of activity specified             Course competency checklist, project outcomes
                  Rules for interaction set                Collaboration w/ other team members
Activity                                                   Collaboration w/ other courses (activities)
                                                           Assessment clarified
                  Roles assigned                           Roles of team members assigned
                                                           Roles of this course and others assigned
                  Tools designed and employed              Previous cases bank, tools support the above
Personal          Rules negotiated                         Personal commitments
                                                           Personal time/resource management
                  Roles integrated                         Integrating assigned roles into an integrated whole
                  Tools designed and employed              Personal prior learning experience
                                                           Tools designed to support the above

Concluding Remarks
         In this paper we have proposed an exciting framework for designing community-based
collaborative learning activities. It focuses on setting the structure right to start with and thus increase the
possibility for a successful development. In a way, this is a organic approach to learning. Unlike the
traditional design approach which takes a mechanistic view to learning and treats learning a predictable
journey, our proposed approach to learning is like gardening.  We may design how the garden may look
like, but much is uncertain and much is attributed to the process of planting and pruning.  With other
scaffolding and augmenting approaches to learning, this framework offer a more promising result than
other traditional approaches to education design.

References
Chen, D., Hung, W. L. & Wang, Y. M. (2006). Educational design as a quest for congruence: the need for
      alternative learning design tools: British Journal of Educational Technology.
Cole, M & Engeström, Y (1991) A cultural-historical approach to distributed cognition. In G. Salomon (ed)
      Distributed cognitions: Psychological and educational considerations, Cambridge University Press,
      Cambridge, MA.
Jonassen, D. (2000). Revisiting activity theory as a framework for designing student-cantered learning
      environments. In D. Jonassen & S. Land (Eds.) Theoretical foundations of learning environments
      (pp. 89-121). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

                                                     3
                                                      126                                                   CSCL 2007
Reigeluth, C. (2004). Comparing beans and potatoes, or creating a balanced diet? Different purposes and
     different approaches. Educational Technology, 44(1), 53-56.

                                   4
                                                    127                                               CSCL 2007
