     Using Social Network Analysis to Explore the Dynamics of Tele-
                                mentors' Meta-support in Practice

         Fei-Ching Chen      Ho-Ming Jiang, Institute of Learning & Instruction,    National Central University,
                                             Taiwan, fcc@cc.ncu.edu.tw

      Abstract.    Little research  has been  conducted   on  human   support  in  CSCL    situations. Extensive
      investigations on human meta-support are, in fact, rare. In this study, we have developed a set of
      mechanisms to facilitate human meta-support in a CSCL environment. Thirteen cognitive-affective
      pairs of mentors who facilitate a total of 82 forum groups share and discuss their mentoring practice
      in an exclusive Mentoring Forum. Using Social Network Analysis, we have explored the dynamics
      within and among pairs of mentors to reveal how they engaged in this environment and how they co-
      constructed their knowledge on how best to support a group of learners.
      Keywords: meta-support, paired telementors, synergetic scaffolding, SNA

Introduction
      Much software has been designed to support the learning of individual mentees while little to none has been
developed to support telementors in sharing their ideas and beliefs on synergetic mentoring. Our research team has
developed  a  web-based    software  suite designed  to support   telementoring  in our   inquiry-based science  learning
programs, Lain (Learning Atmospheric science via InterNet). In this study, we focus upon analyzing the interaction
of telementors in an exclusive, Mentoring Forum. Within this private area, telementors can share and seek advice
from colleagues before taking action. Our goal was to explore the dynamics among telementors and to examine how
such a simple mechanism can facilitate the practice of meta-support and also enhance synergetic telementoring. We
first explore how these telementors utilize a private forum as a resource for human meta-support, then identify how
these pairs of telementors interact with each other and other pairs in a mentoring community.

Methods
      Twenty-six volunteer mentors (13 males and 13 females) participated in facilitating 491 high school learners
in a virtual  summer  camp    in Lain 2003.  Mentors    were  paired according   to their academic   backgrounds,   those
majoring  in  the sciences as cognitive  mentor  (mentor  A)   and those with  non-science   majors  as affective  mentor
(mentor B). In participation-oriented practice, cognitive mentors are responsible both for fostering mentee learning
of content and also learning how to participate in collaborative inquiry discourse practices.     Affective mentors, on
the other hand, engage in an intensive effort to get mentees to do inquiry themselves, for example, to pose questions
themselves,  as well  as  to pursue  their own  explanations   in scientific practice. Since the camp   was held   during
summer, most of the volunteers were elementary to secondary school teachers or graduate students with majors in
the learning sciences. Together, they posted a total of 2936 articles over six weeks. On average, each mentor posted
112 articles in 5-8 group forums.

      We designed two levels of meta-support mechanisms for them. One mechanism exists at the within-paired
level, Footnotes. The other mechanism exists at the between-paired level Mentoring Forum a general forum for all
telementors.  The   Mentoring  Forum  is   designed to enable  them  to have   a "coffee  break" in the  teacher's lounge
whenever they choose to share their mentoring experiences from different forums. Since mentees are prohibited from
entering this space,  telementors   can also share  their impressions   and  personal  concerns  about  things that have
happened in their respective group forums.

      Postings from the Mentoring Forum may be treated as relational data, stored in a matrix, and subjected to an
analysis of interaction patterns. Social Network Analysis (SNA) is used to analyze the social structure of such a
mentoring COP. Our approach differed from that of many researchers who have used email communication in a
distributed community of learners (Sylvan, 2006), or have used       the number     of messages written and how many
times and by whom a certain message was read (de Laat, 2004; Reffay & Chanier, 2003);               but was conceptually
similar to indirect relationship networks, which used relationships established through a shared object (such as the
creation and  later reading  of  a document  in a shared  workspace)(Martinez,    et.al., 2006)  as entry data for  SNA.

                                                           128                                                  CSCL 2007
However,                  we  developed          an    alternative     way   to transform    the interaction dynamics  of the mentors   within such a
forum. To illustrate: We regard the contributors to any single thread as having similar interests in response to that
issue.            The social network relationship is defined for each couple (a,b) in a thread, in terms of joint contribution to
that same thread. In other words, we count the relationship of co-construction by measuring the proximities between
two agents instead of just agent a opening a message which is posted by the agent b. Therefore the conceptual unit of
analysis              becomes         the  thread,      rather     than   the   posting.  Following   this   approach, we   first created a thread-by-
participant               table,   and    then     transformed         it into  a participant by  participant matrix.  This network   proximity (Cho,
Stefanone, & Gay, 2002) matrix was then used as input data to generate an SNA graph to identify how these pairs of
telementors interacted with each other and to what extent the same/different roles of telementors (e.g., cognitive
mentor A or affective mentor B) had common interests in contributing to various mentoring issues. For the purpose
of exploring                  telementors'         social   network       relationships,  we  excluded   the  postings of the coordinators   from the
following analysis.

The Mentoring Forum Activity
                  Table 2 shows the distribution of 13 pairs of telementors among the remaining 630 postings. On average, the
mentors contributed 24 postings each. The standard deviation was 20. 32 percent of threads consisted of a single
posting, which brought the average length of threads down to 3 postings each. As we can see in table 2, mentor B
contributed more postings in general than did mentor A. There were three mentors B (7B, 9B, 12B) and one mentor
A (7A) who were very active and shared more than 50 articles in this forum. From this paired distribution, we notice
that paired mentors of both #4, #10 and #13 contributed very few postings. Mentors 3B and 9B have significantly
higher posting counts than did their assigned pairs 3A and 9A. In order to explore how these interactions intertwined
among pairs in juxtaposition with the different roles of the telementors, we need further examination with SNA to
uncover the communication structure of the mentors as a group.

The Dynamics of Telementors
                  In order to measure the proximities among these mentors in terms of their contributions to the same threads,
the co-occurrence of postings between every two mentors were counted (Table 2). From this matrix, we identified a
couple of mentors who had similar interests when engaging in the Mentoring Forum. Information in Table 2 can be
explored in terms of the affective role shown in the bottom-right, the cognitive role in the upper-left area, and A-B
paired mentors in the bottom-left area along with the diagonal line, and finally in terms of A-B outside their assigned
pairs             shown       in  the  bottom-left         area,   respectively.    This  matrix   also shows   that the interaction  among  affective
mentors seems to take place with greater frequency than that of cognitive mentors.

Table 1 The distribution of postings among                                      Table 2 The matrix of co-occurrence of cognitive-affective
26 telementors                                                                  paired mentors contributing to the same thread

               80
               60
               40                                                         A
                                                                          B
               20
               0
                    1   2   3   4   5   6   7    8   9  10  11  12  13
                                          mentor

                   This initial proximities analysis in Table 2 was very helpful in interpreting the results of SNA in Figures 1
and 2. In Figure 1, the graph shows the entire social network of 26 mentors. Lines between members indicate that
they jointly contributed to the same thread. The relationships between the different nodes indicate roughly which
mentors were more closely linked to others. From this graph we see two subgroups in terms of the roles: one cluster
at the lower part of the graph is composed mainly of cognitive mentors, with the exception of two affective mentors,
5B and 11B; and the other at the upper part is composed mostly of affective mentors, with the two cognitive

                                                                                         129                                                  CSCL 2007
   p o s tin g
mentors, 12A    and 1A, appearing  about  the  periphery and  one  at the center (7A) surrounded   by all the affective
mentors. It's very interesting to explore further what happened in this social network.

Fig.1 Graphical representation of forum contribution         Fig. 2 Reduced graphical representation of forum
                                                             contribution
       The graph in Figure 2 is identical to Figure 1 but shows only co-occurrence instances greater than 3. By
comparing all interactions in Figure 1 with the strong co-occurrence in Figure 2, we can see better where stronger
interactions exist. The smaller group consists mainly of five cognitive mentors, while the other bigger one consists of
eight affective mentors  and three   cognitive mentors.  The  insights provided  by this reduced  graph   imply  several
things. Firstly, the more active cognitive mentors in the bigger subgroup either shared cognitive domain knowledge
that was needed by these non-science major affective mentors, or they were jointly engaging in affective affairs. It is
these four  cognitive  mentors,  7A, 12A,  and   1A  who    developed  more connections   with  affective mentors   and
promoted   distributed expertise within  these telementoring  communities.    Secondly,  although  some   of the paired
mentors frequently share cases occurring in their respective group forums with all the other colleagues (e.g., 12A
and 12B), the active cognitive mentors also pursued discussions on many similar subjects of         interest with other
affective mentors as well. Thirdly, the members that bridge two subgroups of social networks are 7B, 9B, and 8B for
the affective mentors  and 8A    and 11A  for  the cognitive  mentors. The  SNA   shows  that their interests cross  the
boundary between the same role and the assigned pairs.
       We   made  some   cautious modification  to  analyzing social   networks  with SNA.  We   put  emphasis   on  the
proximities of  persons contributing  to the  same  thread, rather than on  a loose correlation of  the relationship of
message reading and sending. The results show that, besides the pre-assigned pairing of these mentors, the SNA
graphs also reveal links among cognitive as well as affective mentors of different pairs. Two clusters with mixed
types of interaction represented in our reduced social network graphing provide evidence of synergetic scaffolding in
the Mentoring Forum. From this point of view, telementors participate in their own forums, and observe colleagues
in their respective forums, and, mediated simultaneously thus by the Mentoring Forum, are supported in becoming
more reflective about, and conscious of what they are doing, and thereby develop more meta-knowledge on how best
to implement scaffolding in their community.

References
Cho, H., Stefanone, M., Gay, G. (2002). Social Network Analysis of Information Sharing Networks in a CSCL
       Community. CSCL (Computer Supported Collaborative Learning) Conference, Boulder, CO: Lawrence
       Erlbaum Associates.
de Laat, M. (2004). Network and content analysis in an online community discourse. Proceedings of the 6th
       International Conference of the Learning SciencesICLSEmbracing Diversity of the Learning Sciences.
       128-135. (ISBN 0-8058-5301-4)
Mart´ nez, A., Dimitriadis, Y.,  G´omez-Sanchez, E., Rubia-Avi, B., Jorr´ n-Abellan, I. &  Marcos, J. A.(2006).
       Studying participation networks in collaboration using mixed methods. International Journal of Computer-
       Supported Collaborative Learning, 1: 383-408.

                                                          130                                                 CSCL 2007
Reffay & Chanier, (2003). How social network analysis can help to measure cohesion in collaborative distance-
     learning. CSCL (Computer Supported Collaborative Learning) Conference, Bergen, Norway
Sylvan, E. (2006). Who knows whom in a virtual learning network? Applying social network analysis to
     communities of learners at the computer clubhouse. Proceedings of the 7th International Conference of the
     Learning Sciences (ICLS): Making a Difference.

                                                         131                                               CSCL 2007
