                                  Effects of Previous Messages'
         Evaluations, Knowledge Content, Social Cues and Personal
     Information on the Current Message During Online Discussion
 Gaowei Chen, Ming Ming Chiu, Department of Educational Psychology, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
                              Email: gaoweichen@gmail.com, mingming@cuhk.edu.hk

         Abstract: This study of the flow of online discussions examined how previous messages affected
         the current message    along    five   dimensions:  (1)  evaluations (agreement,   disagreement,   or
         unresponsive actions); (2) knowledge content (contribution, repetition, or null content); (3) social
         cues (positive, negative, or none); (4) personal information (number of visits); and (5) elicitation
         (eliciting response or not). Using dynamic multilevel analysis (DMA) and a structural equation
         model  (SEM),   this study analyzed    131 messages   of 47 participants across  seven  topics in the
         mathematics forum of a university Bulletin Board System (BBS) Website. Results showed that a
         disagreement or contribution in the previous message yielded more disagreements and social cue
         displays in the current message. Unlike face-to-face discussions, online discussion messages that
         disagreed with a previous message elicited more responses. Together, these results suggest that
         teachers can use and manage online discussions to promote critical thinking, facilitate discussion
         of controversial topics, and reduce status effects.

         Studies on FTF discussions have shown that the actions of earlier speakers can affect those of the current
speaker. For example, a person is more likely to agree if the previous speaker agreed (Chiu & Khoo, 2003). Hence,
earlier messages might also affect later messages in online forums. By understanding how online discussions evolve
message by message, educators can improve their quality and facilitate student learning.

         Most   previous  studies on     online discussions  examined    the  individual properties  of  each  message
(Tallent-Runnels et al., 2006;  De  Wever,    Schellens, Valcke,  &  Van  Keer, 2005;    Hara, Bonk, &   Angeli, 2000;
Schellens & Valcke, 2005). Their results showed that many students processed course information at high cognitive
levels during online discussions, supporting the claim that online discussion can promote active and critical thinking
(Garrison, Anderson, & Archer, 2000, 2001).

         Using data on 131 messages by 47 respondents on seven topics, we extend this line of research in three
ways. First, we propose a framework for examining the relationships among messages in an online independent
academic forum. Our framework consists of an online message's evaluation of the previous message (agreement,
disagreement, or unresponsive actions), its knowledge content (contribution, repetition, or null content), its social
cues (positive, negative, or  none), displayed    personal   information (number  of visits,   nickname, and   personal
statement), and its elicitation of other messages (eliciting response or not). Second, we explicate a new methodology
for analyzing these relationships, a modified version of Chiu and Khoo's (2005) dynamic multilevel analyses. Lastly,
we apply this revised method to test how earlier messages' evaluations, knowledge content, social cues, and personal
information affected the properties of each message in a mathematics forum on a Bulletin Board System (BBS)
Website.

Data and Analyses
         In this data set, 47 participants posted 131 reply messages across seven topics. These topics were among
the most popular discussions on the mathematics board of Peking University BBS Website (URL: bbs.pku.edu.cn)
from May to October, 2004. Peking University students are among the best students of China and are usually 18 to
30 years old (from undergraduate to postgraduate). Gender information was unknown.

         The set of variables (see table 1) for a single message included number of visits by each e-poster and the
following binary variables: agreement, disagreement, contribution, repetition, social cue, negative social cue, and
elicitation. Values of zero for Agreement and Disagreement indicate an unresponsive action. Likewise, values of
zero for Contribution and Repetition indicate Null content. Also, values of one for Social cue and zero for Negative
social cue indicate Positive social cue.

                                                           132                                                CSCL 2007
Table 1: Message properties to be examined in the study.

  Message properties                                 Example
  Agreement                                          "I agree with you."; "Good answer. Can you say more?"
  Disagreement                                       "I don't think so."; "That's partially right, but, ..."
  Unresponsive / new topic                           "This reminds of an interesting story ..."
  Contribution                                       "In my opinion, ..."; "we can multiply rate times time"
  Repetition                                         "Yes, you're right. Two times six is twelve, not ten."
  Null content                                       "Yes"; "Thank you"; "I don't understand"
  Positive social cue                                "Excellent!"
  Negative social cue                                "That's ridiculous!"
  Non-personal social cue                            "Two times three equals six"
  Visits                                             E-poster's visits on the BBS website, e.g., 791.

          This analysis  uses   three sets  of variables: properties  of the current  message  (0), properties   of earlier
messages variables in the same thread (-n, where n = 1, 2, 3, ...), and properties of the next message (+1) in the
same thread. For example, contribution (0) indicates whether the current message includes a new idea. Likewise,
repetition (-1) indicates whether the previous message in the thread repeated an earlier message. Lastly, elicitation
(+1) indicates whether or not a message responded to the current message.

          To statistically analyze interactions among online messages, we must address three major concerns. First,
e-posters' behaviors and effects differ across topics, yielding nested data. Second, most variables in this study are
discrete, not  continuous.  Third, messages    are often  similar to recent events in time-series  data, so  the  values of
variables tend to depend on the values of these variables from recent messages.

          Ordinary least squares (OLS) regressions do not address these difficulties (Goldstein, 1995; Enders, 1995).
We address these difficulties using an extension of dynamic multilevel analysis (Chiu & Khoo, 2003, 2005). We test
for topic differences, build an explanatory model, test for serial correlation, and model direct and indirect effects.
Extending    Chiu and   Khoo     (2005),   we  also use   a structural   equation  model  to  test  all  predictor  effects
simultaneously.

Results and Discussion
          The multi-level variance components analysis showed that topics did not differ significantly (variance at
the topic level was not significant), so single-level analyses were adequate. Based on dynamic multilevel analysis
results, we used an SEM to test the direct and indirect effects of the earlier messages. Non-significant effects in the
SEM were removed. The final model is shown in figure 1.

                                             0.40**                          0.35**
               Disagreement (-1)                     Disagreement (0)                  Elicitation (+1)
                                         0.27*
                           0.37*
                                         0.39**
               Contribution (-1)                     Social cue (0)
                                             0.34*
   Figure 1. Structural equation model for predictors of disagreement, social cue and elicitation with
             significant standardized parameter estimates (2 [df = 5, N = 109] = 8.19, p = .146).

          As  expected, disagreements    often  occurred  after prior disagreements   and contributions  in  this study. A
message   that disagrees   with an  earlier message  yielded  further disagreements,  consistent   with  Chiu and   Khoo's
(2003) FTF     interaction result. Unlike   FTF  interactions   however,  disagreements   did not  seem   to  threaten   the

                                                            133                                                   CSCL 2007
continuation of the discussion, as disagreements raised the likelihood of later e-posters' responses. These effects
suggest that online discussions are suited to controversial topics.

          Both disagreement and contribution in the previous message positively predicted a social cue in the current
message.   This  result suggests    that  in  online  discussions,  disagreements    and   new   ideas  tend to  cause     stronger
emotional responses and engagement compared to other types of messages. Also, disagreements and contributions
elicited  more  responses,     suggesting    that messages    are   more   provocative    and    engaged  students  to   respond.
Furthermore, these results showed that messages with critical thinking were more popular, which supports the claim
that online discussion forum can promote critical thinking (Garrison et al., 2000, 2001).

          There were also several notable non-significant results. Contrary to Walther's (1996) and Henri's (1992)
arguments, social cues did not substantially affect the behaviors studied. Furthermore, status in the form of number
of visits was   linked  to  more    contributions,   suggesting   that   experienced   e-posters  elicited  more  contributions.
However,     agreements     did not    occur   more   often   after messages     by  e-posters    with  more    visits. Likewise
disagreements were not less likely after messages by e-posters with more visits. Together, these results support our
hypothesis that status effects are weaker in online discussions than in FTF discussions.

Implications
          This study showed that disagreements and contributions affected the likelihoods of later disagreements,
social cues and responses. If future studies support the results of this study, then educators and researchers might use
online academic discussion in three ways: (1) Developing controversial discussions on online forums. As shown in
this study,  participants   were   likely  to  engage  in  and sustain    online  discussion   on  topics  that involved    many
disagreements.   This  result   suggests  that educators  might     help students  learn  and  think critically by  using   online
forums   for discussion     of  controversial  topics, e.g.,  new   hypotheses    or problems     with  contested  answers.   (2)
Reducing status effects. This study showed that experience status effects are much weaker in online discussions than
in FTF   discussions.   If  status effects are a  serious  problem   in  classroom   interactions,   online  discussions   among
multiple classes (or schools) or perhaps with pseudonyms might mitigate these status effects. (3) Managing online
discussions at message level. This study suggested that the property of previous messages may affect the current
messages in a discussion thread. It implies that, in addition to encouraging student to participate, teachers may also
manage the online academic discussions for specific purposes at message level.

References
Chiu,  M.   M., &   Khoo,    L.   (2003).  Rudeness    and  status  effects  during  group    problem   solving:  Do    they  bias
          evaluations   and    reduce  the likelihood   of   correct solutions?    Journal    of Educational    Psychology,   95,
          506-523.
Chiu, M. M., & Khoo, L. (2005). A new method for analyzing sequential processes: Dynamic multi-level analysis.
          Small Group Research, 36, 1-32.
De Wever, B., Schellens, T., Valcke, M., & Van Keer, H. (2005). Content analysis schemes to analyze transcripts of
          online asynchronous discussion groups: A review. Computers & Education, 46(1), 6-28.
Enders, W. (1995). Applied econometric time series. New York: Wiley.
Garrison,  D.   R., Anderson,     T., &   Archer,  W.  (2000).  Critical   inquiry  in  a text-based    environment:    Computer
          conferencing in higher education. The Internet and Higher Education, 2(2­3), 87­105.
Garrison,   D.  R.,  Anderson,     T., &   Archer,    W.  (2001).   Critical    thinking, cognitive  presence,   and    computer
          conferencing in distance education. American Journal of Distance Education, 15(1), 7­23.
Goldstein, H. (1995). Multilevel statistical models. Sydney: Edward Arnold.
Hara, N.,   Bonk,   C.  J., &   Angeli,   C.  (2000).  Content  analysis     of online discussion    in an  applied  educational
          psychology course. Instructional Science, 28, 115-152.
Henri, F. (1992). Computer conferencing and content analysis. In A. R. Kaye (Ed.), Collaborative learning through
          computer conferencing: The Najaden papers (pp. 115-136). New York: Springer.
Schellens,  T., &   Valcke,    M.  (2005). Collaborative    learning  in  asynchronous    discussion    groups: What    about the
          impact on cognitive processing? Computers in Human Behavior, 21, 957-975.
Tallent-Runnels,    M.  K., Thomas,    J.  A., Lan,  W.   Y., Cooper,    S., Ahern,  T.   C., Shaw,  S. M.,  &  Liu,    X. (2006).
          Teaching courses online: A review of the research. Review of Educational Research, 76(1), 93-135.
Walther, J. B. (1996). Computer-mediated communication: Impersonal, interpersonal, and hyperpersonal interaction.
          Communication Research, 23(1), 3-43.

                                                               134                                                      CSCL 2007
