                         Learning Writing By Reviewing In Science

                    Kwangsu Cho, University of Missouri at Columbia, USA, chokw@missouri.edu
                      Christian D. Schunn, University of Pittsburgh, USA, Schunn@misosuri.edu
                   Kyungbin Kwon, University of Missouri at Columbia, USA, kkd2c@mizzou.edu

         Abstract. We examined a theoretical perspective on reciprocal peer reviewing of writing. As an
         alternative  to the   traditional  approach,  Learning    Writing   by  Writing,   focusing  on  increasing
         writing opportunities, we proposed and tested a new hypothesis, Learning Writing by Reviewing.
         Reviewing is defined as a problem solving activity of practicing problem detection, diagnosis, and
         solution  generation    in peer writing. The  results  supported   the hypothesis  in that  peer  reviewers
         improve their own writing by reviewing peer writing.

         In spite of extensive efforts for the past three decades under the Writing-Across-Curriculum (WAC) and the
Writing-in-the-Disciplines (WID) movements, being able to write well is a fundamental skill that most students in
the U.S. lack across all ages. The National Assessment of Educational Progress in 2002 found that 69% of 8th grade
students and 77% of 12th grade students were found to have only basic or lower levels of writing skills (Persky,
Daane,   &  Jin, 2003).  Other   age group  students  also performed   poorly.   Not   surprisingly, a great number   of  high
school graduates in the U.S. remain at a lower level of writing skill (Kamil, 2003) than is expected by colleges and
employers. Accordingly, the U.S. National Commission on Writing (2003) argues that improving writing across the
board should be a national goal of the U.S. They argue that a fundamental reason for this unfortunate situation is that
students do not have opportunity of writing practices because instructors are simply overwhelmed by the workload
related  to reading,  grading,   and   commenting     on  student   writing  assignments.   Therefore    they tend   to  avoid
instructing writing assignments in their courses (National Commission on Writing, 2003).

         On  the  basis  of findings  that  writing improves   across  multiple  drafts as  a function  of feedback   (Hayes,
Flower, Schriver, Stratman, & Carey, 1987), a natural, dominant response is to endow students with more chances of
practicing writing with feedback. We term this general approach as Learning Writing by Writing. This approach tries
to make feedback available for students to help guide the writing practice. For example, as part of the WAC and
WID movements, considerable resources have been devoted to having a few writing-intensive experiences where
instructors or TAs give students opportunities of writing practice with feedback. Another variation of the approach is
to outsource   feedback  beyond     instructors. An   interesting example   is that at Texas   Tech,   freshmen  submit   their
writing to a system, and then this writing is graded by a graduate student from a pool of such graders (Wasley, 2006).

         By contrast to the traditional approach that is dominant, we propose a different perspective, called Learning
Writing by Reviewing, analogous to the reciprocal teaching approaches to early reading instruction. This perspective
emphasizes that learners may improve their own writing skills by engaging in peer review of writing (e.g., Rushton,
Ramsey, & Rada, 1993). We define reviewing as a process of problem solving in which reviewers are engaged in
exercising  important   skills for  writing (Bereiter  &   Scardamalia,    1987; Fitzgerald,  1987;  Flower,  Hayes,    Carey,
Schriver, & Stratman, 1986) such as problem detection, diagnosis, and solution generation along with reading and
commenting on peer writing. These activities may improve reviewers' own writing and revising skills by reinforcing
successful strategies and by calling attention to unsuccessful strategies that the reviewers have already used in their
own writing. Thus, the goal of this study is to extend the value of peer reviewing beyond its practical advantage by
examining how doing peer reviews helps reviewer's own writing skill development.

         It is   important  to note  that  there  are currently   barriers restricting practical use   and adoption   of  peer
reviewing. Due to the demanding nature of reading and commenting on papers, students as well as instructors are
leery of using   peer commenting.     From   the  instructors, peer  reviewing   activities can  be  perceived   at having  an
opportunity cost--what other instructional activities could students be engaged in? From the students' point of view,
commenting is the job of the instructor, not the students. A fundamental reason is that students are not only novices
in their disciplines, but   also are  inexperienced   in writing   and reviewing.   If the  reviewing   activity had  its own
pedagogical merit, these concerns might be allayed.

                                                             138                                                     CSCL 2007
Method
               Initially 145 college     students in three intro      Physics                     courses  participated      in this study   as a part     of their
course requirements. Each student was asked to write first draft and revised draft of two technical research papers.
In addition, each student reviewer was randomly assigned four peer papers. Thus, each student submitted first drafts,
reviewed four peer drafts, received comments on their writing from peer reviewers, and then revised their first drafts.
The reviews were double-blind: authors had pseudonyms and reviewers merely were numbers to the authors. It was
important to controlling for floor and ceiling effect on the writing quality evaluation scale because very low writing
scores often reflect complete lack of effort on the writer's part, and very strong first drafts have little incentive to
revise the paper further. Therefore, participants whose first writing scores placed in the middle 60 % (n=87) were
selected for further data analyses. Individual students played two roles, one of writer and one of reviewer. These
selected students were then categorized into a HIGH helpful review group (n = 44) and a LOW helpful review group
(n = 43) based on reviewing quality, defined in the next section. Although the participants wrote two drafts of two
papers, we only used the two drafts of the first paper.

               Reviewing quality was defined using helpfulness ratings provided by writers on the peer comments they
received. After submitting their final/revised drafts, the writers who received peer reviews evaluated the quality of
the reviews on a 7-point rating scale from Not helpful at all (1) to Very helpful (7) with space provided for optional
short responses.

Results
               Before analyzing the main hypothesis, we examined the first draft writing scores and the 1st draft reviewing
helpfulness ratings between the High helpful review group and the LOW helpful review group to verify that the
groups differed only on review helpfulness and not on initial writing ability. As desired, the first draft writing scores
between the HIGH helpful review group (M = 5.48, SD = .38 SEM = .06) and LOW helpful review group (M = 5.52,
SD = .37, SEM =.06) were not significantly different, suggesting that both groups entered this study with similar
writing skills. As manipulated, the review qualities between the HIGH helpful review group (M = 6.20, SD = .28,
SEM = .04) and the LOW helpful review group (M = 5.29, SD = .30, SEM = .05) were significantly different, F (1,
85) = 211.13, MSe = 0.09, p < .001.

               The number of words used in comments was analyzed to estimate how much effort each group made. As
shown in Figure 2, the HIGH helpful review group (M=151.3, SD= 48.8) put significantly longer comments than the
LOW  helpful          group    (M=94.7,    SD=43.2).   Also  the        number                     of    words has    a      significant correlation      with the
Helpfulness ratings, r (87) = .63, p. < .05 and with the writing quality improvement, r (87) = .24, p < .05.

               200.0                                                                              1.0

               160.0                                                                              0.8

               120.0                                                                              0.6

                80.0                                                                              0.4

                40.0                                                                              0.2

                 0.0                                                                              0.0
                             LOW helpful                HIGH helpful                                            LOW  helpful                 HIGH helpful

     Figure 1. comment length and writing improvement between the LOW and HIGH helpful review groups

               To test the Learning-Writing-By-Reviewing hypothesis, a one-way analysis of covariance (ANCOVA) was
carried out with the first draft writing quality (mean peer evaluation) as a covariate, and the reviewing performance
as an independent variable on the final/revised writing quality. The first draft writing quality was used as a covariate
because it is very likely to a significant predictor of the quality of revised drafts (Cho & Schunn, 2007), and this
approach        to   assessing predictors   of improvement           is preferred                     to using gain     scores   because     gain scores      have
regression-to-the-mean issues.            As shown    Figure 1,         the final/revised                  draft    writing     quality  of the HIGH        helpful
review group (M = 6.15, SD = .46) significantly outperformed the LOW helpful review group (M= 5.95, SD= .48),
F (1, 84) = 5.68, MSe = .18, p < .05. The effect size of the improvement of writing quality from the first draft to final

                                                                         139                                                                              CSCL 2007
        wordssofNumber
                                                                              sQuality Improvement
draft was medium (Cohen's d = .56). In addition, the Pearson correlation analysis revealed that there is a significant
relationship  between  reviewing   helpfulness  ratings and   writing  improvement,   r  (85)   =  .51, p  <  .05. Thus, these
results clearly supported the Learning-Writing-By-Reviewing hypothesis.

Discussion
         In  this paper,  we examined    the gains for  reviewers-as-writers   rather than   the  more  traditional  empirical
focus of reviewers-as-surrogate-feedback for instructor feedback. A moderate effect size was found from the single
round of reviewing. Practically, the findings encourage the use and adoption of peer reviewing in addition to its
practical advantage of making rich feedback available more often to students. Thus, this research suggests that peer
reviewing can empower learning to write from many angles.

         One possible alternative explanation involves a third-variable explanation: stronger revisers giving better
feedback and also being better able to revise their own papers. However, revision is an element of first draft writing,
and the groups were well-matched on first draft scores. If the HIGH helpful group had been better revisers all along,
then they would have had higher first draft scores. Note that we did not force the first draft writing scores to be
identical--we merely restricted the range to be the middle two-thirds of first draft scores. Therefore, it would have
been possible to find first draft score differences.

         Although    this   research  supports   the   proposed    Learning-Writing-by-Reviewing         hypothesis,   several
limitations require cautious interpretation of the findings. The reviewing quality measure we used in this study may
be limited  in that  student writers are  very  likely to prefer  praise comments     as well   as specific  comments    (Cho,
Schunn,  &    Charney,   2006). While    developing    praise comments     may  be useful    for   authors and  may   involve
practicing some evaluation skills, it seems likely that learning from making specific revision suggestions will have
greater transfer  to ones  own  writing  than   making  praise    comments.  Therefore,   it is strongly   recommended      that
further data analysis focus on the content of reviews to examine if comments related to problem detection, diagnosis,
and solution are especially associated with gains in one's own writing.

References
Bereiter, C., & Scardamalia, M. (1987). The psychology of written composition. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
         Associates.
Cho, K., &    Schunn,  C.  (2007). Scaffolded   writing   and  rewriting in the  discipline:  A   web-based   reciprocal  peer
         review system. Computers and Education, 48(3), 409-426.
Cho, K.,  Schunn,    C.,  &  Charney,  D.  (2006). Commenting       on writing:  Typology    and   perceived   helpfulness   of
         comments from novice peer reviewers and subject matter experts. Written Communication, 23(3), 260-294.
Fitzgerald, J. (1987). Research on revision in writing. Review of Educational Research, 57(4), 481-506.
Flower, L., Hayes, J. R., Carey, L., Schriver, K., & Stratman, J. (1986). Detection, diagnosis, and the strategies of
         revision. College Composition and Communication, 37(1), 16-55.
Hayes, J. R., Flower, L., Schriver, K., Stratman, J., & Carey, L. (1987). Advances in applied psycholinguistics Vol. 2.
         Reading, writing and language processing S. Rosenberg, Ed. (Cambridge, Cambridge, England, 1987).
Kamil,  M.   L.   (2003). Adolescents  and   literacy:  Reading   for  the 21st  century. Washington,      DC:     Alliance for
         Excellent Education. Retrieved from http://www.all4ed.org
National Commission       on Writing  in America's     Schools  and  Colleges   (2003).  The  neglected    R: The   need for a
         writing revolution. New York, NY: College Entrance Exam Board.
Persky,  H.  R.,  Daane,  M.  C.,  &  Jin, Y.   (2003). The   nation's report   card: Writing    2002.  U.S.  Department     of
         Education, National Center for Education Statistics.
Rushton, C., Ramsey, P., & Rada, R. (1993). Peer assessment in a collaborative hypermedia environment: A case
         study. Journal of Computer-Based Instruction, 20, 75-80.
Wasley,    P.   (2006).   A   new    way     to  grade.   The     Chronicle   of  Higher     Education.      Available   from
         http://chronicle.com/weekly/v52/i27/27a00601.htm

Acknowledgement
This project   was  funded   by grants from   the University   of  Pittsburgh  Provost's  Office   and  the   Andrew   Mellon
Foundation.

                                                              140                                                    CSCL 2007
