             MUVEs as a powerful means to study situated learning

 Jody Clarke and Chris Dede, Harvard University, 321 Longfellow Hall, 13 Appian Way, Cambridge, MA 02138
                                 clarkejo@gse.harvard.edu, chris_dede@harvard.edu

          Abstract:  This  paper   describes how   multi-user  virtual  environments    (MUVEs)    can  simulate
          immersive,  collaborative learning   environments  intermediate   in complexity   between   recipe-like
          lab exercises and real world inquiry situations. We offer the River City MUVE as a case study that
          illustrates how rich logfiles provide scholars and teachers with detailed data to understand learning
          processes, to diagnose suboptimal patterns of student performance, and to assess the knowledge
          and skills students have mastered.   This aids curriculum design and theory.

Theoretical Framework
          Research  on how    people  learn  suggests  that learning   and  cognition   are complex   social   phenomena
distributed across  mind, activity, space,   and time (Chaiklin     & Lave, 1993;  Hutchins,  1995;  Wenger,    1998).  A
student's engagement and identity as a learner is shaped by his or her collaborative participation in communities and
groups, as well as the practices and beliefs of these communities (Wenger, 1998).       Yet creating classroom activities
that allow students to engage in authentic practices that involve communities of learning is challenging, especially
when it comes to authentic practices of science (Chinn and Malhotra, 2002).           For example, several investigators
(Griffin, 1995;   Young,  1993;  Hendricks,    2001) developed  curricular   activities in  attempts to validate  parts of
situated learning theory, but were forced to modify their research designs due to the difficulty of implementing
situated learning within the constraints of a K-12 classroom.       As an alternative to practices located within a school,
bringing students to a local hospital to work with epidemiologists and doctors to study an outbreak of Whooping
Cough might provide an authentic, meaningful, and motivating context for students to master scientific content and
inquiry skills.  Yet, this is not feasible for a myriad of reasons. Until recently, researchers have struggled to conduct
research on natural and emergent learning situated in complex and authentic classroom practices in K-12 education.
          However, an emerging alternative is to offer students simulated "Alice in Wonderland" experiences via
mediated   immersion   in a  multi-user virtual  environment   (MUVE).      MUVEs     are  online digital contexts  where
multiple participants can communicate and collaborate on shared challenges.        A participant takes on the identity of
an avatar, one's digital persona in a 3-D virtual world, and communicates via text chat and non-verbal gestures.       In a
graphical virtual context, participants also interact with digital artifacts, such as viewing pictures or manipulating
tools (e.g., an online microscope), and with computer-based agents.         MUVEs are unique in their ability to keep
minutely detailed records of the moment-by-moment movements, actions, and utterances of each participant in the
environment (Ketelhut, Dede, Clarke, Nelson, & Bowman, in press).         As such, MUVEs create a context that allows
researchers to study emergent learning and cognition across activity, space and time.
          MUVEs have been used in education to create online communities for teacher professional development
(Bull, Bull, & Kajder, 2004; Schlager, Fusco, & Schank, 2002), to develop science-based activities while promoting
socially responsive behavior (Kafai, 2006), to inculcate social and moral development via cultures of enrichment
(Barab,   Arici, & Jackson,  2005), to  foster online communities     for students to learn computer    programming    and
collaboration skills (Bruckman, 1997), to engage interest in math (Elliott, 2005), and to develop skills in scientific
inquiry (Clarke, Dede, Ketelhut, & Nelson, 2006).      This paper presents a brief illustration of how MUVEs offer
opportunities to study emergent classroom-based learning experiences intermediate in complexity between recipe-
like laboratory activities and complex real world situations.
          Situated learning theory is defined as embedded within and inseparable from participating in a system of
activity deeply determined by a particular physical and cultural setting (Brown, Collins, Duguid, 1989; Chaiklin &
Lave, 1993). The unit of analysis is neither the individual nor the setting, but the relationship between the two, as
indicated by the   student's level of participation  (Greeno,  1998;   Barab &  Plucker,   2002). From    this perspective,
learning and cognition are understood both as progress along trajectories of participation in communities of practice
and as the ongoing transformation of identity (Greeno, 1998; Wenger, 1998).             Through participation in schools,
students develop patterns of participation that shape their identities as learners, including the ways in which they
engage in learning and hold beliefs about their abilities to learn.   As a trajectory, an identity is not an object that one
owns once and for all; it is defined over time, evolves, and has a momentum of its own.           Identity is what gives a
flexible continuity to the various forms of participation in which one is engaged (Eckert & Wenger, 1994, p. 17)

                                                           141                                                    CSCL 2007
Learning and Research in the River City MUVE
         The River City MUVE is a middle school science curriculum designed around national content standards
and assessments in biology, ecology, epidemiology, and inquiry.     Students work in teams of three to collaboratively
solve the problem of why the residents of River City are falling ill. They travel back in time--in the virtual world--
to the time period that bacteria were just being discovered.     This enables all students to bring their 21st century
expertise to a time period in which even the leading scientists were not aware of disease-causing microbes.           As
students move  through    the project, they  advance   through sessions  chronologically.   Each session   represents  a
different season in River City (Fall 1878 ­ Fall 1879), allowing them to collect data on change over time.
         Unlike a canned lab, the curriculum focuses on the front end of the inquiry process by walking students
through  the steps of how  one  first  determines a  question  that can be   answered  through scientific investigation.
Students identify a problem about why people are getting sick and turn it into a question that can be investigated.
They then design and carry out an investigation based on one of the three disease strands infecting the city (insect-
born, air-born, water-born).   Students  participate in the curriculum  along  a trajectory from  novice   (scientist-in-
training) to expert (research scientist), as they learn to develop questions, generate hypotheses, collect and analyze
data, and make conclusions and recommendations that they share with others.
         According  to Greeno   (1998),  the power   of situated learning is derived  from  a person   learning to solve
problems as part of a community in authentic context confronting these challenges.     Part of the promise of MUVEs
is their capability to create immersive, extended experiences with problems and contexts similar to the real world
(Clarke, Dede, Ketelhut, & Nelson, 2006).     To build collaborative skills, we have designed River City around a
realistic problem that is too complex for one student to be able to solve alone within the given time frame.       Team
members are encouraged to distribute tasks and work together to solve the problem.     Logfile analysis gives us a lens
through which to study the extent and type of students' collaboration.
         As mentioned above, MUVEs are unique in their ability to keep minutely detailed records of the moment-
by-moment movements, actions, and utterances of each participant in the environment (Ketelhut, Dede, Clarke,
Nelson, & Bowman, in press).    These data form the basis of a personal MUVE history of each student that follows
him or her from session to session, in the form of extensive log files--a feature impossible to replicate in a
classroom-based experience.   The level of detail in these records is extensive: the logs indicate exactly where
students went, with whom they communicated, what they said in these interactions, what virtual artifacts they
activated, and how long each of these activities took.  Analysis of these log files allows us to understand patterns of
behavior, such as development of community norms, conversational practices, and trajectories of participation.
         We closely examined log files of three classes of students in the 7th grade (n=54), all taught by the same
science teacher, in an urban public middle school in the Northeast.  The level of analysis was the team of students,
and we looked at each session as a separate "chunk" in order to understand how students' participation changed over
time. In order to assess how students were participating, we developed a set of codes based on aspects of authentic
inquiry and situated learning (trajectories of participation, conversational practices, community norms, confronting
ineffective strategies and misconceptions, distributed cognition, cognitive apprenticeship, LPP) that are meant to
foster curiosity, openness to new ideas, and informed skepticism: making observations, building and sharing ideas,
coming up with questions that can be investigated (taken from NRC, 1996, AAAS, 1993 and Chinn and Malhotra,
2002). We are creating multiple, interrelated case studies (Yin, 2003) of students' participation by combining
evidence from logfiles with data from pre-and-post measures, performance assessments, and -- in the case of ten
students -- pre-and-post interviews.  Prior to the implementation, we asked the teacher to rate their expectation of
students' successes and motivation in the project.  These indicate, at a rudimentary level, how the teacher perceives
the student is participating in the class overall prior to the MUVE curriculum; in our case studies, this is compared to
students' own perceptions (based on interviews and affective instruments) of their participation in the MUVE.

Findings and Conclusions
         Interesting patterns about the types of learning processes and behaviors of students are emerging from the
data. We are finding that the simulation fosters behaviors that are characteristic of situated learning and authentic
inquiry. Limited by space, we briefly illustrate two.   Further findings will be discussed in our presentation.
         First, research has shown that students often do not engage in authentic science inquiry in schools (Chinn &
Malhotra, 2003).   However,    we found  numerous    examples  of   students reasoning scientifically, making   sense of
causality, and building off each other's knowledge. The following excerpt presents one such example:
                   Cabra:  a lot of people at the hospital have stomach pains and diarrhea
                   Rock:   humm.. I think it might be a virus / bug

                                                          142                                                  CSCL 2007
                  Rock:     I'm sure of it,,, because a lot of people I have visited are coughing,,, and they sweat at
                            night (might be a fever)
                  Cabra:    yeah, and there are coughs too
                  Rock:     yeah, it's probably a virus... temporarily, we'll call it that... okay??
                  Cabra:    fine, but I got to do more water testing
         Second, while research documents that learning and cognition is distributed, very few opportunities exist to
document the kinds of informal supports students offer each other in the classroom.      We are finding that students
who do not typically participate in class, like Theo, provide help and support to others via increased participation:
                  Theo:     hey lets meet at the school
                  Ri:       WHERE IS THE SCHOOL
                  Theo:     look at the things in the tool box then click the globe and click school
                  Theo:     click river city map in the lower right hand corner
Our logfiles also document when students fail to reason scientifically, build knowledge, and offer supports.      We are
building cases of unrealized learning that suggest design heuristics to support situated and authentic inquiry.
         Overall, MUVEs are a promising way to create situated learning experiences within K-12 education and to
assess the complex forms of individual and group learning that ensue.      In particular, the rich logfiles they generate
provide scholars and teachers with detailed data to understand learning processes, to diagnose suboptimal patterns of
student performance, and to assess the knowledge and skills students have mastered.       In turn, this information can
inform improvements in curricular design and develop insights about theory.      Our design-based research illustrates
early steps towards developing robust methodologies for studying situated learning under controlled conditions in
which principled variations can yield knowledge about how context shapes collaboration and knowledge building.

References
Barab,  S. A.,  Arici, A., &  Jackson, C.  (2005).   Eat your   vegetables and  do  your  homework:      A    design-based
         investigation of enjoyment and meaning in learning. Educational Technology 45(1), 15-21.
Bruckman, A. S. (1997). MOOSE Crossing: Construction, community, and learning in a networked virtual world for
         kids. Unpublished Doctoral Dissertation, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA.
Bull, G., Bull, G., & Kajder, S. (2004). Tapped In. Learning & Leading with Technology, 31(5), 34­37.
Chaiklin,  S., &  Lave,  J. (1993).  Understanding    practice:  Perspectives   on activity and      context. New  York:
         Cambridge University Press.
Chinn, C. & Malhotra, B.    Epistemologically Authentic Inquiry in Schools: A Theoretical Framework for Evaluating
         Inquiry Tasks.  Science Education, 82(2) 175-218.
Clarke, J., Dede, C., Ketelhut, D. J., & Nelson, B. (2006).    A design-based research strategy to promote scalability
         for educational innovations. Educational Technology, 46 (3), 27­36.
Dillashaw, F. G., & Okey, J. R. (1980). Test of integrated process skills for secondary science students. Science
         Education, 64(5), 601-608.
Eckert, P.& Wenger, E. (1994). From School to Work: an Apprenticeship in Institutional Identity. Working Papers
         on Learning and Identity, 1. Palo Alto: Institute for Research on Learning.
Elliott, J. L. (2005). AquaMOOSE 3D: A constructionist approach to math learning motivated by artistic expression.
         Unpublished Doctoral Dissertation, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA.
Fraser, B. (1981).  TOSRA:    Test  of Science Related    Attitudes.  Australian  Council   for Educational     Research,
         Hawthorne, VIC.
Greeno, J. (1998). The situativity of knowing, learning, and research. American Psychologist, 53:5--26.
Griffin, M. M. (1995). You Can't Get There from Here: Situated Learning, Transfer, and Map Skills. Contemporary
         Educational Psychology, 20, 65-87.
Hendricks, C. C. (2001). Teaching Causal Reasoning Through Cognitive Apprenticeship: What are Results from
         Situated Learning? Journal of Educational Research, 94(5), 302-311.
Hutchins, E. (1995). Cognition in the wild. MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.
Ketelhut, D., Dede, C., Clarke, J., Nelson, B., & Bowman, C. (in press). Studying situated learning in a multi-user
         virtual environment. In E. Baker, J. Dickinson, W. Wulfeck, & H. O'Neil (Eds), Assessment of Problem
         Solving Using Simulations. Erlbaum.
Midgley, C., Maehr, M. L., Hruda, L. Z., Anderman, E., Anderman, L., Freeman, K. E., Gheen, M.,Kaplan, A.,
         Kumar,  R.,   Middleton, M. J., Nelson, J.,  Roeser,  R., &  Urdan, T.  (2000).  Manual for the Patterns of
         Adaptive Learning Scales (PALS), Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan.

                                                           143                                                   CSCL 2007
National Research Council. (1996).   National Science Education     Standards: observe, interact, change, learn.
         Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
Schlager, M. S., Fusco, J., & Schank, P. (2002). Evolution of an online education community of practice In K. A.
         Renninger & W. Shumar (Eds.), Building virtual communities: Learning and change in cyberspace (pp.
         129­158). Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.
Wenger, Etienne (1998) Communities of practice: learning, meaning, and identity. Cambridge U. Press, New York.
Young,   M. F.  (1993). Instructional  Design  for Situated     Learning. Educational Technology    Research &
         Development, 41(1), 43-58.

                                                         144                                               CSCL 2007
