    Using Social Network Analysis to Highlight an
               Emerging Online Community of Practice
             Anthony Cocciolo, Hui Soo Chae, Gary Natriello, Teachers College, Columbia University
                                  525 West 120th Street., New York, NY 10027 USA
                  cocciolo@tc.columbia.edu, chae@tc.columbia.edu, natriello@tc.columbia.edu

       Abstract: In this exploratory study, Cocciolo, Chae and Natriello investigate the extent
       to   which  the communicative     processes    exhibited  within  a  large digital repository
       illustrate the emergence of an online community of practice (CoP). In order to make this
       claim, we present a method for identifying the emergence of an online CoP using Social
       Network    Analysis  (SNA)    on communication     data  (i.e., uploads and  downloads)   and
       institutional role  (i.e., expert/faculty vs. novice/student).  The analysis reveals that the
       online   repository provides   opportunities  for novices to perform  the  role of the expert
       knowledge facilitator.     We posit that these conditions constitute a necessary element for
       the emergence of an online CoP.

Introduction
       In September 2006, Teachers College, Columbia University launched PocketKnowledge (PK)
(http://pocketknowledge.tc.columbia.edu/) a digital repository for archiving and publishing the "knowledge
products" (e.g., publications, working papers, research data, audio, video) of faculty, students, staff, and alumni.
Informed by the literature on communities of practice (Lave & Wenger, 1991; Wenger, 1998), PK was purposively
developed to facilitate the sharing of intellectual materials and collaboration among various members of the
Columbia University (CU) community. Specifically, features such as: 1) group pockets/portfolios, 2) community
commenting, 3) distributed/non-authoritative taxonomic intersections, 4) Rich Site Summary (RSS), and 5)
variegated item-level access permissions were incorporated into the design of the system in order to encourage
collaboration.

       In this exploratory study, we analyze PK utilization by different members of the CU community (e.g.,
faculty, students) in order draw attention to the possible emergence of an online community of practice (CoP). In the
context of this initial study, an online CoP refers to a group of people separated by time and location who: 1) share a
common interest in some topic, 2) engage in a process of social learning, and 3) provide opportunities for the novice
to perform the expert role (Johnson, 2001; Lave & Wegner, 1991; Wenger, 1998). Using Social Network Analysis
(SNA) (Wasserman & Faust, 1994) and cutpoint analysis techniques (Hanneman, 1997), we construct a method for
identifying the emergence of an online CoP, and examine the (sub)networks and interactions that have emerged thus
far in PK.

Literature Review
       The literature on collaborative learning has called for greater research emphasis on the "communicative
processes involved in successful (and unsuccessful) peer interactions rather than just learning outcomes" (Cho,
Steganone, & Gay, 2002, p. 43). According to scholars such as Lave and Wenger (1991), this line of inquiry is
critical because learning is fundamentally a socially situated process. One method for analyzing communicative
processes is the investigation of structural locations within a system using social network analysis (SNA). SNA has
been used to shed light on several Computer Supported Collaborative Learning (CSCL) contexts.      For example,
SNA has enabled researchers to identify central and peripheral actors in a CSCL course.    Moreover, it has elucidated
how the actors' positionalities mediate "learners' perceptions and behaviors related to community-based information
sharing practice" (p. 49). Other researchers such as Reffay & Chanier (2003) have investigated the influence of
group cohesion in Computer Supported Collaborative Distance-learning (CSCDL). Others have used SNA to clarify
the impact of social structures on knowledge construction in an asynchronous learning environment (see, for e.g.,
Aviv, Erlich, Ravid, & Geva, 2003).

       Despite the insights that SNA affords, there are a number of concerns regarding the scope, depth, and
richness of network data (de Nooy, Mrvar, and Batagelj, 2005). To address this concern, Martínez, Dimitriadis,

                                                           145                                                CSCL 2007
Rubia, Gómez, Garachón, & Marcos (2002) augmented their SNA with qualitative research to gain a deeper
understanding of a CSCL environment. Future iterations of this study will similarly employ qualitative methods to
supplement the network analyses.

Methods
        In the context of this mini-study, we used Systems Theory to define the uploading and downloading of
materials as "communicative acts," PK users as "actors," and the cumulative communicative exchanges as
"interactions" (Buckley, 1967). Although this is only one configuration for evaluating sociality (1), this particular
systems arrangement is useful because it provides a readily available metric for assessing actors' interactions within
a network.

        PK usage data was gathered from September 6, 2006 to November 18, 2006. During this time, N=228
distinct users exchanged files either by uploading a file or by downloading a file.  The analysis does not include
downloads from users who were not logged in. The usage data was converted to a matrix and visualized as a
network using NetDraw (Boragatti, 2002). Network attribute data, which indicated institutional role (e.g., masters-
level student) and color, was added to indicate user/node role. Additional analyses were conducted with NetDraw,
including segmenting the network into components and filtering out key actors using cutpoints analysis. Table 1
presents the distribution of individuals over the set of institutional roles.

Table 1: Role distribution of user population

Library         Doctoral Student    MA Student                 Faculty/instructor     Staff    Other
2               66                  106                        17                     11       25

Results
        The network can be decomposed into several components as shown in Figure 1. These include: 1) isolated
actors (users who only use the system to store their own work and choose not to share with others), 2) a large and
varied community of actors and interactions, and 3) close-knit communicators who are isolated.   Within the large
community of actors and interactions, there are two clusters. These can be found by visual inspection or by
computing eigenvetors. Cluster one illustrates interactions for a course offered by a doctoral student, and cluster two
illustrates interactions around library-contributed materials (e.g., historical dissertations). These two clusters
illustrate the importance of community members who are specifically responsible for communicating knowledge or
content (in this case, an instructor and an academic library).

                                                         146                                                    CSCL 2007
                            Figure 1. Components of community network visualization

       Upon further analysis, there are many more critical community members than Figure 1 might suggest. A
cutpoints analysis was conducted to reveal those key actors/nodes whose removal would leave the network divided
into unconnected systems. As described by Hanneman (1997), "cutpoints may be particularly important actors --
who may act as brokers among otherwise disconnected groups."   Figure 2, which shows the cutpoints or key
facilitators, reveals that there are other actors--in addition to those highlighted in Figure 1--who play a significant
role in knowledge sharing.

                                Figure 2. Cutpoints, or key facilitators of sharing

                                                        147                                                 CSCL 2007
In the context of this study, cutpoints are actors who are facilitators of knowledge sharing. This analysis reveals that
knowledge facilitators occur in proportion to their total numbers within the system. For example, ~11% of all
cutpoints are faculty, and ~7% of all actors are faculty. Similarly, ~72% of all cutpoints are students, where ~75% of
all actors are students (see Table 2). Our analysis also reveals that students (i.e., novice) play an equally important
role in facilitating knowledge sharing as do faculty (i.e., experts). Moreover, the analysis indicates that novice
learners (in a relative sense) are able to come to occupy the role of the expert facilitator, gradually "fashioning
relations of identity as a full practitioner" (Lave & Wegner, 1991, p. 121). Much like a CoP, experts are not
dispensed with, but rather novice learners are provided "with opportunities to make the culture of practice theirs" (p.
95).

Table 2: Cutpoints (or key actors) by role, % of all cutpoints, and % of all users

           Library         Doctoral       MA                 Faculty/instructor         Staff      Other
                           Student        Student
Cutpoints  2               4              9                  2                          3          0
% of all   11.1%           22.2%          50.0%              11.1%                      5.6%       0%
cutpoints
% of all   .9%             28.9%          46.5%              7.5%                       4.8%       11.9%
users

Conclusion
         This study used Social Network Analysis (SNA) to examine the communicative processes represented in an
expansive repository for community-generated intellectual materials. This analysis reveled several phenomena, the
most important of which is the extent to which novice learners have come to occupy central roles in terms of
facilitating knowledge sharing. Additionally, by examining the extent to which novices are afforded opportunities to
share the role of the expert performer, and analyzing the proportion of expert and novice actors who share the role of
knowledge facilitator, the study presents a way for researchers to determine the emergence of an online CoP.

Endnotes
(1) Another measure of sociality could be community commenting on materials within PK

References

Aviv, R., Erlich, Z., Ravid, G., & Geva, A. (2003). Network Analysis of Knowledge Construction in Asynchronous
         Learning Networks. Journal of Asynchronous Learning Networks, 7(3), 1-23. Retrieved November 30,
         2006, from http://www.aln.org/publications/jaln/v7n3/pdf/v7n3_aviv.pdf
Borgatti, S.P. (2002). NetDraw: Graph visualization software. Harvard: Analytic Technologies.
Buckley, W. (1967). Sociology and modern system theory.      Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Cho, H., Stefanone, M., & Gay, G. (2002). Social information sharing in a CSCL Community. In G. Stahl (Ed.),
         Computer support for collaborative learning: Foundations for a CSCL community (pp. 43-50). Hillsdale,
         NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
De Nooy, W., Mrvar, A., & Batagelj, V. (2005). Exploratory social network analysis with Pajek.     New York:
         Cambridge University Press.
Hanneman, R. A., & Riddle, M.  (2005). Introduction to social network methods. Riverside, CA:      University of
         California, Riverside. Retrieved November 30, 2006 from http://faculty.ucr.edu/~hanneman/
Lave, J. & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge: Cambridge UP.
Martínez, A., Dimitriadis, Y., Rubia, B., Gómez, E., Garachón, I., & Marcos, J.A.     (2002). Studying social aspects
         of computer-supported collaboration with a mixed evaluation approach. In G. Stahl (Ed.), Computer
         support for collaborative learning: Foundations for a CSCL community (pp. 631-632). Hillsdale, NJ:
         Lawrence Erlbaum.

                                                         148                                                   CSCL 2007
Reffay, C., & Chanier, T. (2002). Social network analysis used for modeling collaboration in distance-learning
       groups. In S.A. Cerri, G. Guardères, & F. Paraguaçu, (Eds.), Proceedings of the 6th international
       conference on intelligent tutoring systems (pp. 31-40). Biarritz, France.
Reffay, C., & Chanier, T. (2003). How social network analysis can help to measure cohesion in collaborative
       distance-learning. In B. Wasson, S. Ludvigsen, & U. Hoppe (Eds.), Designing for change in networked
       learning environments. Proceedings of the international conference on computer support for collaborative
       learning 2003 (pp. 343­352). Dordrecht, Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Wasserman, S., & Faust, K. (1994). Social network analysis: Methods and applications. Cambridge: Cambridge
       University Press.
Wenger, E. (1998). Communities of practice: Learning, meaning, and identity. New York: Cambridge University.

                                                         149                                               CSCL 2007
