 Mentored Professional Development to Support Successful Integration of
                       Technology-enhanced Science Curriculum

                  Stephanie B. Corliss, Michele W. Spitulnik, Tara E. Higgins, & Doug Kirkpatrick
             University of California, Berkeley, 4407 Tolman Hall, Berkeley, Ca 94720-1670
  sbcorliss@berkeley.edu, michelespitulnik@aol.com, thiggins@berkeley.edu, dougkirk@berkeley.edu

         Abstract:   MODELS      (Mentored     and    Online   Development       of Educational     Leaders  for
         Science) is a 5-year NSF grant funded to support teacher professional development and
         learning to enable schools to implement technology-enhanced inquiry instruction. In this
         paper    we  discuss  professional       development        activities,  classroom     enactment    of
         technology-enhanced   projects,    and    the trends     emerging   in  changes  in teachers'   beliefs
         and practices during  the   first two    years of    the project.  We   present a  case study   of one
         teacher's learning progression and discuss plans for further data collection and analysis.

       Inquiry-based  science learning     and    teaching    can    be enhanced    by  the  use of  technology    in the
classroom  (Bransford,  Brown,   &   Cocking,      1999; Linn,       Davis, &   Bell, 2004).  However,    integration  of
inquiry-based  science    curricula and    technology    integration     is  difficult  for  many   teachers.   Effective
professional development    programs    that   are    flexible    to adapt  to  the   needs  of teachers,   schools,  and
communities   (Borko  &   Putnam,   1995)     and  are  sustainable     contribute  to  successful   integration   (Davis,
2003; Fishman et al., 2003; Grossman, et al., 2001; Little, 2002).

         MODELS,     Mentored    and  Online      Development     of  Educational     Leaders for   Science, is  a 5-year
NSF grant funded to support teacher professional development and learning. The program was designed to
enable   schools  to implement      technology-enhanced         inquiry     instruction  by  means    of  a  sustainable
professional development    program   that     is customized      to their  needs.  MODELS       aims to  improve    both
science understanding and practice of teachers through the development of peer-mentoring communities.
Teachers and mentors receive professional development opportunities at summer workshops and mentor
meetings and are encouraged to discuss their experiences in face-to-face and online collaborative activities.
Activities are designed to support teacher collaboration, to stress reviewing student work, and to support
teachers' customization of the curriculum and their teaching. We are in the second year of this 5-year grant,
and are examining how teachers' beliefs and practices are changing from Year 1 to Year 2 as a result of the
professional development.

Methods
Participants
         Participants include 18 middle school science teachers from two schools in separate districts who
are integrating technology-enhanced projects into their curriculum.

Learning Environment
         Teachers  use  projects created    in    the Web-based       Inquiry   Science  Environment     (WISE)    a  free
online science   learning environment      for middle   and    high   school   students  (wise.berkeley.edu).    Projects
engage   students in various  collaborative       activities, such   as  designing    solutions  to problems,    debating
science topics, investigating hypotheses, and critiquing scientific claims.

Data Sources
Summer Workshop Teacher Comments
         During each summer workshop teachers responded to questions posted online that asked them to
reflect upon the professional development activities, their teaching and learning, the implementation of the
projects during the upcoming year, and future professional development activities that could be useful.

Classroom Observations
         University researchers observe teachers and students at various times when teaching with a WISE
project. Observations   are  recorded      on  an   observation      form   containing   specific   categories:    general
interactions, working with simulations, small group interactions, and mentor support.

                                                          150                                                        CSCL 2007
Teacher Interviews
       Following    the completion  of each  project, university researchers interview teachers   about  their
experiences. Questions  focus on   connecting ideas   between the  project and  the rest of the  curriculum,
teaching with the models/simulations, effectiveness of teachers' customizations, assessment/feedback to the
students, and types of mentoring/support received and wanted for the next WISE project.

Procedures
Year 1
       During    the summer,  teachers  attended  a   workshop   for 5 consecutive  days  on the     university
campus. Teachers were introduced to WISE projects, they selected projects to run in their classrooms, and
they planned and set goals for teaching with the projects during the upcoming year.

       During the school year, all teachers ran at least one WISE project in their classroom. A university-
based mentor was present during the first day to offer support and to help the teachers get started and often
provided additional support during subsequent days. One teacher who had previously run WISE projects in
her classroom acted as the school-based mentor for School 1. She visited teachers' classrooms when her
schedule permitted and provided technical support to the teachers. She often acted as a liaison between the
teachers, the administration, and the university researchers. All teachers from School 2 were new to WISE
projects, so they relied on the university mentors rather than school-based mentors for support.

Year 2
       Teachers attended a summer workshop for 5 consecutive days on the university campus. Teachers
reviewed their previous year experiences with WISE projects, discussed teaching practices, and selected
and customized projects to be used the following year. The university researchers provided teachers with
samples of student work and prompted teachers to use this data to make evidence-based decisions about
changes in teaching practice and project customizations. Researchers also led discussions about teaching
strategies for teaching with models and successfully integrating projects into the larger curriculum.

       The school-based mentor from School 1 remained the same, and a mentor was selected for School
2. Mentors met for 2 days on the university campus. They reviewed WISE projects, discussed teaching and
mentoring strategies, shared WISE experiences, and planned for the upcoming school year.

       17    of the 18  teachers have run or  are scheduled  to  run more  than one  WISE   project   in their
classroom in Year 2. The school-based mentors are meeting with teachers before and/or during project runs
to offer assistance. They provide the majority of support for the teachers at their school while university
researchers support the school-based mentors, but are available to provide support to teachers if requested.
The mentors continue to act as liaisons between the teachers, administrators, and university researchers.

Preliminary Results
       Preliminary analyses of summer workshop data, classroom observations, and teacher interviews
reveal some emerging trends in changes in teachers' beliefs and practices. We use one teacher, Rachel, as a
case study to provide examples of these emerging trends and to demonstrate her learning progression.

       Data reveal that on average teachers are more confident Year 2 using the technology. During the
first year, teachers relied on university researcher support to use the technology on the first day and when
troubleshooting technical issues. Teachers worried about if the technology would work and their abilities
and their students' abilities to use it correctly. During a post-run interview in Year 2, Rachel commented:

       Last year and a little bit this year also, I was more concerned about the mechanics of it, of
       the programs and which button do they push, what the screen looks like, scroll down and
       save your work. And I feel like they're getting the hang of it. I feel like next year I don't
       need to stress that as much and now I know which concepts I need to stress...We can talk
       more about what we're teaching than the I-Books. Now we're using it (the technology)
       more than focusing on it. I mean it's exactly the way the evolution should be.

                                                     151                                                  CSCL 2007
In Year 2 teachers are able to focus more on the science content, students' understanding, and their
teaching practices rather than on the technology. Rachel recognizes this as a natural learning progression.

        In general, in Year 2 teachers are better able to use student work to inform their teaching practices.
This was something that was prompted at the summer workshop, and Rachel reported, "I liked having the
time to really think about how well my students integrated the ideas in the mitosis project. It was helpful to
have time to discuss the data with Danielle and come up with ideas about where the gaps are.       We have
revised the project, and made a plan for how to change the way that we teach it." She also stated in a post-
run interview that "going the second time is so much better because I know exactly where they're going to
have problems and where they're not going to have problems." The teachers were able to use the evidence
provided in their students' work to determine where the students had trouble understanding the content and
made plans on how to account for these challenges.

        Teachers also demonstrated much more use of student work during project runs to inform their
teaching. During Rachel's Year 2 post-run interview she revealed, "last year on this project I may not have
even done openers. I don't think I was doing openers except for if I felt like I really needed one...this year I
did them most of the days." This year Rachel made it a priority to look at student work several times during
the project run to determine her students' understanding. She created openers, which were daily discussion
questions or topics related to what she found her students were having trouble understanding.      She said,

        I create the openers after I've looked at the work. And I designed them to try to correct
        misconceptions or help them with something that they're struggling to understand. I don't
        know that I'll use the same openers myself next year. It all depends on where they are.
        What point did they get to in the project that day and then that night I'd look at it and
        what kinds of issues are they having...I feel like it's important, but I feel like they're
        useless unless you're catering them to exactly what the kids need at that point.

This reveals that Rachel has learned the importance of evaluating student work during project runs to assess
students' understanding, so that she can provide the guidance needed to grasp the science concepts.

        These preliminary results are promising and suggest that the professional development is
contributing to positive changes in teachers' beliefs and practices. Additional teachers will be observed and
interviewed during Year 2 and compared to Year 1 data, which will also allow us to create teacher
trajectories that can be tracked over time and compared across settings. We will share these additional
findings at the conference and facilitate a discussion on designing collaborative professional development
opportunities to support successful integration of technology-enhanced curriculum.

References
Borko, H., and Putnam, R. T. (1995). Expanding a teacher's knowledge base: A cognitive psychological
        perspective on professional development. In T. R. Guskey, and M. Huberman (Eds.), Professional
        Development    in Education: New  Paradigms     and Practices  (pp. 35-65). New      York:    Teachers
        College Press.
Bransford, J. D., Brown,   A. L., &  Cocking,    R. R.  (Eds.) (1999).   How people      learn:    Brain, mind,
        experience, and school. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
Davis, E.  A.  (2003). Knowledge     integration in  science   teaching: Analyzing   teachers'       knowledge
        development. Research in Science Education, 34, 21-53.
Fishman, B. J., Marx, R. W., Best, S., & Tal, R. T. (2003). Linking teacher and student learning to improve
        professional development in systemic reform. Teaching and Teacher Education, 19, 643-658.
Grossman, P, Wineburg, S., & Woolworth, S. (2001). Toward a theory of teacher community. Teachers
        College Record, 103(6) 942-1012.
Linn, M.C., Davis, E.A., & Bell, P. (Eds.). (2004). Internet Environments for Science Education.      Mahwah,
        NJ:   Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Little, J. W. (2002). Locating learning in teacher communities of practice: Opening up problems of analysis
        in records of everyday work. Teaching and Teacher Education, 18(8), 917-946.

                                                    152                                                    CSCL 2007
