A Theoretical Framework of Collaborative Knowledge Building with
                   Wikis ­ a Systemic and Cognitive Perspective

   Ulrike Cress, Joachim Kimmerle, Knowledge Media Research Center, Konrad-Adenauer-Str. 40, 72072
                                                       Tuebingen
                              Email: u.cress@iwm-kmrc.de, j.kimmerle@iwm-kmrc.de

         Abstract: Wikis provide new possibilities for collaborative knowledge building with artifacts.
         This paper presents a theoretical framework for describing and understanding the processes
         which  lead  to  collaborative   knowledge    building.     The model    borrows  from  the    systemic
         approach of Luhmann as well as from Piaget's theory of equilibration. It describes people's
         learning  activities as  processes   of externalization     and internalization.  Individual   learning
         happens through internal processes of assimilation and accommodation, whereas changes in a
         wiki's  information     space   are due   to  activities    of  external  assimilation  and    external
         accommodation.      All these   equilibration    activities are  caused   by  subjectively  perceived
         differences  between    an  individuals'  knowledge     space   and   the  wiki's information   space.
         Differences of medium level are considered to cause cognitive conflicts which activate the
         described processes of equilibration.

Computer-Supported Knowledge Building with Wikis
         Recently,  a variety   of new   tools fostering   computer-supported      collaborative learning  (CSCL)   and
computer-supported cooperative working (CSCW) appeared and established themselves on the WWW. On the
one hand, the term Web 2.0 describes a set of new interactive technologies and services on the internet. On the
other hand, Web 2.0 refers to a modified utilization of the internet. What is of particular importance in the web
2.0 context for CSCL researchers is the integration of so-called social software (Kolbitsch & Maurer, 2006).
Social software refers to systems which facilitate human communication, interaction, and collaboration. These
systems support the constitution and maintenance of self-organizing social networks and communities. Weblogs
(blogs), file-sharing communities,    and  especially  wikis loom     large in this social-software  context. Blogs   are
websites which are used as online diaries. They contain new entries periodically. Usually, blogs are produced by
a single author or by a small group of users. But they are open to the public for reading (Blood, 2002; Maurer &
Tochtermann, 2002). File-sharing web pages provide private spaces where users can store their documents and a
public space  where   files can  be  shared  with  other  users. Popular    examples  of   file-sharing communities   are
services like flickr  (a photo   sharing  website),    or youtube    (a  video sharing  website)  (Rodriguez,    Tan, &
Gkantsidis, 2005).

         Whereas blogs and file-sharing systems are mainly used for pooling information, wikis have special
potential for computer-supported collaborative knowledge building. Wikis are web sites which allow users not
only to have access to its content but also to change the content online (Leuf & Cunningham, 2001). Wikis are
mostly used to write texts. Their special feature is that people can do all kinds of revision of the text: they can
create hyperlinks and fill them with text, they can revise texts by adding, deleting or changing any text parts
they want to. This way, large groups of like-minded people are able to work collaboratively on one and the
same text  about  a  certain  topic. In wikis  all users  collaboratively   create  one hypertext.  An   example  which
illustrates the potency of wikis is the online encyclopedia Wikipedia. Here, users mutually develop the world's
largest encyclopedia. Every internet user is allowed to take part in this undertaking. The Wikipedia example will
be applied throughout the whole article in order to make our theoretical analysis more concrete. In a wiki people
work mutually on one common artifact (cf. Stahl, 2002 for the relevance of artifacts in CSCL). And a multitude
of people around the world are able to participate in this process anywhere, anytime. In this article we will ask
what makes wikis especially attractive for learning purposes and knowledge building. To examine this question,
we will consider several fundamental perspectives on learning and knowledge building. We presuppose that a
person's individual knowledge is a resource for other peoples' learning (Kafai, 2006; Scardamalia & Bereiter,
1994). We  base   our arguments      on findings as to  how  people     make use   of each others'  knowledge    through
collaborative knowledge      building   with artifacts (cf. Bruckman,     2006).    We  rely on  Papert's  approach   of

                                                             153                                                    CSCL 2007
constructionism (e.g. Papert, 1980, 1987, 1993, 1997; cf. also Kafai, 2006) and point out that our perspective is
grounded in a tradition that emphasizes the learner's activity in the learning process (cf. Greeno, 2006)

         In the remainder of this article we will present our model of collaborative knowledge building with
wikis   by taking   a systemic    perspective   and   by  distinguishing  between    the processes    of externalization  and
internalization. We will clarify these processes by continuously applying the Wikipedia example to our model.
We will then describe the four processes of knowledge building that result from the distinction between external
and internal (cognitive) processes on the one hand and between assimilation and accommodation on the other
hand. Finally, we will describe the motivational aspects of collaborative knowledge building. We are aware that,
in the  strict sense, the  motivational     aspects are   the foundation  of  the processes    of knowledge    building.  The
cognitive and socio-cognitive processes cannot be separated from the motivational ones. However, we decided
to present our model in an order which would make clear that the cognitive and socio-cognitive processes can
help to explain the motivational processes.

A Model of Collaborative Knowledge Building with Wikis
         In    the model   presented    here   we  consider   from  a  systemic   point  of view  the  components   and    the
processes necessary for the exchange of knowledge and for collaborative knowledge building with wikis. For
this purpose     we   borrow  perspectives      from    systemic  approaches    (cf. Luhmann,     1984,   1995,   1997;   von
Bertalanffy, 1950, 1968). Based on these perspectives, a wiki can be seen as a social system which operates
through the communication of people sharing information and creating artifacts. We have to make clear here
that according to Luhmann, the people themselves are not part of the social system. With respect to a wiki, this
is obvious because the wiki and its content exist as an artifact even if all users are absent. Cognitive systems
operate  through    cognitive   processes   like   retrieval  of knowledge    from   long-term  memory    (Baddeley,    1986,
1992),  elaboration   of   knowledge    (Craik    & Lockhart,    1972),   or externalizing  and   internalizing  information.
According     to   Luhmann   (1984)     it is  the social    system's  border  and   the   difference between    system   and
environment which defines a system. The difference between a system and the environment is determined by
the system's way of operating. Thus, clearly delineating the "border" between the social system (the wiki) and
cognitive  systems    (the users)  is  crucial  for understanding     how    collaborative  knowledge    building with    wikis
works.

         In this section we will first of all outline the functionality of the social system, then we will address the
functionality  of   the cognitive   systems.    After   that we  will describe  the  processes  responsible   for transitions
between    the   social   system   and     the people's   cognitive    systems.   Here,    we  distinguish   the  process   of
externalization from the process of internalization.

Social and the Cognitive Systems
         According to Luhmann (1995) a social system operates via communication. With respect to Wikipedia
the community of users establishes itself through the interaction of its participants who use their knowledge and
write  encyclopedia     articles. The   wiki   articles comprise  the  information   people   share.  For example  one    user
might know something about George Washington's childhood and contribute this information to a Wikipedia
article about    George    Washington.     Another      user might  contribute   something    about   Washington's   attitude
towards slavery and so on. This way, the George Washington article develops out of provided information and
becomes more and more complete. The articles are traceable in the internet. There they are accessible for all
members of the community. Each member of the community can contribute to an article. On the one hand, she
or he can extend or diminish an article by adding or deleting information (e.g. adding references about George
Washington).     On   the other   hand  a  participant  can   change  the artifact's structure by  revising   an  article (e.g.
removing   biographical    information     about   George    Washington   at  the opening   of the   article and  moving   the
references to the end). The information which is embedded in the wiki builds the wiki's "information space". It
consists   of  all information    units (definitions,   descriptions   etc.) and  relations or links  between     these units.
Information units and relations between them belonging together make the structure of a wiki.

         Turning to the cognitive systems, we analogously describe each group members' individual knowledge
as his/her individual "knowledge space". This knowledge space contains all the schemas a person possesses
(Bartlett, 1932; Piaget, 1970; Schank & Abelson, 1977). A schema is made up of knowledge units and relations

                                                                  154                                                   CSCL 2007
between   these   units belonging    together. For    a person    contributing   to a   Wikipedia    article about  George
Washington, knowledge units might be Washington's birthplace, birthday, the name of his mother, and so on .
What   processes  are   going on,  when  people   share   their knowledge     by   creating   wikis? What    happens when
people  work  parallel  on  one  common     artifact, thereby   building   new   knowledge    collaboratively?   Here, two
processes are relevant which describe the "crossing of the border" between the social and the cognitive system
(a process   which Luhmann     terms   structural coupling):    we   refer to these  processes  as   "externalization"  and
"internalization" respectively.

Externalization
          For contributing  to the   development   of   a wiki  a  person  first has   to externalize   his/her knowledge.
He/she does this by writing information down in the wiki which reflects parts of his/her own knowledge space.
For it, knowledge units of one's own knowledge space have to be conveyed into a wiki article which maps the
person'   knowledge.    For describing   these processes   of   externalization  we   refer   primarily  to  an individual's
declarative knowledge in her/his memory's semantic system (Tulving, 1985).

          This artifact, then, exists independently from the person who created it, and it contains information
units which follow from the person's knowledge units. The information units in the wiki's information space
relate to the knowledge units of the contributor's individual knowledge space: therefore, the person's cognitive
schemas   are represented   by   the wiki's structure.    E.g. if  a Wikipedia     user writes  something    about  George
Washington's military career, he/she can only write down something which was in his/her knowledge space
before. The   person's  knowledge    about  George    Washington's    military   career   precedes   the information about
George Washington's military career in the wiki's information space. In this way, information about the military
career is significantly related to the person's knowledge about the career. Of course, the information in the wiki
and the knowledge in a person's mind are not identical, but they are equivalent to a certain degree. After the
process of externalization, the artifact's information space exists independently from the person's knowledge
space.

          Contributing to an article does not only allow the creation of an artifact, it can also lead to an individual
learning process of the contributor. The mental effort necessary for the externalization of knowledge can extend
the person's individual knowledge space, because externalization requires deeper processing and clarification.
This aspect is addressed by the work of Flower and Hayes (1980) as well as Webb (1982). So, normally the
person  who   produces   a  wiki article cannot   externalize   some  of   his/her  own   knowledge   units  without some
changes   of his/her own    individual knowledge   space.   Through    the  externalization   process    one often deepens
one's  own   knowledge   and   might   even acquire   new  knowledge       which   can  improve  an  existing   schema. So
externalization can lead to individual learning processes, and a contributor to a wiki article can expand his/her
individual knowledge space through acquiring new knowledge units which were not part of the individual's
knowledge space before. With respect to the Wikipedia article about George Washington one can imagine that a
person who writes something about George Washington's military career is forced to restructure her or his own
knowledge in order to make it more comprehensible for others. This way some issues become clearer to her-
/himself and he/she acquires deeper knowledge and comes to new insights about George Washington's military
career.

          In Figure 1 this kind of learning is shown by the grey symbols which expand the individual knowledge
space   K to  K'. In  this  figure each  symbol   represents    another    knowledge    unit. Each   of  the three  people
externalizes knowledge by contributing to the wiki, but only Person 1 and Person 3 acquire new knowledge
units by this activity.

          If a person has contributed to a wiki, then each individual group member can have access to the wiki's
information space. This is shown by the symbols in the wiki's information space in Figure 1. For the time being,
this process of externalization does not require the interaction with other people in a narrow sense. A person can
externalize  her/his own    knowledge    (and  thereby    extend   one's   own   knowledge    space)  without    necessarily
addressing other people. However, with respect to the process of internalization, which will be described in the
next section, a participation of other people is indispensable.

                                                               155                                                     CSCL 2007
          Figure 1: Three people with different individual knowledge spaces K1 to K3 interacting with a wiki.
  The grey symbols show novel knowledge units as a result of learning through externalization, K1' and K3'
                          represents the extended knowledge spaces correspondingly.

Internalization
         Interindividual knowledge transfer and collaborative knowledge building takes place when people have
the opportunity to work with a wiki and to internalize the information the wiki contains. So people have to
decode the information captured in a wiki, and then they have to integrate the information units in the wiki's
information space into their individual knowledge spaces. Through this internalization a person acquires new
knowledge  units and relations between knowledge   units,    i.e. a person uses  the wiki's information space to
expand his/her own knowledge space. In Figure 2 the results of an internalization is indicated by the striped
symbols. Through internalization the individual knowledge spaces are expanded to K''. For example, if a person
reads something about George Washington's first election as president and this person did not know beforehand
that George Washington became president in 1789, then the person expands his/her own knowledge space by
adding this new knowledge unit to his/her schema about George Washington.

         Besides this interindividual knowledge transfer resulting from the internalization of information in a
wiki, an additional kind of knowledge-acquisition process can occur: If a person internalizes information units
from the wiki which did not belong to his/her personal knowledge space before, knowledge units can develop
which were neither part of his/her personal knowledge space nor part of the wiki. Such additional knowledge
acquisition can happen if a new knowledge unit that a person internalized from a wiki interacts with his/her
individual knowledge space in a way that enables the person to create new knowledge. This kind of knowledge
building can happen  if a person is able to infer new knowledge        units out of  the knowledge units  he/she
internalized through the work with the wiki and the knowledge units he/she had in his/her individual knowledge
space before. This knowledge can be described as "emergent knowledge". A person would not have been able
to create this knowledge if it had not been internalized from the artifact before. This emergent knowledge is a
product of the collaboration and as such represents the result of a form of collaborative knowledge building
which is more than mere knowledge sharing (something qualitatively new is developed). Emergent knowledge
has not been part of the individual's knowledge spaces before (for a detailed elaboration on the phenomenon of
emergence cf. Holland, 1998 or Johnson, 2001). This process can also be clarified with the Wikipedia example:

                                                         156                                                 CSCL 2007
if a person comes to know that George Washington became president in 1789 by reading the corresponding
Wikipedia    article, and if this person previously knew that the U.S. declared independence in 1776 and also
knew some facts about the American Revolutionary War, he or she can draw conclusions with repect to certain
delevopments in American history. In Figure 2     person 3 has created such emergent knowledge.

            Figure 2: Process of internalization: Each of the three individuals internalizes one concept (striped
symbols). Person 3 additionally creates a new knowledge unit (light-grey) through a process of inference      from
   an internalized knowledge unit and from another one belonging to the person's knowledge space previously.
                       The occurrence of such knowledge units shows an emergent process.

Four Processes of Knowledge Building
         The model so far has described different kinds of individual learning. Individual learning occurs
·        as a result of externalization (due to processes of deeper processing and elaboration which are activated
         by the externalization process),
·        as a result of internalization (due to the simple adding of new knowledge units) and
·        as  a result of inferences (due   to the expansion  of   a person's individual  knowledge  space   through
         internalization and, arising from that, an opportunity to interconnect old and new knowledge units, i.e.
         inferences of knowledge units that were unknown until then).

         All forms of learning take place when people interact with the artifact in a way that information and
knowledge are transferred between the individual's knowledge space and the wiki's information space. So, to
refer back   to Luhmann's     perspective,   learning occurs   by   the transgression of  the  border between    the
individual's   knowledge  spaces   and   the  wiki's  information   space. The   processes  of  internalization and
externalization cause   these individual   learning  processes. But  in  the model   as described so  far,  learning
primarily is considered as quantitative increase of knowledge units in an individual's knowledge space. And up
to this point,  expansion of  the wiki's  knowledge   space  has  been   described, but not yet qualitative changes
within the wiki. These aspects will be addressed systematically in this section.

                                                           157                                                 CSCL 2007
         For considering    this qualitative aspects  we  take   up Piaget's  model   of  equilibration  (Piaget,   1977a,
1977b). This model also describes how people deal with new information from their environment and how they
perceive and  encode     this information from    outside and  integrate  it into   their own   cognitive  schemas.   The
equilibrium theory describes the way people try to maintain a balance between the environmental information
on the one hand and their cognitive schemas on the other hand. If information is new and leads to knowledge
that was not part of the individual's knowledge space before, it cannot be promptly decoded and integrated into
an existing cognitive schema. Thus, people have to adapt to this new environment. There are two possibilities of
adaptation: people can assimilate the new information or they can accommodate their internal cognitive schema
(in order to match it with the information). Assimilation describes a process where an individual understands
new information on the basis of an existing cognitive schema and then integrates it into this cognitive schema.
This means that information coming from the environment is perceived and modified in a way that makes it fit
into the individual's    cognitive   schemas.   Assimilation  describes   more    a quantitative    aspect of   individual
learning. The mental schemas of an individual remain the same and only additional concepts are acquired which
fit to these schemas.

         The other process of adaptation which Piaget describes is the process of accommodation. Here a person
interacts with new information in a way that changes a cognitive schema. In this case, a person does not simply
integrate new information into an existing cognitive schema, but actually changes this schema in order to better
understand the environment and its information. We consider the creation of new schemas as an indicator of
learning in a more qualitative manner.

         We  apply     this distinction between    assimilation   and   accommodation      to   our model      of people's
interaction with wikis described in our model. When interacting with the wiki, people can learn as a result of
externalization, or as a result of internalization (with or without inferences). This learning can take place by
assimilation or  by   accommodation     respectively: people  can   acquire  new  information   without    changing   their
cognitive schemas, or they can modify schemas or create new schemas.

         For collective knowledge building with wikis, we state that accommodation and assimilation do not
only  take  place   internally (in  people's  individual  knowledge      spaces)  but also   externally    (in the  wiki's
information space). A wiki can accommodate or assimilate as well. If people contribute information to the wiki
without  linking   it to previously    existing information   units,   they  only   extend  the wiki   by  adding    some
information. If people contribute this way, the information space of the wiki assimilates the new information,
which means that the structure of the wiki remains the same, only some information is added. For example, if a
user adds some references about George Washington in the Wikipedia article, this is only an assimilation of the
wiki. But the wiki can also accommodate. This happens when people do not only attach new information to the
existing information space, but they also structure the information of the wiki in a new way. For example, in
Wikipedia this would happen if a user revises an existing article by arranging and configuring the information
of the  article, by   separating an  article into  different articles, or by  linking  an   article to another    one and
describing the relation between both. In Wikipedia such organization processes often occur. The application of a
history flow diagram     is a visual method   developed   by  an  IBM   research  group    which   makes   such   activities
visible (Viegas,  Wattenberg     & Dave,  2004).   Such  visualizations   of Wikipedia    articles show  that  sometimes
people only add new information to in existing article, and sometimes people completely restructure an article.

         In sum,   in collaborative  knowledge     building  with  wikis  we  can   distinguish four different    forms of
knowledge    building:    Internal   assimilation  (quantitative    individual   learning),   internal  accommodation
(qualitative individual learning), (quantitative) external assimilation, and (qualitative) external accommodation.
The first two are processes of individual learning, the latter two are processes of a collaborative knowledge
building with respect to the wiki.

Motivational Processes in Knowledge Building
         What    motivates  people  to engage   in this collective  process  of knowledge     building? We     know  from
many scenarios where shared databases, forums, or blogs are used for knowledge exchange that people often are
reluctant to contribute their own knowledge (Ardichvili, Page & Wentling, 2003; Huber, 2001; Jian & Jeffres,
2006) because of the costs of the contribution: People have to write down information, they fear embarrassing
themselves through publishing information which might contain mistakes, or they may be afraid of losing power

                                                             158                                                      CSCL 2007
if they share information, which only they have (Cress & Hesse, 2004). All these problems are described in
knowledge-exchange settings, where the main aim is to pool information and to make it accessible (Cress &
Hesse, 2006).  In  knowledge building  scenarios like Wikipedia   this  seems  to be  different.  The success  and
quality of this encyclopedia shows that people take part in this collaborative process of knowledge building
voluntarily and with plenty of effort and enthusiasm. What motivates people to do this?

        Following Piaget's model of equilibration we propose that people engage in knowledge building by
contributing new   information to wikis and  by  restructuring  existing articles because     of a social-cognitive
conflict. We propose that when people work with a wiki they have to match their own individual knowledge
space with the information space the wiki provides. This matching process can lead to different results: If an
individual feels that the wiki's information space is congruent to his/her individual knowledge space then there
is no need for equilibration and people do not accommodate or assimilate, either internally or externally. In
contrast, if people feel that the wiki's information space differs from their own knowledge space, there is a need
for equilibration, which people can satisfy by processes of internal or external assimilation or accommodation.
If an individual realizes that concepts which are part of the individual's knowledge space are missing in the wiki
he/she perhaps will externalize these and add them to the wiki (external assimilation). If she/he feels that the
wiki's information space describes concepts which are not part of the individual knowledge space she/he will
acquire new knowledge by internal assimilation. If she/he feels that both spaces are structurally different he/she
will accommodate    the cognitive schema   (internal accommodation)     or revise the wiki's     structure (external
accommodation).

        We further propose that the motivation for the described activities of equilibration is a function of two
features: The amount of dissonance between the individual knowledge space and the wiki's information space,
and the valence which the topic has for a person. According to the valence we propose a linear relation: the
higher an individual rates the valence of the topic, the higher the perceived cognitive conflict is and the more
interest (Krapp, 1999) a person feels. According to the objective difference between the individual knowledge
space  and the wiki's   information space we  propose  an    inverted u-shaped relation between     the difference
between both spaces and the cognitive conflict people perceive which is displayed in Figure 3. If the difference
between both spaces is very small, there is no need for equilibration. If the difference is very large, the concepts
of the wiki and the individual knowledge space will not be perceived as describing one and the same topic. This
will reduce the need for making both consistent. We propose that only a medium-level discrepancy causes a
cognitive conflict which motivates  people to engage   in one  of the  knowledge   building   processes    described
above.

             Figure 3: The inverted u-shaped relation between cognitive conflict and difference between an
  individual's knowledge space and the wiki's information space. The Figure provides this relation for four
                     different levels of v, ranging from a low level of v to high level of v.

                                                         159                                                   CSCL 2007
         In this model the dissonance between people's individual knowledge space and the wiki's information
space is the motor of the system's development. In a process of mutual development people learn and enhance
their individual  knowledge    space  and  the artifact improves,     becomes more   exhaustive  and  more  and   more
consistent. And   according   to Luhmann    (1986)  this  is   the base  of the  autopoietic processes which   can  be
observed  in all  social  systems  (for  a detailed elaboration    on  the  phenomenon   of   Autopoiesis  cf. Varela,
Maturana, & Uribe, 1974 or Luhmann, 1990). Through processes of equilibration the wiki tends to incorporate
more and more knowledge from the individual knowledge spaces of the users. Through external assimilation the
wiki  consists of more    and  more   information units,    and  through  accommodation     processes  it enables  new
understandings and transports new and emergent information.

Conclusion
         In this  article we  develop   a  model  which   helps    us to better  understand  collaborative knowledge
building with wikis. For this purpose we combined Luhmann's system theory with Piaget's cognitive theory.
Luhmann's approach is very thorough with respect to social systems, and Piaget's theory primarily focuses on
the development of cognitive structures. Our model attempts to demonstrate the interplay of the social system
wiki and individuals' cognitive systems. This consideration of the structural coupling of social and cognitive
systems illustrates collaborative knowledge building with artifacts and might be a fertile approach for CSCL
research. Our next steps will be to test the model empirically in various contexts in order to further elaborate on
this approach and to make it more sophisticated.

References
Ardichvili, A., Page, V., & Wentling, T. (2003). Motivation and barriers to participation in virtual knowledge-
         sharing communities of practice, Journal of Knowledge Management, 7, 64-77.
Baddeley, A. D. (1986). Working memory. New York: Oxford University Press.
Baddeley, A. D. (1992). Working memory. Science, 255, 556-559.
Bartlett, F. C. (1932). Remembering. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Blood, R. (2002). The weblog handbook: Practical advice on creating and maintaining your blog. Cambridge:
         Perseus Publishing.
Bruckman, A. (2006). Learning in online communities. In R. K. Sawyer (Ed.), The Cambridge handbook of the
         learning sciences (pp. 461-472). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Craik, F. & Lockhart, R. (1972). Levels of processing: A framework for memory research. Journal of Verbal
         Learning & Verbal Behavior, 11, 671-684.
Cress, U. & Hesse, F. W. (2004). Knowledge sharing in groups: Experimental findings of how to overcome a
         social dilemma. In Y. Kafai, W. Sandoval, N. Enydey, A. S. Nixon, & F. Herrera (Eds.), Proceedings
         of the  Sixth International  Conference    of  the Learning    Sciences (pp. 150-157).  Mahwah:    Lawrence
         Erlbaum.
Cress, U. & Hesse, F. W. (2006). The social complexity in establishing and sharing information resources. In J.
         Elen & R. E. Clark (Eds.), Handling Complexity in Learning Environments: Research and Theory (pp.
         67-87). Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Flower,  L.  &   Hayes,   J. R.  (1980).  The  cognition    of  discovery:  Defining  a rhetorical  problem.   College
         Composition and Communication, 31, 21-32.
Greeno, J. G. (2006). Learning in activity. In R. K. Sawyer (Ed.), The Cambridge handbook of the learning
         sciences (pp. 79-96). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Huber,  G.  P.  (2001).   Transfer of knowledge     in  knowledge     management   systems:   Unexplored    issues and
         suggested studies. European Journal of Information Systems, 10, 72-79.
Holland, J. H. (1998). Emergence from chaos to order. Redwood City: Addison-Wesley.
Jian, G. &   Jeffres, L.  W.  (2006). Understanding     employees'    willingness to  contribute to shared  electronic
         databases: A three-dimensional framework. Communication Research, 33(4), 242-261.
Johnson, S. B. (2001). Emergence. The Connected Lives of Ants, Brains, Cities and Software. Allen Lane: The
         Penguin Press
Kafai, Y. B. (2006). Constructionism. In R. K. Sawyer (Ed.), The Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences
         (pp. 35-46). New York: Cambridge University Press.

                                                             160                                                  CSCL 2007
Kolbitsch, J. &  Maurer,  H. (2006).  The transformation  of    the web: How     emerging  communities   shape the
        information we consume. Journal of Universal Computer Science, 12(2), 187-213.
Krapp, A. (1999). Interest, motivation and learning: An educational-psychological perspective. European
        Journal of Psychology of Education, 14(1), 23-40.
Leuf, B & Cunningham, W. (2001). The wiki way. Quick collaboration on the web. Boston: Addison-Wesley.
Luhmann, N. (1984). Soziale Systeme. Grundriss einer allgemeinen Theorie. Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp.
Luhmann,   N.   (1986). The  autopoiesis  of social systems.     In  F.  Geyer   &   J. Van  der Zouwen    (Eds.),
        Sociocybernetic paradoxes (pp.172-192). London: Sage.
Luhmann, N. (1990). Essays on Self-Reference. New York and Oxford: Columbia University Press.
Luhmann, N. (1995). Social Systems. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Luhmann, N. (1997). Die Gesellschaft der Gesellschaft. Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp.
Maurer,  H.   & Tochtermann,   K. (2002).   On  a new   powerful    model  for   knowledge   management   and  its
        applications. Journal of Universal Computer Science, 8(1), 85-96.
Papert, S. (1980). Mindstorms. New York: Basic Books.
Papert, S. (1987). Computer criticism versus technocentric thinking. Educational Researcher, 16(1), 24.28.
Papert, S. (1993). The children's machine: Rethinking school in the age of the computer. New York: Basic
        Books.
Papert, S. (1997). Tinkering  towards  utopia:  A century    of public  school   reform. Journal of  the Learning
        Sciences, 6(4), 417-427.
Piaget, J. (1970). Piaget's theory. In P. H. Mussen (Ed.), Carmichael's manual of child psychology (pp. 703-
        732). New York: Wiley.
Piaget, J. (1977a). The development of thought: Equilibration of cognitive structures. New York: The Viking
        Press.
Piaget, J. (1977b). Problems of equilibration. In M. H. Appel & L. S., Goldberg, (Eds.), Topics in cognitive
        development, Vol. 1 (pp. 3-14). New York: Plenum.
Rodriguez,  P., Tan,  S.-M., &  Gkantsidis,  C. (2005).  On  the    feasibility of commercial, legal P2P  content
        Distribution. Proceedings  of the IEEE    10th International  Workshop     on   Web Content  Caching   and
        Distribution. Sophia Antipolis, France.
Scardamalia, M. & Bereiter, C. (1994). Computer support for knowledge-building communities. The Journal of
        the Learning Sciences, 3(3), 265-283.
Schank, R. & Abelson, R. (1977). Scripts, plans, goals, and understanding. Hillsdale: Erlbaum.
Stahl, G. (2002). Contributions to a theoretical framework for CSCL. In G. Stahl (Ed.), Proceedings of CSCL
        2002, (pp. 62-71). Boulder, USA.
Tulving, E. (1985). How many memory systems are there? American Psychologist, 40, 385-398.
Varela, F. J., Maturana, H. R., & Uribe, R. (1974). Autopoiesis: The organization of living systems, its
        characterization and a model. Biosystems, 5, 187­196.
Viégas, F. B., Wattenberg, M., & Dave, K. (2004). Studying cooperation and conflict between authors with
        history flow visualizations. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
        Systems, (pp. 575-582). Vienna, Austria.
von Bertalanffy, L. (1950). An Outline of general system theory. British Journal for the Philosophy of Science,
        1, 139-164.
von Bertalanffy, L. (1968). General system theory: Foundations, development, applications. New York: George
        Braziller.
Webb, N. M. (1982). Student interaction and learning in small groups. Review of Educational Research 52( 3),
        421-445.

                                                         161                                                  CSCL 2007
