Impact of Anonymity of Input in Next-Generation Classroom Networks

  Sarah M. Davis, National Institute of Education, 1 Nanyang Walk, Singapore 637616, Sarah.Davis@nie.edu.sg

         Abstract: This project looked at anonymity of input across a series of classroom activities seeking
         to answer three research questions.   First, did activity type influence students' use of anonymity?
         Second, did activity type influence students' perception of the utility of anonymity?     Finally, did
         student statements   about  the use and utility of anonymity    match their actions?   Analysis of  the
         digital artifacts revealed no significant differences for use of names by activity or gender. Females
         more frequently made comments about wanting to be confident of their answers before they would
         attach their names.  Males much more frequently expressed that anonymity was not important to
         them.   Yet the use of names by the two groups across activities was virtually identical.         Both
         groups had a use of names across all activities of approximately 60%.

Introduction
         This project looked at anonymity of input across a series of four classroom activities done using a next-
generation  classroom   network.    Next-generation  classroom   networks   have  four  important  features.   First, the
networks allow for many different formats of input including free response.       Second, the networks perform some
sort of meaningful, synchronous input aggregation.       Third, the networks display submitted data to the group in a
contextually meaningful format.    Fourth, the input device for next-generation networks is an able device (graphing
calculator, computer, etc.) and not a multiple choice clicker.  The three research questions this study explored were:
First, did  activity type  influence students' use   of  anonymity?    Second,  did  activity type   influence  students'
perception of the utility of anonymity?   Finally, did student statements about the use and utility of anonymity match
their actions?

Changing What Anonymity Means
         Webster's defines anonymous as "lacking individuality, distinction, or recognizability." (Merrian-Webster)
Within next-generation classroom networks students are only anonymous in the public space.             Public anonymity
specifically refers to the ability of the participants to submit data to be viewed in the public display space in a way
that identities are not revealed.    In next-generation  classroom networks,   it is explicit to the students  that their
identities can be viewed by the teacher in the private space.  The ability of student data to be viewed by the teacher
is private accountability.  The participants' identities are only hidden from other participants, not from the teacher.

         There is a tendency to talk about anonymity as the ability to avoid negative consequences.      It is seen as the
removal of identity or the taking away of something.      Teachers believe that anonymity, in the display space, will
save students embarrassment.     There is an expressed feeling that anonymity can save students from being made fun
of by their peers (Davis, 2002a).     This description of anonymity is subtractive.     The individual is deleting their
personally identifiable information from the group.     Next-generation classroom networks allow for a positive view
of anonymity.   Anonymity allows for an extension of the students' private space.    Private space is the space in which
the student  feels   comfortable experimenting,  trying  out   different types of  input  without having    to take   firm
ownership of the idea to others (Stroup, personal conversation 2001).    In their private space (scratch paper, graphing
calculator, laptop,  brain) students can  work through   difficulties, on the  way   to finding  solutions or  creating a
hypothesis.    Previous work  in  classrooms   using next-generation   networks   indicates that the veil  of  anonymity
extends this private space by allowing students to share (make available for class discussion) their nascent ideas
without the fear of ridicule (Davis, 2002a, 2003a).

         Anonymity opens the individuals' shared information via the class display for interpretation.     For example,
if there is a range of answers collected from the students up in the display space, students can talk about any one of
the answers as if it was theirs.  Or, they can talk about the response as if it was someone else's.     It is specifically
because the information in the display does not have names attached that students can "try on" other responses.         In
this way, anonymity opens up the classroom allowing students to try on new roles.           Students having submitted a
correct answer, if asked how someone might have gotten a different result, can try on being someone who got a
wrong answer and explain how the incorrect answer might have been derived.        Students can add on to who they are.
They can add on to who they talk about and it is not antagonistic because they are not talking about the most popular
kid in the classroom or the shy kid or themselves, just generically about the response.       Within the network space,

                                                           162                                                  CSCL 2007
anonymity opens up new ways to participate in affirming ways.           Anonymity becomes additive in that it adds to the
roles students can play in the classroom and extends the student's private space.

Literature Review
          In Education     research, the   predominance     of research    on   anonymity   of input    has   been done   using
asynchronous    data  collection   (Cohen    &   Scardamalia,   1998;   Hoadley   &   Linn,   2000;  Hsi    &  Hoadley,   1997;
Scardamalia & Bereiter, 1992).       Major results from this field showed that anonymity of input allows for greater
gender equity in peer collaborations.        In  the field  of Business   Communication       research,  systems   allowing for
synchronous data input have been the predominant focus (Connolly, Jessup, & Valacich, 1990; Gallupe & Cooper,
1993; Jessup, Connolly, & Galegher, 1990; Scott, 1999; Valacich & Dennis, 1992).              The systems were created to do
research  on   brainstorming   in  group   settings.   Major   results from   these   studies showed     that larger electronic
brainstorming groups were more productive, in terms of participation and quality of input, than verbal brainstorming
groups.

Methods
          The research for this project was conducted in two pre-calculus classrooms (n=29) at an urban high school
on the East Coast of the United States.        First a framework by which to select activities was needed.           Using the
taxonomy for Generative Activities proposed by Stroup, Ares, Hurford and Lesh (in press-b), four activities were
chosen that embodied characteristics from different categories in the taxonomy.           First Questioning activities, these
were situations were the teacher asked a question to check for understanding and students responded electronically.
Second, was a connected SimCalc MathWorlds activity.           Third was a NetLogo linear regression activity.       Forth was
the NetLogo Disease simulation.      The technological interfaces for all of the activities were modified to give students
the option of submitting information to the class display space with or without their names attached.             All submitted
digital artifacts, across all four activities, were collected and analyzed to evaluate the frequency with which students
chose to attach their names to their input.      At the end of each activity student were given a questionnaire regarding
their use of anonymity in the day's lesson.      Finally, at the completion of the four activities, video taped interviews
were conducted with the students.

Findings
          Statistical analysis  of the   digital artifacts submitted   by   the students during   each   activity  revealed no
significant differences for use of names by activity or gender.        A generalized linear model for repeated sample data
was done   for  each   question   on the questionnaire.     Analysis   showed,   with statistical significance,    that students
perceived  the  activities to be  different.   Qualitative  analysis   of the open  response   portions  of   the questionnaire
revealed  that  for less generative  activities,  students' comments      about the attachment    of names    revolved   around
confidence   in the   correctness of their answers.    As   activities became   more  generative,   the  quality  of comments
changed to revolve around strategy and aesthetics.      The video interview were transcribed and analyzed qualitatively
to identify themes in comments. By far the most common theme in the statements made by students, dealt with
anonymity being important for risk mitigation (avoid embarrassment, lack of confidence, etc.).                Finally, all three
forms of data were compared.         An  incongruity   between   statements   and   actions emerged     from  this comparison.
Females more frequently made comments about wanting to be confident of their answers before they would attach
their names.    Males much more frequently expressed that anonymity was not important to them.                  Yet the use of
names by the two groups across activities was virtually identical at approximately 60%.

          Before a comparison of activities was meaningful, it needed to be determined if the students perceived the
activities themselves as different.   Questionnaire data showed that students interpreted the activities to be different.
Contrary to expectations, there were no significant differences in student use of anonymity across the four activities.
Students tendency to reveal their names fluctuated by only 11 percentage points (57% to 68%) across the activities.
Students' open ended responses on the questionnaires showed that they perceived the utility of anonymity to differ
across the four activity types.      For the Questioning    and    SimCalc  activity, a  major  theme    in students'   reported
reasons for utilization of anonymity was confidence in the correctness of their answer.           Both of these activities had
the possibility of wrong answers.        The two   activity types  differed   greatly in the  numbers    of possible    solutions
available to the students, still incorrect answers were possible.         In response to their participation in the Disease
activity, students  refer  to using  anonymity     for strategic   reasons.     The Disease    activity, where    there was no
possibility for incorrect participation (even if a student did not move his/her icon they were still a valid participant in
the activity), was the first time that confidence in correctness of response no longer appeared as a theme.          Finally, in

                                                               163                                                    CSCL 2007
the Regression activity comments of aesthetics emerged.       Students' concern for showing their name became about
not "cluttering"  the screen.  This  variation  of concern   changing    from  right answers,  to  strategy, to  aesthetics
indicates a difference of utility of anonymity.

Conclusions
        Tying  the remarks    made  about   confidence  in answer,  from   the questionnaires,  to comments      about  risk
mitigation, from  the  interviews,  anonymity   being  used   to  avoid  negative  consequences    was   by  far the  most
important feature for the students. Students' perception of the potential, in an activity, for their responses to be right
or wrong, was what most clearly delineated differences in activities. Concepts of right and wrong input were the
students' way  of interpreting differences  in  levels of  generativity.  The interaction between Generative Activity
design and  anonymity   was   demonstrated   by   the  change  in content  of  the student  comments     on  the utility of
anonymity.   In the more generative simulation environments, students' ideas about their utilization of anonymity
turned from subtractive (risk management) to additive (strategy and aesthetics).

        In addition to students' perceptions of anonymity, analysis of classroom videotape showed that when a
response was in the display space with no name attached, if the teacher initiated a discussion of the response, the
conversation was left open to the whole class.    Questions like, "What might this person have been thinking?", were
asked. In contrast, if the response the teacher wanted discussed had been submitted with a name attached, he would
turn to that specific student and ask them to explain their answer. For this reason, the display of names could be said
to reduce student agency.   The ability for anyone in the classroom to take ownership of any response in the display
space disappeared.

        It is important to note that this project was not seeking to identify those situations in which anonymity
should no longer be used.     The   author  holds  a  very strong belief  that anonymity   is a critical feature  of next-
generation classroom networks and 40% use of anonymity is a sizable fraction of the students.            If, during class
discussions, students want to take public ownership of their answers, that is their choice, and that choice should not
be taken away.    The goal of this study was to better understand anonymity and, oddly, that was best accomplished
by exploring its removal.

References
Cohen,  A.,  & Scardamalia,    M.   (1998). Discourse   about  ideas: Monitoring     and  regulation in  face-to-face   and
        computer-mediated environments. Interactive Learning Environments, 6(1-2), 93-113.
Connolly, T., Jessup, L. M., & Valacich, J. S. (1990). Effects of anonymity and evaluative tone on idea generation in
        computer-mediated groups. Management Science, 36(6), 689-703.
Davis, S. M. (2002a). Research to industry: Four years of observations in classrooms using a network of handheld
        devices.  Paper presented   at the  IEEE   International  Workshop  on  Wireless   and  Mobile   Technologies    in
        Education, Växjö, Sweden.
Davis, S. M.   (2003a). Observations   in   classrooms  using  a  network  of  handheld   devices. Journal   of  Computer
        Assisted Learning, 19(3), 298-307.
Gallupe, R. B., & Cooper, W. H. (1993). Brainstorming electronically. Sloan Management Review, 27-36.
Hoadley,  C. M.,  &   Linn, M.  C.  (2000).  Teaching   science   through  online,   peer discussions:  Speakeasy    in  the
        knowledge integration environment. International Journal of Science Education, 22(8), 839-857.
Hsi, S., & Hoadley, C. M. (1997). Productive discussion in science: Gender equity through electronic discourse.
        Journal of Science Education and Technology, 6(1), 23-36.
Jessup, L. M., Connolly, T., & Galegher, J. (1990). The effects of anonymity on gdss group process with an idea-
        generating task. MIS Quarterly, 14, 313-321.
Merrian-Webster.Merrian-webster      online.       Retrieved   October    18,  2004,   from   http://www.m-w.com/cgi-
        bin/dictionary?book=Dictionary&va=anonymous
Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (1992). An architecture for collaborative knowledge building. In E. De corte, M. C.
        Linn & H. Mandl (Eds.), Computer based learning environments and problem solving (Vol. 84). Berlin:
        Springer-Verlag.
Scott, C. R. (1999). The impact of physical and discursive anonymity on group members' multiple identifications
        during computer-supported decision making. Western Journal of Communication, 63(4), 456-487.
Valacich, J. S., & Dennis, A. R. (1992). Group size and anonymity effects on computer-mediated idea generation.
        Small Group Research, 23(1), 48-73.

                                                           164                                                   CSCL 2007
