Computer Supported Moderation of E-Discussions: the ARGUNAUT
                                                   Approach
  Reuma De Groot, Raul Drachman, Rakheli (Rachel) Hever, Baruch B. Schwarz, The Hebrew University of
                                            Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel,
 Email: msruma@mscc.huji.ac.il, drachil@netvision.net.il, mt.scopus@gmail.com, msschwar@mscc.huji.ac.il
               Ulrich Hoppe, Andreas Harrer, University of Duisburg-Essen, Duisburg, Germany,
                                 Email: hoppe@collide.info, harrer@collide.info
                           Maarten De Laat, Rupert Wegerif, University of Exeter, UK,
                           Email: M.F.DeLaat@exeter.ac.uk, R.B.Wegerif@exeter.ac.uk
    Bruce M. McLaren, Deutsches Forschungszentrum fur Künstliche Intelligenz, Saarbrücken, Germany,
                                                bmclaren@dfki.de
                       Benoit Baurens, Silogic, Toulouse, France, benoit.baurens@silogic.fr

         Abstract: Despite their potential value for learning purposes, e-discussions do not necessarily
         lead to desirable results, even when moderated. The study of the moderator's role, especially
         in synchronous, graphical e-discussions, and the development of appropriate tools to assist
         moderators    are the  objectives of  the ARGUNAUT          project. This  project   aims  at unifying
         awareness and feedback mechanisms in e-discussion environments, presently implemented on
         two   existing platforms.   This   system  is primarily     directed  to   a human    moderator    and
         facilitating moderation, but might also help the students monitor their own interactions. At the
         heart of system are the inter-relations between an off-line AI analysis mechanism and an on-
         line monitoring module. This is done through a collaboration of technological and pedagogical
         teams, showing promising preliminary results.

Introduction
         One of the important trends in Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning/Working (CSCL/W) is the
proliferation of tools to support e-discussion so as to reach learning objectives. Discussions, however, do not
necessarily lead to desirable results but often turn out to be ineffective or chaotic when no moderator/tutor is
present. The ARGUNAUT project's (IST-2005027728 - Partially funded by the EC under the 6th Framework
Program,   http://www.argunaut.org)    goal is to  provide  moderators   with     a computerized    tool to support  and
increase their effectiveness    and thereby the quality    of the monitored    e-discussions.     ARGUNAUT      aims  at
delivering a unified   mechanism    of awareness   and  feedback   to support     moderators   in  multiple e-discussion
environments.  The  tools  that are  being  developed  within    the project  not   only  help the  moderator   visualize
information about relevant aspects of the discussions taking place ("awareness"), but also pinpoint possible
problematic issues, give "advice" to the moderator in real time, and support his/her intervention. In addition, the
tools provide the moderator with options for post-discussion reflection and awareness. ARGUNUT supports two
existing collaborative learning environments; Digalo (developed on the DUNES project ­ IST-2001-34153 -
http://www.dunes.gr/), and Cool Modes (http://www.UDE.info/).

         Since feedback and advice to the moderator regarding the current e-discussion are among the main
goals of ARGUNAUT, a primary need was to define criteria for the quality of discussions. Observations of the
argumentative  practices   that developed   in classes  led   to the  elaboration     of criteria such  as  participation,
responsiveness, and Toulminian criteria for the quality of the arguments (see also Schwarz & Glassner, in
press). Walton (1989) types of dialogue and Baker's approach (2003) to the use of argumentation in online
dialogue helped us to elaborate criteria for quality.  Since the criteria are about dialogical models of reason, at
least two levels of analysis were required: an account of intersubjective orientations and an account of ground
rules fulfilled during interaction (see Wegerif & Mercer 1997 for the description of ground rules in classroom
dialogues). Such criteria inspired us to come up with analysis schemes for e-discussions in the ARGUNAUT
context. We    present  here the ARGUNAUT          system, developed   in     the hope   that it  will contribute to the
moderators in their goal of facilitating good quality e-discussions.

The ARGUNAUT Approach
         During the conference, we plan to present the ARGUNAUT approach of supporting moderation, as
well as the initial prototype (partial functionality) of the ARGUNAUT system. Various features that have been
developed so far will be demonstrated in the context of the pedagogical scenarios.

                                                         165                                                         CSCL 2007
ARGUNAUT Scenario, Main Components and Architecture
          The        ARGUNAUT             platform
incorporates two modules, the "deep loop" and
the "shallow loop".     The "shallow loop" is a
module    for  monitoring    ongoing   discussion.
This   module   collects    data about  awareness
variables or   "indicators"   (e.g.,  participation,
social interaction). If a possibly problematic or
significant  situation  (pre-defined   as such)   is
detected,    a  dialogue    appears,   giving     the
moderator      the  relevant     information,  plus
advice   and    "remote     control"  intervention
options when applicable. The "deep loop" is
an  off-line   analysis     mechanism   based     on
machine-learning     techniques.     This  module
takes  human-annotated       examples  of  past   e-
discussions (situations, or aspects thereof) and
attempts  to   learn   the  examples'  underlying
pattern,  or   classifiers. These  classifiers can
then  be  used   to  detect  similar  situations  in
future discussions.    A    schematic overview    of
the architecture is shown in Figure 1.                              Figure 1. Planned System Architecture

The 'Indicators for Deep and Shallow Loop Classification' Approach
          The offline analysis module ­ the deep loop- is designed to derive situation indicators. The underlying
approach used by the deep loop is classification learning, i.e. induction of classifiers from labeled examples,
which can later be used to classify new and previously unseen examples.           According to this approach, (a) our
experts and researchers pre-define a typology for classification according to specific concepts (e.g., 'critical
reasoning', a central concept for e-discussions in education); (b) discussions then are annotated according to
these typologies or schemes, and these annotations are analyzed offline; (c) the output of the offline analysis is a
set of situation classifiers, which may then be incorporated as indicators into the visualization and awareness
components of ARGUNAUT. These modules are planned to also enable induction of relations between the
indicators and generation of feedback for the moderator (and the learners), explaining the situation and offering
advice. These possibilities will rely on "post-processing" of indicators produced automatically by the system,
and increase the usefulness of the indicators for participants in the electronic discussions.

          The  on-the-fly    analysis and visualization   module   ­ the   "shallow  loop"- provides methods   that  are
"lighter" with respect to computability and complexity and thus can be utilized on-the-fly.            These methods
provide the moderator with awareness feedback: information about specific characteristics of the monitored e-
discussions. This information can be categorized into three types of awareness: a) process awareness: related to
temporal traits of the discussion, such as phases, key events; b) content awareness: content-related properties,
such   as    foci   of  interest   within     the  discussion,   relations  between   contributions,   etc.);  and   c)
communication/social awareness: related to the social interrelations between the participants of a discussion,
such  as typical   patterns  of  interaction  between   specific participants. Each  time   an "interpreter" component
produces new information based on activities within the learning support system(s), the data is sent to the
corresponding view(s) and integrated into the user interface that is available for the moderator, using elaborated
visualization features.

          The shallow and deep loops together enhance the capabilities of the moderator by explicitly marking
situations of interest. The moderator may also further annotate discussions on the fly (or after the discussion),
relying (among other things, on the indicators produced by the offline analysis. The moderator's annotations
may in turn be used for further refinement of these indicators.

Steps towards Implementation: First Results

Cross-System Interoperability and the Moderator's Interface
          The ARGUNAUT system is designed to achieve interoperability, that is to say, serve more than one e-
discussion   end   user environment    (EUE).     Since actions, objects and   users are  logged  differently across e-

                                                            166                                                     CSCL 2007
discussion tools, there was a need for a "common format", a unified representation schema for action logs from
both EUEs handled by the project.   This was achieved via the use of transformational approaches converting the
action logging of the EUEs to common format XML logs. The ARGUNAUT 'Moderator's Interface' includes a
unified graphical representation and a cross-system replay system based on this common format, which allows
the moderators to monitor the discussion in progress, regardless of the concrete EUE the students are using. It
also includes the ability to make content keyword queries, annotate discussions, and intervene in the students'
EUEs via remote control capabilities (see Figure 2).

  Figure 2. ARGUNAUT's Moderator Interface            Figure 3. The Integration of the Deep and Shallow Loops

Offline Analysis and Annotation of E-Discussions
         At this stage, we have not determined absolute criteria for quality of e-discussions. Rather, we have
focused on identifying and annotating phenomena relevant to the analysis and evaluation of such discussions.
Our initial experiences would suggest that actions, objects and attributes in the discussion log files, can be
successfully used to  capture these  more   meaningful  theoretical   phenomena.     This  can be achieved by    the
combination of structural and process-oriented elements (e.g., ontologies of shapes, types of connectors, logged
actions) with content  elements (the   text of the discussion   itself). One direction for  this is the training of
machine-learning classifiers to classify discussion units (shapes and paired-shapes) into pre-defined theoretical
categories, using structural and process-oriented attributes. The classifiers are trained with examples categorized
by humans, based on content and some contextual cues. At this point we already have a few classifiers for
phenomena such as 'critical reasoning' and 'question and answer', showing high overall accuracy (86-95%). A
second direction is the use of a PROLOG-based pattern matching tool (Harrer, Vetter, Thür, & Brauckmann,
2005) in conjunction with e-discussion XML log files to generate "rules" in order to look for "patterns" that
combine user actions (e.g., create shape, delete link) and structural elements with content key words.

Integration of Deep Loop Classifiers with the Online Shallow Loop
         As  described above,  the  AI  module    of  ARGUNAUT        (the  "deep   loop") has been  successful  in
generating some classifiers. We are now in advanced stages of integrating these classifiers with the online
monitoring module (the "shallow loop"), as shown in Figure 3.

References
Baker, M. J. (2003). Les dialogues avec, autour et au travers des technologies éducatives. /¶Orientation Scolaire
         et Professionnelle, 32(3), 359-397.
Harrer, A., Vetter, M., Thür, S., Brauckmann, J. (2005) Discovery of Patterns in Learner Actions. In Proc. of
         Artificial Intelligence in Education (AIED), IOS Press, Amsterdam, pp. 816-818.
Schwarz, B. B. & Glassner, A. (in press). The role of CSCL argumentative environments for broadening and
         deepening understanding    of the  space  of debate.   In R. Saljo  (Ed.), Information  Technologies and
         Transformation of Knowledge.
Walton,  D.  N. (1989).    Informal Logic:   a handbook     for critical  argumentation.   Cambridge:   Cambridge
         University Press.
Wegerif, R., & Mercer, N. (1997). Using computer-based text analysis to integrate quantitative and qualitative
         methods in the investigation of collaborative learning. Language and Education, 11(4), 271-287.

                                                        167                                                    CSCL 2007
