       Fostering Audience Design of Computer-Mediated Knowledge
                          Communication by Knowledge Mirroring
                                      Jessica Dehler, Daniel Bodemer, Juergen Buder
 Applied Cognitive and Media Psychology, University of Tuebingen, Konrad-Adenauer-Str. 40, 72072 Tuebingen
                    Email: j.dehler@iwm-kmrc.de, d.bodemer@iwm-kmrc.de, j.buder@iwm-kmrc.de

          Abstract. Higher education is increasingly realized by net-based scenarios often incorporating
          collaborative   activities. This  is  accompanied      with  specific  benefits   but also   constraints. In
          computer-mediated peer-tutoring for example it is more difficult to construct mutual models, thus
          impairing collaborators´ grounding, audience design and coordination. In this paper `Knowledge
          Mirroring`,  that is   providing     information  about     the  partner's knowledge,     is introduced   as
          technological   support  developed      to compensate      for  these problems.    Effects   of Knowledge
          Mirroring on audience design and knowledge acquisition are studied in a simulated peer-tutoring
          scenario with explaining as basic activity. Analysis of explanations revealed audience design with
          respect to usage of elaborations and references. Results regarding knowledge acquisition show
          that  learners  provided    with  Knowledge      Mirroring     were  able  to  draw   more   inferences   on
          information distributed across the learning material.

Computer-mediated knowledge communication
          Higher  education  is  increasingly     realized by    net-based collaborative  scenarios.   Thus,  by analysing   the
specific constraints   of computer-mediated       collaborative  learning  effective   support  can be  developed.  Knowledge
Mirroring   (KM)    follows recent    interest in group   awareness    tools  (Soller, Martinez, Jermann,    & Muehlenbrock,
2005). As KM provides learners with relevant information without explicit instruction on how to use the information
it is classified as implicit learner support. The effects of KM on communication are investigated in an experimental
study. Among the various tasks that can be implemented within collaborative learning this study focuses on two
basic activities within peer-tutoring: question-asking and explanation-giving.

          For peer-tutoring to be effective learners need to construct adequate models of their partner's knowledge
(Chi, Siler,   & Jeong,   2004). However,      initial  models   are  biased   towards  the model   of  one's own    knowledge
(Nickerson, 1999). Even worse, common strategies of verifying models are frequently ineffective (Person, Graesser,
Magliano, & Kreuz, 1994). In addition to these problems also arising in face-to-face tutoring, particular affordances
and constraints are being introduced when peer-tutoring is realized through computer-mediated communication (e.g.
mail, chat). More specifically, costs of grounding vary with the medium (Clark & Brennan, 1991). Altogether, in
computer-mediated peer-tutoring it is more difficult to construct mutual models, establish common ground and adapt
utterances to the specific partner, i.e. perform audience design (Clark & Murphy, 1982). KM is introduced in this
paper  as a    method  to  compensate    for   these    specific problems    by providing   information    about  the  partner's
knowledge.     This is assumed   to   improve     adaptation  of  communication      and  knowledge    acquisition.  KM  offers
information on which to adapt utterances for more efficient communication (Grice, 1979). Support for knowledge
acquisition  is  suggested  as audience    design    of explanations   elicits additional elaboration   and  re-organisation of
knowledge. Giving as well as receiving elaborated explanations was shown to enhance learning (Webb & Palincsar,
1996).

Research method
         The primary goal of this study was to facilitate audience design in peer-tutoring by providing KM. As the
focus  was   on  production    rather  than reception    of  explanations    a  simulated   peer-scenario  was   chosen. Thus,
participants were not interacting directly with a learning partner but formulated explanations for a simulated partner
in asynchronous communication.

         Design. 42 participants were randomly assigned to two conditions (with versus without KM). Subjective
estimations of understanding were assessed. In the control condition (CC) only Ss´ own knowledge was presented in
the KM-Tool as knowledge (see green tags in Figure 1) or deficit (not tagged). Ss in the experimental condition
(EC) were additionally provided with the knowledge of a simulated partner. The partner's knowledge was computed

                                                                 168                                                   CSCL 2007
systematically relative to the participants´ knowledge resulting in three types of combinations: shared knowledge
(both tagged), shared deficit (neither tagged), complementary knowledge (only participant tagged).

Figure 1. Explanation-giving task within EC. On the left side KM is realized by two columns next to the topic list.
The left column displays participants´ knowledge and the right knowledge of the simulated partner. Only the left
column is displayed in CC. On the right upper part learning material is presented along with KM-information for the
respective topic. In the right lower part a field is available for formulating explanations.

         Procedure and Analysis. First, participants learned individually for 25 minutes with a hypertext providing
information on the immune system. For the following 25 minutes they wrote explanations for a partner on four pre-
selected topics. KM   was available  during    the  explanation   task in the EC. KM   was   assumed   to induce audience
design and  thereby  activities beneficial  for   learning. Audience    design  was  assessed   by analysis of  formulated
explanations, whereas learning outcome was measured after the explanation task by a 48 items multiple-choice test
capturing factual (24 items)    as well as  local   (information   on  one  page  of hypertext)  and distant  (information
distributed over pages of hypertext) inferential knowledge (12 items each).

Results
Audience Design
         Explanations were coded for the following indicators of Audience Design: number of words, elaborations,
and  references. An elaboration    was assigned    if the explanation   provided  additional information  (e.g. from  prior
knowledge)  that  was not contained    in  the learning   material. References   were  assigned  when   other parts   of the
learning material were used as a basis for the current explanation.

         Audience  Design  (i.e.   adaptation  to  the partner's  knowledge)   was   assumed  to result in  different mean
numbers of words, elaborations, and references (see Table 1) between tagging combinations in the EG. A within-
subject ANOVA revealed significant differences between tagging conditions for number of words (F(2,11) = 4.4, p
< .05), and references (F(2,14) = 5.1, p < .05), but not for number of elaborations (F(2,14) = 0.8, p = .48). T-tests for
paired samples revealed significantly more words for complementary knowledge than shared knowledge (t(17) =
3.6, p < .01) and  shared deficits  (t(12) =   2.4, p  <  .05) as well as  more  references  to shared  knowledge   than  to
complementary knowledge (t(20) = 3.5, p < .01) and shared deficit (t(20) = 2.7, p < .05).

Knowledge acquisition
         An ANOVA performed on achievement in the knowledge test revealed a significant effect of condition
only for distant inferential knowledge (53% vs. 41%; F(1,40) = 4.4, p < .05). In the remaining subtests a consistent

                                                             169                                                 CSCL 2007
but non-significant better performance   of  EC   was   found. Correlative  analyses showed   that performance  in the
distant inferential test was moderately associated with absolute (i.e. number of elaborations and references) but not
with relative audience  design   indicators (e.g. ratio of references   per type of  tagging combination).  However,
according to additional regression analyses neither of the absolute indicators mediates the effect of experimental
condition on performance in the distant inferential knowledge test.

Table 1: Indicators of Audience Design for each tagging combination in the experimental condition.

                                         Mean number of              Mean number of                Mean number of
                                               words                    elaborations                 references
EC: shared knowledge                              11,7                      0,10                       0,67
EC: complementary knowledge                       16,9                      0,29                       0,05
EC: shared deficit                                10,4                       0,24                      0,19

Theoretical and educational significance
        Enhancing     efficiency and effectiveness  of  computer-mediated    knowledge  communication    is the main
purpose of this research project. Evidence of support for audience design and knowledge acquisition by KM during
explanation-giving is presented. As a next step it will be investigated whether recipients benefit from audience-
designed  utterances. KM   is flexibly  and easily applicable  to a multitude  of collaborative learning settings  and
domains (e.g. physics), particular value in complex learning domains of higher education is supposed.

        Recently, a multitude of tools providing awareness of group characteristics was developed (Soller et al.,
2005). Empirical validation of awareness tools can be found e.g. in research on expert-layperson-communication
(Nückles, Wittwer,  &  Renkl,    2005). This study  complements    this body  of  research by investigating processes
triggered by awareness tools within a peer-tutoring scenario.

References
Chi, M. T. H., Siler, S. A., & Jeong, H. (2004). Can tutors monitor students´ understanding accurately? Cognition
         and Instruction, 22, 363-387.
Clark, H., & Brennan, S. (1991). Grounding in communication. In L. B. Resnick, R. M. Levine, & S. D. Teasley
         (Eds.), Perspectives on socially shared cognition (pp. 127-149). Washington: APA.
Clark, H., & Murphy, G. (1982). Audience design in meaning and reference. In J. F. Le Ny & W. Kintsch (Eds.),
         Language and comprehension (pp. 287-299). Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Grice, P. (1975). Logic and conversation. In P. Cole & J.L. Morgan (Eds.), Syntax and semantics: Speech acts (pp.
         41-58). New York: Academic Press.
Nickerson, R. (1999). How we know ­ and sometimes misjudge ­ what others know: imputing one´s own
         knowledge to others. Psychological Bulletin, 125, 737-759.
Nückles, M., Wittwer, J., & Renkl, A. (2005). Information about a layperson's knowledge supports experts in giving
         effective and efficient online advice to laypersons. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Applied, 11, 219-
         236.
Person, N. K., Graesser, A. C., Magliano, J. P., & Kreuz, R. J. (1994). Inferring what the student knows in one-to-
         one tutoring: The role of student questions and answers. Learning and Individual Differences, 6, 205-229.
Soller, A., Martinez, A., Jermann, P., & Muehlenbrock, M.(2005). From mirroring to guiding: A review of state of
         the art technology for supporting collaborative learning. International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in
         Education, 15, 261-290.
Webb, N. M., & Palincsar, A. S. (1996). Group processes in the classroom. In D. Berliner & R. Calfee (Eds.),
         Handbook of Educational Psychology (pp. 841-873). New York: Macmillan.

Acknowledgements
The author is member of the Virtual PhD-Program "Knowledge Acquisition and Knowledge Exchange with New
Media" (VGK) sponsored by the German Research Association (DFG).

                                                          170                                                 CSCL 2007
