From socially-mediated to technology-mediated coordination: A study
                            of design tensions using Group Scribbles
                         1                                    1                                1                       2                 2
Yannis Dimitriadis , Juan Ignacio Asensio-Pérez , Davinia Hernández-Leo , Jeremy Roschelle , John Brecht , Deb-
                                            3                        4                    2                        2
                             orah Tatar , S. Raj Chaudhury , Chris DiGiano , Charles M. Patton
  1
    GSIC/EMIC Group, Department of Signal Theory, Com. and Telematics Engineering, University of Valladolid,
              Camino del Cementerio, s/n, 47011, Valladolid, Spain, {yannis, juaase, davher@tel.uva.es}
2
  Center for Technology in Learning, SRI International, 333 Ravenswood Ave., Menlo Park, CA 94025, USA, {jer-
                              emy.roschelle, john.brecht, chris.digiano, charles.patton@sri.com}
    3
      Department of Computer Science, Virginia Tech, 2202 Kraft Dr., Blacksburg, VA 24061, USA, tatar@vt.edu
    4
      Department of Physics, Christopher Newport University, Newport News, VA 23606, USA, raj@pcs.cnu.edu

         Abstract. It is well known that scripts based on good practices can enhance the collaboration ef-
         fectiveness and efficiency in CSCL environments. Yet, to achieve rich, interactive, and creative
         collaborative learning settings CSCL tools need new flexible, dynamic and lightweight metaphors.
         This design tension between social and technology-mediated coordination is difficult to resolve
         and worthy of close analysis. In this paper, we study such a tension through the use of the Group
         Scribbles (GS) CSCL tool, developed at SRI International, a GUI-based approach that enables the
         creation and enactment of lightweight CSCL scenarios. The potential of GS, as well as its limita-
         tions  and  possible    extensions      are studied      in   relation to design     scripts based    on    Collaborative
         Learning    Flow     Patterns. Preliminary    experiences         in an authentic       environment   illustrate   several
         facets of the design tension, such as the participants' workload and awareness, or the adaptation to
         emergent situations.     On the other hand, this study points out the need for a new flexible architec-
         ture that complements Group Scribbles.

Introduction to the coordination design tension in CSCL scripts
        CSCL, with its emphasis on both the disciplines of engineering and education, is about balancing competing
forces, a familiar challenge to any emerging multi-disciplinary paradigm. On the one hand researchers advocate
open, flexible, technology-mediated environments that support situated learning. On the other hand, student experi-
ences are often measured against rigid learning goals. Furthermore, designers of a CSCL tool must often compro-
mise   their notions for     an ideal learning     environment         in light of limited       resources for designing,    implementing,
evaluating the tool. Thus, practitioners face the task of resolving many design tensions (Tatar, 2007) as they make
decisions about appropriate technology and learning situations. These design tensions underlie and motivate design
patterns in the field of technology-enhanced learning. While the CSCL literature is replete with descriptions of the
final configurations of technology and learning situations, there is a paucity of reflective writing on how designers
converged on their approach through an analysis of tradeoffs. The field needs more case studies of design to exem-
plify known tensions and identify new ones, so as to inform future CSCL projects. A particularly vexing design
tension both in the field of CSCL and CSCW comes from the desire to use technology to structure group coordina-
tion, but at the same time support unanticipated, emergent coordinated activity.

        Design tensions conceptualize design not as problem solving, but as goal balancing. They draw ex-
        plicit attention to conflicts in system design that cannot be solved, but only handled via compromise
        (Tatar, 2007, p. 3).

        Based on this principle, a design tension helps us to identify relations between "what ought to be" and "what
is", and therefore to search the few crucial emergent configurations that may make or break a system. In the case of
activity-level coordination in CSCL scripts, one can observe several design tensions. These include scripted action
vs. bricolage, script intrinsic vs. extrinsic constraints, and the balance between technology use driven by data cap-
ture and monitoring and technology use driven by activity-specific support. "Scripted action vs. bricolage" is in-
deed a major tension that has been studied in several contexts of fixed or mobile learning devices (Dillenbourg,
2002; Tatar, 2007). Balance has to be found in the compromise between active / discovery learning and a proper use
of existing knowledge on good practices that increase the chances of effective learning. In the latter case, collabora-

                                                                       181                                                         CSCL 2007
tive learning flow patterns (CLFP), i.e. computational representations of scripts such as jigsaw, pyramid, etc. have
been shown to be significantly useful in several CSCL scenarios (Hernández, Asensio & Dimitriadis, 2006). On the
other hand, the balance of the real-time improvisational demands as compared with authoring effort must also be
considered. A  lightly scripted scenario  may  require  a lot  of creativity and  improvisation  by the students, while
highly planned scripts involve a resource-consuming authoring process for the teacher. In addition, dependence on
external programmers / developers increases to the extent that technology is involved in the scripts.

      This paper focuses on activity-level coordination and awareness in face-to-face activity, and examines the
tradeoffs between socially-mediated and technology-mediated coordination. It aims to provide an initial exploration
of such a tension in the context of the use of a significant CSCL tool in an authentic situation. The ultimate aim of
this approach is to provide valuable information on the intertwining variables of real settings, point to the conflicts
and the associated compromises, and even to configurations that might provide design solutions. In this case, we
have opted to employ Group Scribbles (GS) (SRI International, 2007) in a case study consisting of face-to-face
tutoring sessions of a project-based course on Computer Architecture.

      Group Scribbles is based on a simple, research-based set of GUI elements, which help the user create and
move easily between lightweight public and private arrangements of information.      Among other capacities, it allows
the teacher (or other user) to design, present and edit representations of processes.  Since GS supports lightweight,
flexible social coordination, it serves as a good candidate for the study of the aforementioned design tension. The
Group Scribbles design stakes out a specific, and less well-explored, balance among the poles of the design tensions
considered here. In particular, the support for colorful organizing backgrounds and the lack of support for canned
scripts positions it much closer to the bricolage pole than the scripted-action pole of intended use. Similarly, its
inclusion of few, but very firm, internal constraints (including the firm separation of public and private action, hu-
man- rather than machine-interpretable data, and uniqueness of objects) helps set the expectation that many, but not
all, of the constraints must be supplied externally. Finally, in the current implementation, only such data capture as
is a natural outcome of the underlying architecture is supported.

Discussion and conclusions based on the case study
      The case study took place at the University of Valladolid, Spain in Fall, 2006. The context was a series of tu-
toring sessions in a collaborative and project-based course on Computer Architecture at the Telecommunications
Engineering School. The specific topic of the tutoring sessions reported on here is "search and selection of reliable
information sources" related to issues of benchmarking computer systems. The scenario integrated a combination of
the Jigsaw and Pyramid collaborative learning flow patterns and it was enacted in two sessions of two hours, each
involving two sets of different students (5 and 8 volunteers, respectively). The first session, Experience1, is entirely
based on social coordination and involves both the use of paper (for collaborative activities on diagrams and conclu-
sions) and general purpose software for Internet access, document viewing, etc., while the second session, Experi-
ence2, is supported by the GS tool. In other words, in this session, we used the tool to provide a low level of tech-
nology-mediated coordination. GS was initially set up with specific background images and sets of boards tailored
for the activities. These two experiences cover an important but small range of solutions for the design tension un-
der study. To reinforce our contrast, we are going to speculate on the expected results of a third experience, Experi-
ence3 that uses strong technology mediation, since it can serve as a contrast point for our study. Although Experi-
ence3 has not yet taken place expected features can be reasonably based on several previous experiences held out by
the GSIC/EMIC group in similar contexts, as e.g. in (Hernández, Asensio & Dimitriadis, 2006). In Experience3,
coordination will be   accomplished through   a highly  prescriptive computational   script, generated  by the Collage
editor of learning designs in IMS-LD and enacted within Gridcole, a tailorable service-oriented environment.

      The data based on a simplified mixed evaluation method allowed us to analyze various aspects of the afore-
mentioned design tension and provide evidence-based conjectures. The specific data suggest that the case study can
be considered authentic, because it employs non-trivial activity flows, integrated in a meaningful way into a com-
plex project-based and collaborative course.    It also suggests that GS, as a CSCL tool, provides affordances that
support and enhance activity-level coordination, as compared to the purely socially coordinated experience. It can
be argued that GS' lightweight character, together with the powerful underlying metaphor and the Tuple Spaces
coordination language, enabled and strengthened embodied coordination through the awareness stickers, flexibility
and adaptation to emergent    situations, and less need   for  guidance by   the teacher. Social coordination was  also
shown to be highly effective. Its benefits include utilizing very few resources, with the notable exception of teacher

                                                           182                                                 CSCL 2007
creativity and improvisational ability. Additionally, we have confirmed the potential of using collaborative learning
flow patterns (CLFP) i.e. good practices or formalized effective scripts, which contributed to the perception of a
non-complex activity flow.
                                            Logger                             Interaction
                                                                Event Log      Análisis Tool

                                                                                                                            Flexibility
                                                                                                                           (adaptation to
                                                    Callbacks                         CoordinationStatus                    unexpected
                                                                                          Updates                           condicions)

                                        GroupScribbles          Coordination(TupleSpaces)commandsCoordination                                      Teacherworkload
                                              +                                  Engine                                             Social       (guidance and
                                                                                                                                Activity-level    awareness)
                                                                                                                                coordination
                                                                                Coordination                                                        Students
                                                                                   script                                                          cognitive
                                                                                                                         Participants are          workload
                                                                                                                          aware of the
                                                                                                                            process

                                                                                                                                Fixed and fully-
                                                                                                                              automated activity-
                                                                                                                               level coordination
     Experience1        Experience2     Experience3

                     Figure 1: The envisioned architecture (left) and its relation to the design tension (right)
     However, in both cases, that of GS and that of social-coordination, the role of the teacher is crucial. As an-
ticipated in the design philosophy of GS, "the only limit is educator's creativity" (SRI International, 2007). There-
fore, demands on the teacher are high in all phases of the activity: design, enactment and evaluation phases. The
teacher had to design from scratch the activity flow, improvise, supervise, react, and finally monitor and analyze the
experience based on "ephemeral" data. Improvisation, creativity and experience cannot be easily found among prac-
titioners, and in any case they may pose a burden for an extensive use of lightweight CSCL tools, such as GS. On
the other hand, the hope is that with time, just as with HyperCard, familiar patterns of use will emerge that will put
less of a burden on the teacher.                All these elements point out to the expected benefits from strong technology media-
tion, as the one envisioned in the third experience. Tools for design, enactment and evaluation may increase effi-
ciency according to the engineering worldview. Based on the analysis of the design tension (see Figure 1 ­ right),
we can point out to a new flexible architecture that encapsulates affordances of GS as a lightweight coordination
technology support, and provides the possibility of using additional computer mediation. In this case, a designer or
practitioner as a person involved in action / research may choose to use one or more of all the additional modules
presented in Figure 1 (left).

References
Dillenbourg, P. (2002). Over-scripting CSCL: the risks of blending collaborative learning with instructional design.
    In P.A. Kirschner (ed.), Three worlds of CSCL. Can we support CSCL (pp. 61-91), Heerlen:Open Universiteit.
Hernández, D., Asensio, J.I. & Dimitriadis, Y. (2006). Collaborative learning strategies and scenario-based activi-
    ties for understanding network protocols. In Proceedings of the Frontiers in Education conference, San Diego,
    CA.
SRI International (2007). Group Scribbles. http://groupscribbles.sri.com (last visit March 2007).
Tatar, D. (2007). The design tensions framework, International Journal of Computer-Human Interaction (in press).

Acknowledgments
     The authors would also like the members of GSIC/EMIC Group and the GS development group. The work at
University       of Valladolid        has       been           partially       funded              by projects FP6-2002-IST-507838,          TSI2005-08225-C07-04,
VA009A05.         The  Tuple          Spaces           project               was supported             by  the US  National Science          Foundation        under grant
#0427783.

                                                                                                     183                                                         CSCL 2007
