                                                  PhysHint:
  A Qualitative Study of Student's Knowledge Elaboration in CSCL

Ning Ding, Groningen Institute for Educational Research, Groningen University, the Netherlands, N.Ding@rug.nl

          Abstract:   The  poster  concerns  a  qualitative  study    of student's  knowledge     elaboration   in
          computer-supported     collaborative problem   solving.   The     aim of  the study is   to investigate
          whether we can use elaboration value as a measurement to insight into student's communicative
          artefacts in CSCL and diagnose the crux of mixed-gender collaboration.
          Keywords: CSCL,     problem solving, physics learning, partner gender

Introduction
       Parnter gender plays an important role in dyadic collaboration, especially for high school female students in
solving physics problems (Ding & Harskamp, 2006). Although mixed-gender collaboration produces more ideas
and a greater diversity of proposals than single-gender collaboration (van Hiel & Schittekatte, 1998), females are
at a disadvantage with respect to learning achievement (Graham, Fenwick and Derrick, 2001). In our previous
research (Ding & Harskamp, 2006; Harskamp & Ding, 2006), we used Bales' Interaction Process Analysis (IPA)
model to investigate students' information exchange during collaboration, and found that the presence of male
students made females reluctant to put forward ideas and become less active in collaboration. But partner gender
has no   significant  influence on  males'  interaction. Students   have    different exposure    to  the use of   computer
technology.   The     computer   itself is  arguably   a  disadvantage      for  females    because   computer-mediated
communication (CMC) is historically stereotyped as a male dominated domain.

       Although numerous research has investigated females'communication styles in single- and mixed-gender
collaboration, very few research affords an insight into students' knowledge elaboration, especially in the field of
Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning (CSCL). According to Sutherland (2002), elaboration of knowledge
is the key factor for students' problem-solving learning. Therefore, we embark this qualitative study to verify
whether we can use message elaboration as a measurement to insight into students' cognitive activities in CSCL
and diagnose the crux of mixed-gender collaboration.

Knowledge Elaboration in CSCL
       In collaborative   problem   solving, group   is  the learning    agent   (Suthers,  2006).   The  joint knowledge
elaboration is made up of numerous meaningful artefacts, such as utterances, visual representations. Students learn
more from each other through elaborative explanations than simple forms of exchanges (Webb & Farivar, 1999;
van der Meijden & Veenman, 2005). The knowledge elaboration perspective which emphasizes the cognitive
process of collaborating individuals states that learning occurs when students are involved in reflecting, correcting,
extending and restructuring partner's way of thinking (King, 1999; Webb & Farivar, 1999; van der Meijden &
Veenman, 2005). The       knowledge elaboration might differ across participants. We presume that the individual
difference in knowledge     elaboration  could be reflected     by the   content of individual    communicative     artefact.
Looking into students' communicative artefacts, we might deduce whether they are elaborating their knowledge
and what kind of relationship exists between the collaborating individuals' elaboration process.
       CSCL can make students' ideas visible and preserve them in a shared context. Firstly, it is regarded as a way
to deepen students' talk and turn their transitory talk into visible artefacts for reflection; Secondly, in CMC, as
Rutter (1987,   p.74)  states that "cuelessness  leads   to psychological    distance,    psychological   distance leads to
task-oriented and depersonalized content, and task-oriented depersonalized content leads in turn to a deliberate,
unspontaneous style and particular types of outcomes." However, it is also argued that the reduced shared context
is expected to have reduced utility (Suthers, 2006) because the shared context represents the multiple facets that
make up the participants' identity, which facilitates the negotiation of interpersonal questions.

       Problem-solving task is a goal-oriented task. Students communicate with each other in order to accomplish
a set of  goals and   sub-goals. Thus,   a communicative     artefact is not  merely    a simple  expression    of students'
knowledge or understanding, but connected with each other to construct a meaning jointly. While analyzing, we
should relate   it to the context  of joint knowledge    elaboration.    If we  define  the first artefact which   students

                                                            184                                                     CSCL 2007
exchange as the initial state and the subsequent one as meaningfully interrelated, we might plot the track of the
joint and individual elaborations in a sequential analysis.

Research Question
       Focusing on students' online  communicative      artefacts,  is it possible to use elaboration values as   a
measurement to find differences of knowledge elaboration between single- and mixed-gender collaboration in
CSCL?

Methodology
       The  computer program    "PhysHint" aims     at improving    secondary  students' problem-solving  skills in
physics. It was compiled with SQL to facilitate an online collaboration in physics problem solving. For instance, a
dyad of  students  work   together on  a moderately-structured       physics  problem    synchronously. They  can
communicate in the Chatting Section and illustrate the variables in the Drawing Section. What student A draws is
automatically shown on student B's computer. To strengthen and structure students' interaction, we provide five
"Hints" for problem solving. Different students read different hints so that they have to exchange what they read.
In the end, they input their answers in the Answer Section for an evaluation by the computer. After that they are
given the Worked-out Example to check the details.

       Six secondary school students (3 girls & 3 boys) participated in the five-day experiment. There were three
dyads:  one mixed-gender  dyad   and two   single-gender     dyads. Prior  to the  experiment, they were  given   a
twenty-minute pre-flight training about how to use the program. Then they were separated with a board to avoid
talk or eye-contact with each other. The whole experiment was overseen by the researchers. We endow each
communicative message an elaboration value according to its content (Table 1):

Table 1: Sample of Elaboration Values.

  Number      Description                                     Example
  +1          messages elaborating on knowledge and           Student A: What is the Newton's 2nd law?
              contributing to the final solution.             Student B: F=m*a
  0           messages remaining on the previous              (Student B: F=m*a)
              elaboration level                               Student A: Yeah.
  -1          messages that are irrelevant to the task and    Student B: You will go to Rome, won't you?
              distract the problem solving task

Results
        Peter & Henry                       Sandy & Karol                              Ralf & Jenny
        (male-male dyad)                 (female-female dyad)                      (mixed-gender dyad)

       Figure 1. Individual Knowledge Elaboration in 3 dyads (students are pseudonymous)

       As we add up students' individual elaboration values and plot them sequentially, we are able to illustrate the
process of knowledge elaboration in each dyad (Figure 1). Three dyads exemplify three types of relationship of
individual knowledge elaboration: Cross (in Peter& Henry dyad), Parallel (in Sandy & Karol dyad) and Divergent
Elaboration (in Ralf & Jenny dyad). We look into the mixed-gender dyad and zoom in the episode that Ralf and

                                                        185                                                  CSCL 2007
Jenny diverge in knowledge elaboration. After examining their communicative artefacts, we find two problems
that lead to the divergent knowledge elaboration: incoherence in CMC and Ralf's overlook of questions.

Discussion
     The study shows that the elaboration value can be a workable measurement to trace students' cognitive
activities in CSCL and diagnose the problems in dyadic collaboration. In the future, a quantitative study involving
more students and a longer period of experimental time are expected.

References
Ding, N. and Harskamp, E. (2006). How partner gender influences female students' problem solving in physics
       education. Journal of Science Education and Technology, 15(5-6), 331-343.
Graham, D. F. & Derrick, J. N. (2001). Effect of gender composition on group performance, Gender Work and
       Organization, 8(2), 205-225.
Harskamp, E. and Ding,    N. (2006). Structured collaboration    versus individual learning in solving physics
       problems. International Journal of Science Education, 28(14-17),1669-1688.
King, A. (1999). Discourse patterns for mediating peer learning. In A. O'Donnell & A. King (Eds.), Cognitive
       perspectives on peer learning (pp.87-115). Mahwah, NJ:Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Lay, M. M. (1992). The Androgynous Collaborator: The Impact of Gender Studies on Collaboration. J. Forman
       (ed.), New Visions of Collaborative Writing. Portsmouth, N.H.: Boynton/Cook, 82-104.
Rutter, D. R. (1987). Communication by telephone. Oxford: Pergamon Press.
Sutherland, L. (2002). Developing problem solving expertise: the impact of instruction in a question analysis
       strategy. Learning and Instruction, 12, 155-187.
Suthers, D. D. (2006). Technology affordances for intersubjective meaning making: A research agenda for CSCL.
       International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 1(3), 315-337.
Van der Meijden, H., & Veenman, S. (2005). De invloed van groepsgrootte en schooltype op het elaboratiegedrag
       van leerlingen in een CSCL-omgeving. Paper presented at the 32nd Education Research Day 2005, Gent,
       Belgium, 30 mei - 1 juni 2005.
Van Hiel, A. & Schittekatte, M. (1998). Information exchange in context: effects of gender composition of group,
       accountability, and   intergroup perception on      group decision making.  Journal  of Applied  Social
       Psychology, 28 (22), 2049-2067.
Webb, N. M., & Farivar, S. (1999). Developing productive group interaction in middle school mathematics. In A.
       O'Donnell  &    A. King  (Eds.),  Cognitive  perspectives    on  peer learning (pp.117-149). Mahwah,
       NJ:Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

                                                       186                                               CSCL 2007
