                          An Innovative Approach for Fostering
                             Computer-Supported Collaboration
                                 Tanja Engelmann (née Keller), Sigmar-Olaf Tergan,
           Knowledge Media Research Center, Konrad-Adenauer-Str. 40, 72072 Tuebingen, Germany
                                 t.engelmann@iwm-kmrc.de, s.tergan@iwm-kmrc.de

        Abstract: Computer-supported collaboration is still problematic with regard to the interaction
        between spatially distributed group members. In this paper, an innovative approach to tackling
        this problem is presented. This approach is based on fostering "knowledge and information
        awareness"   that    is defined  as awareness     of a   group member     with regard to   task-relevant
        knowledge     and    information    underlying     this  knowledge     of  his/her  collaborators.  An
        experimental    study    described  in    this paper  confirmed  the   efficiency  of knowledge    and
        information awareness on computer-supported collaborative problem solving.

Knowledge and Information Awareness to Tackle Problems in CSC
        Computer-supported collaborative learning (CSCL), defined as "practices of meaning-making in the
context of  joint  activity, and    the  ways in  which   these  practices are  mediated   through  designed    artifacts"
(Koschmann, 2003, p. 18), is becoming increasingly important. In the context of CSCL, not only are learning
settings in focus, but also settings that are learning-relevant, like computer-supported collaborative problem
solving which   is addressed    in  this paper.   Results of empirical  research  confirm   the potential  of computer-
supported collaboration (CSC): For example, it has been shown that learners in such settings may make higher
quality decisions and may be better in idea generation (Fjermestad, 2004). However, research results also show
that efficient CSC is not easy to achieve: For example, according to Janssen, Erkens, Jaspers, and Broeken
(2005), groups in CSC settings often have communication and interaction problems. In the CSCL research
community, there are different strands of research addressing such problems of CSC, e.g., approaches that aim at
enhancing different kinds of group awareness. Following Gross, Stary, and Totter (2005) group awareness is
defined as "consciousness and information of various aspects of the group and its members" (p. 327). However,
in the literature, there is no consensus about how this term is defined. Mostly, the meaning of awareness refers to
social  or action  awareness     (e.g.,  Carroll, Neale,   Isenhour,   Rosson,  &  McCrickard,     2003).  However,    in
knowledge-rich and information-rich situations, these awareness types may not be enough to support effective
CSC, but "knowledge and information awareness" (KIA) is needed, which is defined as awareness of a group
member regarding both the knowledge and the information underlying this knowledge of his/her collaborators
(Keller, Tergan, & Coffey, 2006). KIA can be fostered by means of using advanced digital concept maps that
have   not only the potential    to represent  conceptual    knowledge  (i.e., concepts  and  their relations),  but also
information underlying a concept (e.g., an image or an explanation of a concept). It is suggested that being aware
of the knowledge of others and the information underlying this knowledge, may help cooperative problem
solvers in shared knowledge-construction and problem-solving tasks. This assumption is based on the theory of
transactive memory (Wegner, 1986). According to this theory a transactive memory system is a set of individual
memory systems combined with the communication between the group members. In the present project, KIA is
supported by means of an environment visualizing knowledge and information visualizations of the collaborators
by means of digital concept maps. It is assumed that KIA is helpful in a computer-supported collaborative
problem-solving scenario, because it could be expected that KIA has a positive impact on interaction, especially
on communication and coordination and, therefore, also on collaborative problem solving: Following Clark and
Brennan (1993), shared understanding in communication is crucial for individuals working in a group. Making
visual  representations of   the  knowledge    structures  and   the underlying   information   of each  group   member
available to the group should facilitate shared understanding and, thus, communication. Moreover, it has been
shown that information that is shared by all group members is often mentioned in group discussion, while
unshared information that is known by only some group members, mostly remains unmentioned (e.g., Stasser,
Vaughan,   &  Stewart,  2000).   However,     such unshared    information could   be  important   for problem   solving.
Therefore, it is important to also recognize unshared information. By comparing the external knowledge and
information representations of the collaborators, group members can easily recognize which knowledge and
information is shared and which is not. This should have a positive effect on group coordination. In addition, it is
assumed that the possibility to view the knowledge and underlying information of other group members provides
a kind of affordance for each individual to make use of these representations (Suthers, 2005).

Experimental Study
        The experiment investigated whether groups using an environment for fostering KIA collaborate more
efficiently in problem solving tasks than groups that do not have a KIA environment.

                                                             187                                                     CSCL 2007
Method
          Participants: Participants  were  90  students  (58   female, 32   male)  of   the University    of   Tuebingen,
Germany.   Average  age     was 24.47  (SD  =   3.83). The  students   were  randomly    assigned    to the  experimental
condition (N = 15 groups) or to the control condition (N = 15 groups).

          Materials and Procedure: The participants worked in groups of three students sitting in separate room
sections. They could not see each other, but could speak with each other. The domain was about caring for a
fictitious kind of spruce forest and consisted of several concepts, relations, and information elements underlying
the concepts. These elements were evenly distributed among the three group members. At the start of the study,
control variables (e.g., computer experience) were measured by a questionnaire. Afterwards, the participants had
to practice the use of CmapTools (http://cmap.ihmc.us/). At the outset of the individual phase 1 (23 minutes), the
group members worked separately, accessing the information elements in their own information window on the
left side of their desktop and structuring their information and knowledge in form of concept maps in their own
working window on the right side of their desktop. In the individual phase 2 (5 minutes), each participant of the
control group examined his/her own map. Each participant of the experimental group, however, could also see
the maps of his/her collaborators. After this activity, there was a manipulation check to measure the amount of
KIA acquired (15 items). In the collaboration phase (40 minutes), the group members collaborated on solving
two problems, i.e., which pesticide and which fertilizer they would use. To solve these problems, the participants
needed to compile their knowledge and information. To do this, they used a shared working window to create a
common digital concept map. During this phase, they could speak with each other. In the control condition, the
participants could only see their own working window and the shared working window. In the experimental
condition, the participants also saw the individual maps of their collaborators to become aware of the knowledge
and  information  their collaborators  had. Finally,   a knowledge   test was     used to measure     the knowledge     the
participants had acquired and a questionnaire was used to assess, e.g., difficulties regarding collaboration.

          Design and    Dependent   Measures:    The   analysis was  based    on  a comparison      of  the  experimental
condition, in which the groups were provided with an environment for fostering KIA, and the control condition,
in which the groups worked without it. The dependent measures were the domain knowledge (30 multiple-choice
items), the quality of the common concept map created in the collaboration phase, the quality of the group
answers to the two problem-solving tasks, and process-related measures.

Results and Discussion
          In all analyses of variance reported here, the control variable "experience in creating computer-based
graphics" was used as a covariate, because of a significant difference between the control and the experimental
condition. All analyses presented here are based on group level, i.e., the group values are calculated as means of
the values of the individuals of a group. This was necessary, due to the fact that the members of a group are not
independent of each other. The first series of analyses confirmed that the groups in the experimental condition
acquired KIA by using the KIA environment: The analysis of the manipulation check after the individual phase
showed that the experimental groups achieved on average 58.75% of the score in tasks asking for information
that only one of the other group members had and 59.44% of the score in tasks that asked for information that
only   the   two  other     collaborators  had.   The    analysis   of  the    questionnaire      items   (rating     scales:
1 =  "no   agreement"   and 5   = "complete  agreement")    showed,    e.g., that the  experimental     groups  agreed   on
average that it was helpful to have access to the maps of the collaborators (ME = 4.27; SDE = 0.75).

          The second series of analyses explored the impact of the use of the KIA environment on the dependent
measures. The questionnaire measuring process-related aspects showed that participating in the study was more
stressful in the control groups    (MC =   3.2; ME   = 2.7; F(1,27)  =  4.66;  MSE     =  0.28;   p <  .05),  although  the
experimental groups had more problems regarding the use of the different windows on the desktop (MC = 1.8;
ME = 2.2; F(1,27) = 6.25; MSE = 0.25; p < .05) compared to the control groups. The analyses of the log files
with regard to uptake events, i.e., events in which group members take up and build on prior contributions
(Suthers, 2006), confirmed that there were significantly more intersubjective uptake events in the experimental
groups than in the control groups (MC = 0.5; ME = 3.3; F(1,27) = 18.20; MSE = 2.93; p < .001). KIA seems to
foster intersubjective  knowledge     construction.  The   analysis  of the    knowledge     test   revealed,   e.g., better
performance for the experimental groups regarding the knowledge on domain relations that were shared by a
participant collaborator dyad compared to the control groups (MC = 2.1; ME = 2.4; F(1,27) = 4.2; MSE = 0.14;
p <  .05). Moreover,    the analyses revealed   that the experimental   groups    gained  higher    values   in knowledge
regarding information underlying a concept that is only shared by the other collaborators (MC = 2.6; ME = 2.9;
F(1,27) = 4.17; MSE = 0.41; p = .05). These results provide evidence of the efficiency of the KIA environment.
Regarding the quality of the group maps, there were no differences between the conditions regarding the number
of correct relations and concepts (nodes: MC = 12.9; ME = 12.6; F(1,27) = 1.71; MSE = 0.46; p = .20; relations:

                                                          188                                                          CSCL 2007
MC = 23.3; ME = 21.5; F(1,27) = 1.81; MSE = 22.21; p = .19). However, it seems that the experimental groups
tried to avoid information overload in their maps: There were more intersections of relations in the group maps
of the control groups  than in the maps  of the experimental  groups  (MC   = 15.3; ME  =   9.0; F(1,27) = 4.84;
MSE = 51.88; p < .05). With regard to the problem-solving tasks, the experimental groups tended to be more
confident that they had solved the two tasks correctly (pesticide problem: MC = 3.8; ME = 4.2; F(1,27) = 3.38;
MSE = 0.47; p = .077; fertilizer problem: MC = 3.8; ME = 4.2; F(1,27) = 3.17; MSE = 0.57; p = .086). This
subjective estimation of the participants was partly mirrored in objective results, namely in the group answers
given: Regarding the number of correct answers to the pesticide problem, the data did not show a significant
difference between the conditions (Pearson-2 (2) = 3.20; p = .20). However, regarding the number of correct
answers to the fertilizer problem, the experimental groups attained a marginally higher performance compared to
the control groups (Pearson-2 (2) = 4.9; p < .087).

Summary
         The presented   study demonstrated  that   computer-supported collaborative  problem    solving can  be
supported by enhancing KIA. In this study, an experimental condition using an environment for enhancing KIA
was compared to a control condition that ran without it. The analyses showed that the experimental groups
acquired a substantial amount of KIA by using the KIA environment. Results further indicate that participating
in the study was more stressful for the control groups, although the experimental groups had more difficulties in
using the windows. Therefore, the benefit of using a KIA environment seems to be great enough to compensate
for the higher cognitive load caused by the need to use more windows on the screen. By analyzing the log files, it
could be confirmed that, in the experimental groups, more intersubjective meaning construction took place than
in the control groups. Moreover, the analyses showed that the experimental groups achieved higher performance
in both knowledge regarding content information that was only shared by the other collaborators and knowledge
regarding relation information that an individual and another collaborator had.  Regarding    the quality  of the
group maps, there was no difference in the quality in the sense of correct nodes and relations between the
conditions. However, the analyses showed that the experimental groups tried to avoid information overload in
their map. Most importantly, the study demonstrated that using a KIA environment was helpful for problem-
solving performances.

References
Carroll, J. M., Neale, D. C., Isenhour, P. L., Rosson, M. B., & McCrickard, D. S. (2003). Notification and
         awareness:   Synchronizing   task-oriented collaborative activity. International   Journal of   Human-
         Computer Studies, 58(5), 605-632.
Clark, H. H., & Brennan S. E. (1993). Grounding in communication. In R. E. Baecker (Ed.), Readings in
         groupware and computer-supported cooperative work assisting human collaboration (pp. 222-233).
         San Mateo, CA.: Morgan Kaufman.
Fjermestad, J. (2004). An analysis of communication mode in group support systems research. Decision Support
         Systems, 37(2), 239-263.
Gross, T., Stary, C., & Totter, A. (2005). User-Centered Awareness in Computer-Supported Cooperative Work-
         Systems: Structured Embedding of Findings from Social Sciences. International Journal of Human-
         Computer Interaction, 18, 323-360.
Janssen, J., Erkens, G., Jaspers, J., & Broeken, M. (2005). Effects of visualizing participation in computer-
         supported collaborative learning. Paper presented at Earli, 2005, Nicosia, Cyprus.
Keller, T., Tergan, S. -O., & Coffey, J. (2006). Concept maps used as a "knowledge and information awareness"
         tool for supporting collaborative problem solving in distributed groups. In A. J. Cañas, & J. D. Novak
         (Eds.), Concept  Maps:   Theories, Methodology,    Technology  (pp.  128-135). San   José:  Sección  de
         Impresión del SIEDIN.
Koschmann, T. (2002). Dewey's contribution to the foundations of CSCL research. In G. Stahl (Ed.), Computer
         support for collaborative learning: Foundations for a CSCL community (pp. 17-22). Boulder, CO:
         Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Stasser, G., Vaughan, S. I., & Stewart, D. D. (2000). Pooling unshared information: The benefits of knowing
         how   access to  information is distributed  among  members.   Organizational    Behavior  and  Human
         Decision Processes, 82, 102-116.
Suthers, D. D. (2005). Technology affordances for intersubjective learning: A thematic agenda for CSCL. In T.
         Koschmann, D. D. Suthers & T. W. Chan (Eds.), Computer Supported Collaborative Learning 2005:
         The Next 10 Years! (pp. 662-672). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Suthers, D.  D.   (2006). A  qualitative  analysis  of collaborative knowledge   construction    through  shared
         representations. Research and Practice in Technology Enhanced Learning, 1(2), 1-28.
Wegner, D. M. (1986). Transactive memory: A contemporary analysis of the group mind. In B. Mullen & G. R.
         Goethals (Eds.), Theories of group behaviour (pp. 185-208). New York: Springer.

                                                       189                                                  CSCL 2007
