                Helping Teachers in Designing CSCL Scenarios:
                     a Methodology Based on the LDL Language
                         Christine Ferraris, Christian Martel, Laurence Vignollet, Equipe scénario,
                     Université de Savoie, Campus Scientifique, 73376 Le Bourget-du-Lac cedex, France
                        {Christine.Ferraris, Christian.Martel, Laurence.Vignollet}@univ-savoie.fr

        Abstract:    When  teachers prepare  learning activities to be  carried out by    learners  within web
        learning environments, they encounter two main problems: the modelling and the technical ones.
        The modelling one is nowadays regarded as being the most important, both in CSCL and Learning
        Design. We have defined a methodology to help the teachers to model. It is briefly presented here.
        It is subordinated to the educational modelling language used to produce the models: LDL.

Introduction
          There is a broad acceptance in the CSCL community that collaboration is not that spontaneous and that
learners need to be scaffolded in collaboration activities. The teacher has to provide them with some guidance to be
sure that collaboration will be effective and efficient. Researchers have thus recommended carrying out a scripting
phase before the performance of the activity, during which a description of the future activity will be produced.

        In order to support this preparatory task, we have defined an educational modelling language (EML) called
Learning Design Language (LDL) (Martel et al., 2006a). It is intended for teachers or instructional designers. It has
been created to allow them to describe and specify collaborative pedagogical activities on internet. The ambition of
LDL is twofold: on the one hand, it provides the teachers and instructional designers with simple means to build the
formal description of whatever kind of pedagogical activities and to combine them; on the other hand, it allows the
teachers to be able to transform easily these formal descriptions into effective online activities whilst considering the
technical environment in which they operates (i.e. the resources available on their school network and on internet).

        Using LDL during the preparation phase leads the teacher to create a scenario. A scenario is a very codified
and formal description of a future activity. It can be considered as a specification of this activity. Building such a
specification is not that easy. We have defined a methodology and a graphical notation to help the teachers build a
scenario. The methodology is subordinated to the LDL language. It is presented briefly in what follows.

The proposed methodology
        The proposed methodology distinguishes two steps clearly. Step1 aims at building an informal scenario (a
narrative text). Indeed, we think that it is not possible to ask a designer to produce a formal description directly.
Step2 aims  at formalising this informal scenario. When     analysing a learning  situation,  it is possible  to identify
activities of different types that are interwoven. We consider four types of activities:
·   the learning type. Activities of this type are the heart of the learning. Learners manipulate the resources put at
    their disposal.  They  produce   contents  related   to  the learning objectives.     They   work  individually  or
    collaboratively.
·   the observation type. During activities of this type, the teacher observes the ongoing learning activities with the
    aim of supervising and regulating their progression.
·   the assessment type. Any learning activity is preceded, associated with or followed by at least one assessment
    activity. The place of the assessment activity in the overall learning flow depends on the kind of assessment
    desired by the designer (diagnostic, formative, summative, etc.) (Durand & Martel, 2006).
·   the organisational type. Activities of this kind are dedicated to organisation problems: resources and tools are
    made accessible; instructions are given; if needed, groups are created; the other activities are started.

We propose to regard these four types of activities as basic elements that are constitutive of every learning activity
to model. The overall learning activity results from the combination and the interrelations of these activities. Being
activities per se, they can be modelled as independent scenarios. Building the formal scenario of a learning activity
is thus no longer a matter of defining a unique scenario, which encapsulates everything. It becomes a matter of
defining at least four scenarios, corresponding to the four different kinds of activities identified. As a consequence,

                                                         190                                                   CSCL 2007
it becomes a matter of describing the relationships between these scenarios. It is also a matter of describing each
scenario in terms of the concepts proposed by LDL. Once again, this leads to splitting the methodology into two
phases : (1) identifying the activities and (2) modelling each identified activity.

Formalizing the informal scenario: (1) Identifying the activities
          At this stage, the designer has first to analyse the overall activity to identify the activities that constitute it
and  that correspond   to  the  four  types of  activities  mentioned   above:    organization, learning,  observation  and
assessment. This has to be completed with the description of who is to be involved in each activity. This is a matter
of identifying the roles. Furthermore, for each activity, the designer has to identify the participation modes.

          What is meant by "participation modes" is the overall way participants will exchange and interact in an
activity. They describe the kind of situation a designer wants to carry out with her/his students. They allow one to
distinguish individual participation from collaborative participation. The former is characterized by participants
having individual activities and no relationship with each other, the latter by participants acting in the activity as
interdependent   and  engaged   partners involved  in  a  common    quest.  In  collaborative participation, we distinguish
frontal situations from open ones. In frontal situations, participants have individual activities and no relationships
with the other participants, except with a person having a particular role who oversees, stimulates, coordinates and
controls. A course at university in a lecture hall is a typical frontal situation. In open situations, participants can
cooperate freely with the other participants. It is the case for example of a panel session in which participants are
invited to discuss and express freely their opinions and points of view. Note that in real educational practices, these
various forms can be combined with each other to produce hybrid educational situations that can evolve over time.

          Once the designer has identified the activities and the participation modes for each of them, s/he has to
position these activities with respect to each other. This means that s/he has to:
·    define the learning flow. This leads to both the building of the activity schedule (specification of the order
     according   to which  the  activities will have   to be  performed)    and  the definition   of synchronization points
     between these activities;
·    define the objects the activities may share. Two kinds of objects can be shared: arenas and positions. Both are
     LDL concepts. Arenas represent the places where the activities and exchanges will take place (activities are
     situated). A position reflects the participants' reactions and perception of the activity. It is a general concept
     which covers    different notions   such as the  participant's   point of  view (for example,    "I  have finished this
     exercise"; "we have answered this question"; "this exercise is too complicated"), her/his availability, a mark (we
     consider it as the position of a teacher on a learner's work), etc.

Formalizing the informal scenario: (2) Modelling each activity
          It is time now for the designer to go deeper into each activity and to build a model (i.e. a scenario) for each
of them. This is done by using LDL concepts. We have made a particular analysis of what a learning activity is.
From our point of view, it is not a process which can be broken down into a succession of tasks to be carried out.
Rather, we   draw   a parallel  with  a  conversation, in   which  locutors  speak   to their interlocutors, who   make  an
interpretation of what is said and may react in turn (Austin, 1955). Just like a conversation, we consider an activity
as a set of exchanges and interactions between the users involved (the participants). And as in a conversation, every
exchange involves at least two participants: an addresser who acts and whose actions are aimed at an addressee. It
should be noted that the addresser and the addressee may be the same person in a given exchange. The exchanges
may be organized and structured by the designer in a given learning context (the activity is situated). This context
includes not only adequate learning objects (contents and services) and the learning objectives but also a set of rules
that scaffolds the activity. In addition, an activity progresses through individual and collective positions taken by the
participants within their exchanges. These positions have an influence on the progress of the activity, as they are
indicative of the participants' reactions and perception of the activity. So the teacher observes them with the aim of
adapting the situation, by modifying the context, the exchanges or even the way exchanges are structured.

          LDL has been defined within this particular interactional vision of learning activities. It also takes into
account   their intrinsically evolutionary  nature   and  the need  for observation   and    regulation. Within this vision,
designing  a scenario  consists  in  describing  (1) what   the   participants' interactions will be, how   and when  these
interactions will be connected throughout the activity (this is represented by the interaction and structure concepts
in LDL), (2) where the activity will take place (the arena concept), (3) who the participants in the activity will be
(the role concept),   (4) the  rules the participants  will have   to comply    with (the rule  concept)  and  (5) what the

                                                              191                                                  CSCL 2007
consequences of the participants' actions and points of view on the activity will be and how they will be able to
express these points of view (the position concept, which is linked to the observable one).

Discussion and Conclusion
         Once the formalisation work has been completed, the designer has built several diagrams that specify the
scenarios and the learning flow between the activities modelled by these scenarios. As the methodology is based on
LDL and involves the description of scenarios by means of LDL concepts, it is possible to make an automatic
translation of the resultant diagrams into an LDL-equivalent codification (in an xml binding form). Then a computer
is able to  "understand"  this  codification.  Thus  it is  possible  to operationalise  the scenarios   and execute   the
corresponding activities in a given web learning environment, chosen by the teacher who wants to carry out these
activities with her/his students. This is carried out by LDI (Learning Design Infrastructure), an infrastructure which
deals with both operationalisation and execution of LDL-scenarios. LDI has been developed by Pentila Corp., which
is our main partner in this project (see http://ld.pentila.com. Many thanks in particular to Steve Giraud).

         Our approach is different from what is usually done in CSCL research. The usual approach consists in
embedding scenarios in CSCL tools. The source code of these tools has to be modified by computer engineers to
integrate the scenarios. In our approach, on the other hand, we propose to keep the scenarios outside the tools. Then
the scenario, formalised in LDL, made executable by LDI, becomes a means of organizing the use of whatever
services and Learning Objects that could be used in learning activities. This approach has several advantages. First,
it is easy to reuse  scenarios. In  (Harrer et al., 2006)   a similar argumentation   is used  applying  IMS/LD    for the
scripting of CSCL activities. Second, people who have to deal with learning activities and scenarios do not have to
concern themselves with the technical problems related to implementation. Third, the time between the moment
when   the formal scenario  is  produced and   the  moment    when it can   be executed  on  a computer  is  considerably
reduced. This could lead to a new potential use of scenarios, which supplements the ones listed by (Miao et al.
2005): the possibility for CSCL researchers to carry out their experiments more easily and more quickly.

         There is another difference between our propositions and the work usually done in CSCL scripting. Instead
of building a single scenario that encapsulates the overall complexity of a given learning activity, we rather propose
a modular approach. It consists in considering every learning activity as a composition of activities of four types:
learning, organisation, observation, assessment. The advantage is threefold. First, it reduces the complexity of the
overall situation to be  modelled.  Second,    it provides  the designer  with some   guidance.   Third, as  it leads to a
componential approach, it facilitates the reuse and the adaptation of the scenarios produced.

         The methodology was practically tested on the example of the planet game, a case study that was used as a
benchmark/competition in a workshop we organized during last ICALT (Martel et al., 2006b, Vignollet et al., 2006).
We now need to validate it. For that purpose, we have to do some experiments with teachers, giving them the role of
"scenario designer". If we wish to do that in the best conditions, we in fact have to provide an authoring tool to
support  the  design process.  This tool has   to be simple   and intuitive  enough  to  be  used by teachers.   We   have
specified such a tool. It is currently under development and should be operational next summer. This will allow us to
start a validation phase with teachers and, why not, CSCL researchers. Are you interested in this ? ...

References
Austin, J.N. (1955). How to do Things with Words. Oxford.
Durand,  G.   &  Martel, C.   (2006). To    Scenarize   the Assessment    of an  Educational   Activity. Proceedings     of
         ED'MEDIA 2006, Orlando, Florida.
Harrer, A., Malzahn, N. & Roth, B. (2006). The Remote Control Approach ­ How to apply Scaffolds to Existing
         Collaborative Learning Environments. Proc. of CRIWG'2006, Medina del Campo, Spain. LNCS 4154.
Martel, C., Vignollet, L., Ferraris, C., David, J.P. & Lejeune, A. (2006a). Modeling collaborative learning activities
         on e-learning platforms. Proceedings of ICALT 2006, (pp.707-709), Kerkrade, The Netherlands.
Martel, C., Vignollet, L. & Ferraris, C. (2006b). Modeling the case study with LDL and implementing it with LDI,
         Workshop paper at ICALT 2006, (pp.1149-1151), Kerkrade, The Netherlands.
Miao, Y., Hoeksema K., Hoppe, H. U. & Harrer, A. (2005). CSCL Scripts: Modelling Features and Potential Use.
         Proceedings of CSCL'2005, Taipei, Taiwan, 2005.
Vignollet,  L., David,  J.P., Ferraris, C., Martel,   C. &    Lejeune,   A.  (2006). Comparing    Educational   Modeling
         Languages on a case study, Workshop at ICALT 2006, (pp.1149-1151), Kerkrade, The Netherlands.

                                                            192                                                  CSCL 2007
