                    Illegitimate Practices as Legitimate Participation:
                         Game Cheat Sites in a Teen Virtual World
                                           Deborah A. Fields & Yasmin B. Kafai
                                University of California, Los Angeles, 2128 Moore Hall
                                              Los Angeles, CA 90095-1521
                                      stareyes@gmail.com       kafai@gseis.ucla.edu

          Abstract: Much research has described the various practices of gaining access and participation in
          multi-user game communities. Cheat websites that are a prominent part of the game culture and
          industry have been debated because of their illegitimate nature but received little attention in terms
          of their educational value. In this paper we analyze the cheat sites created by players for a teen
          virtual world called Whyville.net, which encourages youth ages 8-16 to participate in a range of
          social activities and play casual science games. Analysis of a sample of 257 cheat sites resulted in
          typologies for both the cheats and sites in terms of quality and quantity of science content. A case
          study  of  an  especially active  cheat  site   and analysis   of  player-written  articles in   Whyville's
          newspaper   illuminate  the illegitimate  and    legitimate  aspects of  cheating   in this virtual  world.
          Implications   of these  findings as   cultural  artifacts  of the game   community    and    as guides  for
          designing informal online learning activities are discussed.

          The phenomenon of cheating is gaining increasing traction in discussions of gaming practices in multi-user
virtual environments (MUVEs). The debate whether cheats are illegitimate has largely been influenced by industry
practices to publish short cuts in their magazines, thus legitimizing the dissemination. Even among players there are
no clear standards on what counts as cheating and what the repercussions are. According to Mia Consalvo (in press)
cheating provides players with gaming capital, which can be defined in this context as "being knowledgeable about
game    releases and  secrets, and  passing  that  information    on  to  others.  It's having  opinions   about  which  game
magazines are better and the best sites for walkthrough on the Internet". One aspect of cheating that has received
little attention so  far is  cheat  sites, player-generated    websites    where   players   share strategies  (or answers   if
applicable) for solving problems in the virtual games. We approached the investigation of cheat sites for Whyville
with the following questions: How do Whyville players design cheat sites? What does a site consist of, how do they
change over time, who creates them and what are their motivations?           Is there any science displayed in the cheat sites
stemming from Whyville?        If so, what kind of science concepts and skills are targeted on these sites? Moreover,
what does this reveal both about the designers of the sites and the nature of the science games themselves?

Research Approach
          For our investigation of cheat sites, we drew from two sources, cheat sites available on the Internet and the
archive of news articles in The Whyville Times. We sampled a subset of 15% of the 257 sites (38 in all) and ruled out
sites that were scams (asking for people's passwords in exchange for an advertised raised salary) and sites that only
talked about cheating but did not offer answers or directions. Of the remaining sites, 13 were legitimate cheat sites.
In a first step, we evaluated the identified cheat sites using the typology developed by Salen and Zimmerman (2004).
In a second step, we developed a classification system that delineated the types of sites according to the quality and
helpfulness of   the cheats  (from  comprehensive      to copies  of  other  cheat sites) and  the kinds   of cheats listed for
various games as they relate to the science in the games (from a listing of answers to more qualified descriptions and
illustrations). We also searched in the archive of The Whyville Times newspaper and identified over 100 articles that
discussed cheating in Whyville. We used these articles to evaluate the ethical discussions surrounding cheating in
the world of Whyville.

Illegitimate Cheat Sites outside Whyville
          The large  number,    257,  of   cheat sites about   Whyville    found   on   the Internet is a  clear indication  of
Whyville's popularity. When we applied Salen and Zimmerman's (2004) typology of cheats, we found that cheat
sites for Whyville incorporated all of the types they     identified. We have outlined their definitions in the table below
and listed parallel types of cheats found on Whyville sites (see Table 1).

                                                              193                                                    CSCL 2007
Table 1: Typology of Cheat Sites

     Cheats                 Description                                         Whyville Cheat Sites
     Easter eggs            Special   secrets   hidden   in  the  game   by     Unlisted spaces within the game, e.g., Jupiter, Disco Room,designersthe Newspaper
                                                                                Indirect parallels in Whyville:
     Cheat codes            Actual  codes   written   up  by  the designers     -    "teleport Jupiter" to get to Jupiter,(providing immortality and other benefits)-"earmuffsnowon"tolistentopeoplewhispering
                                                                                     online
                                                                                Most common cheat on sites:
     Game guides andwalkthroughsStep-by-step instruction for finishing a game   -    How to play through a game,-Answers to games
                                                                                -    Illustrations for games
                                                                                -    E.g. House   of  Illusions: walking   through   all rooms
     Workarounds            `Legal'    ways   of  working    around    game          without looking at anythingstructures-Setting up another account to get more clams
                                                                                -    Selling or buying others' extra accounts
     True cheating          Really and truly breaking the official site rules   Stealing  others'  accounts   through   scams   that  ask   for(e.g. multi-sessioning)usernames and passwords
     Hacks                  Intervention on the level of a computer code        Codes that deposit many clams in account (now expired ­we were unable to test these)
     Spoil-sport hacking    Intervening  in a   way  that brings  down  thegameandisnotforthepurposeofbeinginvolved in the games.Stealingothers'accountsbyhackingintothesystem(rumors of this happening but unstudied by the authors)

         We examined in detail Gamesite2.net (a pseudonym for the site), one of the more comprehensive sites that
contained Easter eggs, cheat codes, game guides and walkthroughs, and workarounds as described above. The site
itself noted that it had on average 200 visitors a day, in addition to 34 registered users (as of 8 October 2006).                               It
began in mid-2004 and, according to the history posted on the site, went through several versions until in mid-2006
it started regaining popularity. The site owner and designer, a 14 year-old young man, and his three administrators,
posted new messages on the home page of the site roughly four times a month, not including numerous responses to
messages    on   the forums.  On       the  home     page,   the  site designer    wrote    regular   updates     about     "our"    progress    in
developing/researching new cheats for new games or versions of games in addition to cheats or hints about things
that were   not  game-related    (in   other    words    not related   to  a   game  that   would     be  rewarded         with   clams).     Other
Whyville players posted comments about cheats they had figured out in a game, pleas for more or better cheats, and
praises for the help offered on the site. While the site designer and his site administrators officially managed and
posted the cheats, the activity of gathering and synthesizing the cheats was a collaborative effort, and the leaders
gave credit to those who had assisted with various parts of researching and developing the cheats.

         In addition, the site was not neutral about what was appropriate behavior on the forum.                            The owner closely
watched  forum     postings  for    inappropriate      material   and  advertising    of  other   sites:  "every       one  who      swears   a lot,
spams, or cusses... will be banned."          Looking through the forum, one can see many times when messages or parts of
them have been locked or erased by the owner.                In addition, other forum participants pointed out things that they
thought rude about some comments left on the site.                 For instance, when one user complained that there were not
enough cheats or that the site did not help him enough, another user replied that the site owner did a lot of work on
others' behalf and we should be grateful for the help he provided.                 While the site recognized that scams occurred, it
did not support them and purposefully tried to distance itself from that practice. Besides cheats for science games,
the site also provided cultural tips and insider knowledge about Whyville.                     These included how to access unlisted
social spaces    (teleporting),  how    to  act  and   talk  on   Whyville,    where     to shop   for   face    parts,    how    to avoid    being
hacked, and    information   about     what     kinds  of   people    hang    out in which    locations      on  Whyville.        The    site even
included non-science game cheats such as how to make your Scion (virtual car on Whyville) invisible, answers to
The Whyville Times weekly crossword, and a simple computer code that makes throwing projectiles faster.                                   The site
even provides "free advertising" for stores that Whyvillians design (Whyville itself only offers paid advertising).

Legitimate Discussions about Cheating within the larger Whyville Community
         Cheat sites about Whyville, like the one we presented above, are not a hidden phenomenon; in fact, they are
openly discussed in The Whyville Times newspaper that constitutes a community forum. Just as in the commercial
gaming  world    (Gee,   2003),  cheating     is a   hotly   debated   topic   in Whyville    and    the newspaper         articles  criticize  the
practice of using cheat sites to increase salaries illegitimately: "when just one person uses cheats it could affect our
whole town" (Ickamcoy, 2003). Of the over 100 articles that mentioned cheats in The Whyville Times from 2000-

                                                                       194                                                               CSCL 2007
2006, roughly 10% were explicit warnings against scams, reporting on the many imaginative ways Whyvillians have
tried to procure  others' passwords  with  the  promise   of raising their salaries, giving  them  makeovers,  and  even
claming to be site designers. Another 30% more generally condemned cheating in salary-raising games, i.e., using
cheats found on cheat sites.  Others (20%) discussed cheating in the Smart Cars races where instead of going around
the track in a traditional race, some players would immediately turn their cars around and cross the finish line, thus
triggering a win. These particular articles constituted a long, multi-year discussion about whether this was a valid
way to win at Smart Cars.    Some utterly denounced the practice while others, including the Times editor considered
it a rather clever method. Still further, another 10% of the articles concerned cheating in dating relationships, some
of them asking whether it was cheating if one had one boyfriend in the `real' world and a different one in Whyville.
Another  20%   concerned   issues with  ballot stuffing, creating multiple  accounts  in  order to have   more votes   for
oneself in elections for Whyville senator or prom king/queen.     And a final 10% described and rebuked other forms
of cheating on Whyville, including the provocative "stealing from Grandma" referenced in the title of this paper.

Discussion
         Our examination of cheat sites in Whyville, an informal free MUVE for teens, took inspiration from what
researchers  had observed  in large-scale  online games.   Our analyses    indicate that the Whyville  cheat sites are as
sophisticated in number of different cheat types as those for commercial games. The cheats cover the whole gamut:
from helping players to make more clams to cheating players out of their clams. If anything, the presence of this
large number of cheat sites can be seen as a simple measure of community participation. The players in Whyville are
interested in finding out  about  short cuts and  pointers and  provide  the audience.    Thus  there is an incentive  for
designers to create, and even copy, these sites. Beyond purely altruistic motives we can suspect that hosting a site as
a designer but also knowing about good ones as a player might just constitute what Consalvo (in press) had in mind
when she coined the term "gaming capital."      As in many other games, knowing shortcuts represents some form of
insider knowledge and thus positions users and designers of cheat sites as legitimate participants of the Whyville
community. We found that the cheat sites reveal a great deal about their designers. All are invested in Whyville, in
promoting others' success on Whyville, and in displaying their knowledge of Whyville. They view the object of the
`game' as getting a salary to buy face parts and participate in the larger Whyvillian culture. In fact, they value the
morals of Whyville as displayed in qualifiers to their chat cheats, asking viewers to read carefully and understand
the principles behind the questions. Still further, they have taken the time to learn the inside secrets of Whyville.  In
addition, the designers often do substantial research to develop their sites and learn how to complete science games.
This includes technological research (web development, html, short codes) and scientific research (illustrations of
spectra, theories about spinning fast).

         In commercial games there are financial issues at stake that place the discussion about cheats in a more
economic framework. When, for example, gamers are paid to play certain characters because their possessions can
be sold on eBay to other players (Steinkuehler, 2006) or when players purchase bots to accumulate possessions for
their avatars, the gaming capital acquired through short cuts has tangible monetary equivalents (Castronova, 2005).
In Whyville.net this aspect just entered in November 2006 in game play when the company started offering clams,
Whyville's currency, for sale in terms of dollars. It will be interesting to see in which ways the typology and nature
of the cheat sites we have investigated will change within this new economic landscape that now provides different
incentives for using cheats.

References
Castronova, E. (2005). Synthetic worlds: The business and pleasure of gaming. Chicago: Chicago University Press.
Consalvo, M. (in press). Cheating: Gaining Advantage in Video Games. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Ickamcoy. (2003). Cheat Sites!, The Whyville Times. http://d.whyville.net/smmk/whytimes/article?id=3247.
Salen, K., & Zimmerman, E. (2004). Rules of play: Game design fundamentals. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Squire, K. (in press). Civilization III as a world history sandbox. In Civilization and its discontents. Virtual history.
         Real fantasies. Milan, Italy: Ludilogica Press.
Steinkuehler, C. (2006). The mangle of play. Games and Culture, 1(3), 199-213.

Acknowledgments
The writing of this paper is supported by a grant of the National Science Foundation (NSF-0411814) to the second
author.  The  views expressed  are those  of the  authors and  do not  necessarily   represent the views  of NSF   or  the
University of California.

                                                           195                                                  CSCL 2007
