Making Thinking Visible: Growth in Graphical Literacy, Grades 3 to 4
                     Yongcheng Gan, Marlene Scardamalia, Huang-Yao Hong, Jianwei Zhang
                          Ontario Institute for Studies in Education, University of Toronto,
                            252 Bloor Street West, Toronto, Ontario, M5S 1V6, Canada
                     Email: yongcheng.gan@utoronto.ca, mscardamalia@kf.oise.utoronto.ca,
                                huangyao.hong@utoronto.ca, jw.zhang@utoronto.ca

       Abstract: This study provides a new coding scheme to analyze growth in seven components of
       graphical   literacy  for   22 students  who    used an   online   multimedia    environment--Knowledge
       Forum®--across       two  years (grades  3   and 4)  to  advance   their theories in   science  and history.
       Students received no instruction in graphical literacy and were free to express their ideas in text or
       graphics. Results show increases in all components of graphical literacy over this time span.

Introduction
       Graphical   literacy  refers to the  ability to  construct, produce,    present, read  and interpret charts,  maps,
graphs, and other visual presentations and graphical inscriptions (Readence, et al., 2004). It is a visual, abstract
language for enhancing learning. According to dual-coding theory, information is easier to retain and retrieve when
it is coded both verbally and visually (Paivio, 1991). Adding graphics to text can improve learning (Clark & Mayer,
2002), and visualization is also a powerful cognitive tool in scientific discovery and invention, and essential to
problem solving in daily life as it provides concrete means to interpret abstract images (Rieber, 1995).

       While    there  is a growing    need for graphical/visual     literacy, there is  less attention paid   to it at the
elementary level than there is to reading and writing. There is evidence that higher order visual literacy skills do
not develop unless they are identified and "taught" (Avgerinou & Ericson, 1997). Visual presentations of abstract
concepts tend to be difficult for students yet ignored in basals and other school texts (Readence, et al., 2004).
Educational researchers are calling for increased attention to graphical inscriptions to help students become literate
in practices related to the production and interpretation of graphics (Roth, 2002).

       Over    the two years    of educational  work    reported  in this study    students were  engaged   in knowledge
building--the creation and   continual  improvement     of  ideas  through  transformative    discourse   (Scardamalia   &
Bereiter, 1994). Knowledge Forum, a knowledge building environment, was integral to their work. It includes tools
for graphical as well as textual representation of ideas. Students choose the representational form best suited to the
expression of  their  ideas. In    knowledge   building    practices, students     assume   collective  responsibility  for
communicating,  elaborating,  evaluating,  and  improving   ideas,   working    in a public forum  where    they  build on,
comment, and in other ways help each other advance their understanding, They received no instruction in use of
graphics, but are supported in the expression of ideas by peer feedback and an easy-to-use graphics palette that
allows them to co-author and revise graphics. A coding scheme was designed to assess the extent to which they use
graphics and advance in graphical expressiveness.

Method
       Participants were 22 students from the Institute of Child Study, University of Toronto, using knowledge
building pedagogy and Knowledge Forum software for their work in science and history. Quantitative results are
reported and content analysis (Chi, 1997) was used to assess the quality of graphical content across grades 3 and 4.
The coding    scheme   identified   seven  components    of    graphical  literacy   growth   (Table  1);  each   graphical
representation was rated for each dimension: Basic, 1 point; Intermediate, 2 points; Advanced, 3 points.

Table 1: Graphical Literacy Coding Scheme.

    Category                                                    Specification
 1. Graphics       Use of line, dot, shape, color, basic shape, etc; Combinations of different color, shape, label,
 Production/       title, etc.; Complex or abstract graphics conveying harmony, clarity in conceptual content, etc.
 Drawing Skills
 2. Graphical      Use of a graphical representation to convey a concept, theory, experiment, procedure, etc.
 Representation
 3. Resources      Use of references and links to source material of peers or from the Internet to reference rather

                                                            206                                                    CSCL 2007
 Reference         than copy graphics.
 4.Captions        Use of clear, correct, and accurate captions to complement and elaborate ideas in pictures.
 5. Revision/      Revision or elaboration of pictures or relevant captions over time to provide increasingly clear
 Elaboration       and accurate accounts.
 6. Aesthetics/    Use of color, layer, rendering, etc. to make graphic attractive; effective use of titles, labels,
 Clarity           tags, and other devices to create pictures that are reader-friendly and accurate.
 7. Judgment/      Use of interpretive comments and summaries to convey the essence of graphical
 Reflection        representations, including processes conveyed by the picture.

Data analysis and results
         Grade 3 students created 556 notes in total, with 68 graphical representations. In grade 4, students created
470 notes in total, with 123 graphical representations. The average number of graphical representations per student
rose from 3.1 to 5.5, and the ratio of graphical representations to the total number of notes rose from 12.2% to 26%.
All but one student used more graphical representations in grade 4 than in grade 3.

              Figure 1. Rating of students' graphical representations in Grades 3 and 4.

         Figure 1 shows the results of content analyses of students' graphical representations over the two school
years (inter-rater reliability over 30 sampled graphical representations r=0.84, with differences resolved through
discussion). The number of graphical representations rated as "Intermediate" and "Advanced" in six categories
increased but one "Intermediate" level decreased in "Evaluation/reflection. The three areas of greatest increase in
"Advanced" ratings were "Graphical representation", "Captions" and "Revision/elaboration," with corresponding
decrease in  the "Basic"   levels in these same    areas. There were   no   incidents  of "Resources  reference"     and
"Evaluation/reflection" in grade 3; but both appeared in grade 4. Paired t-tests of students' total scores in each
category showed significant increases (p<0.05) between the two school years.

         In the  course of their  knowledge building,  students    raised questions and   worked together, as  authors
contributing notes to their collective space for shared understanding and as co-authors to continually improve ideas
represented in their graphics. They also used "rise aboves," a note-type that allowed them to collect notes into an
integrated, higher-order framework (see Figure 2).

         Graphical representation, text and collaboration: The number of words per text note rose from 22.5 in
grade 3 to 48.4 (doubled) in grade 4, and the number of words in captions, labels, and textual elements linked to
graphics rose from 24.7 in grade 3 to 74.6 (tripled) in grade 4. These text elements were used to convey complex
processes, experiments, models, and so forth, and in other ways elaborate abstract ideas conveyed in graphics. In
grade 3,  17.6%   of graphical    representations were co-authored,   and   close   to half (45.5%)  of the   students
collaborated in the production of a graphical representation; in grade 4, the percentage is doubled (35.0%), and all
but one  student (n=21)  co-authored  graphical   representations; suggesting that  students had a   stronger sense    of
collaboration surrounding their graphical work in grade 4.

Discussion
         Quantitative and qualitative analyses of graphical representations showed increases in graphical literacy
according to the coding scheme used to evaluate seven aspects of graphical literacy. A separate study by Zhang, et
al., (in press) analyzed knowledge gains for the same students in the same class; these showed significant advances

                                                          207                                                  CSCL 2007
for individual students in their understanding of optics. Thus there is some suggestion that students use of text and
graphics support  content   learning. Contributions of the  current study   include:  (1) Coding   scheme.  Graphical
literacy is seldom assessed in elementary schools and there are few studies to provide developmental accounts of
graphical literacy. The current study provides a coding scheme that proved useful in assessing the work of students
in grades  3  and 4  in an   online learning environment;   (2)  Literacy as    a by-product   of knowledge building.
Scardamalia (2003) proposed that knowledge building, with focus on conceptual advances related to core content,
and conducted in a medium that requires multiple literacies for the expression and continual improvement of ideas,
would result in increases in literacy, as a by-product of content learning. Previous studies (e.g. Sun, et al., under
review) indicate this is the case for textual literacy. This study suggests that graphical literacy is another important
by-product of knowledge building. A weakness of the current study is that there is no control data. Nonetheless, the
study provides the basis for follow-up work aimed at assessing growth in graphical literacy, using both control data
and assessments across a greater variety of classroom settings.

Figure 2. A rise-above note on "rainbows" in the "Colors of Light" view in Knowledge Forum.

Acknowledgments
         This  research was   funded  by the Social Sciences   and Humanities     Research   Council of Canada,  grant
512-2002-1016. We own special thanks to the students, teachers, and principal of the Institute of Child Study,
University of Toronto, for the insights and accomplishments that enabled this research.

References
Avgerinou, M. & Ericson, J. (1997). A review of the concept of visual literacy. British Journal of Educational
         Technology, 1997. 28(4), 280-291.
Chi, M. T. H. (1997). Quantifying qualitative analysis of verbal data. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 6, 271-315.
Clark, R. C. & Mayer, R. E. (2002). E-learning and the science of instruction: proven guidelines for consumers
         and designers of multimedia learning. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass Pfeiffer.
Paivio, A. (1991). Dual coding theory: retrospect and current status. Canadian Journal of Psychology, 45, 255-87
Readence,  J., Bean,   T., & Baldwin,   S. (2004). Content area   literacy: an    integrated approach,  eighth edition.
         Dubuque, IA: Kendall-Hunt, 260.
Rieber, L. P. (1995). A historical review of visualisation in human cognition. Educational Technology, Research
         and Development, 43(1), 1042-1629.
Roth, W. (2002). Reading graphs: contributions to an integrative concept of literacy. Journal of Curriculum Studies,
         34 (1), 1-24.
Scardamalia, M. (2003). Crossing the digital divide: Literacy as by-product of knowledge building. Journal of
         Distance Education, 17 (Supplement. 3, Learning Technology Innovation in Canada), 78-81.
Scardamalia, M. & Bereiter, C. (1994). Computer support for knowledge building communities. The Journal of the
         Learning Sciences, 3(3), 265-283.
Sun, Y., Zhang, J., & Scardamalia, M. (under review). Literacy as a by-product of knowledge building. Journal of
         Literacy Research.
Zhang, J., Scardamalia,    M.,  Lamon,   M., Messina,  R., &    Reeve, R.   (in press). Socio-cognitive  dynamics  of
         knowledge     building in  the  work  of  9- and  10-year-olds.    Educational   Technology    Research  and
         Development.

                                                           208                                                 CSCL 2007
