 Turning on Minds with Computers in the Kitchen: Supporting Group
         Reflection in the Midst of Engaging in Hands-on Activities

   Christina M. Gardner, Janet L. Kolodner, School of Interactive Computing, Georgia Institute of Technology
                                85 5th Street, NW, Room 324B, Atlanta GA 30332-0760
                                 Email: cmgardne@cc.gatech.edu, jlk@cc.gatech.edu

        Abstract: How can we promote the kinds of reflection needed for deep and lasting learning and
        the development of disposition toward scientific reasoning in the context of an informal learning
        community?      In our research, we've discovered that learners have a greater appreciation of what
        they are learning when we give them the goal of helping others outside their community. This
        appreciation is demonstrated by their willingness to jot down notes during activities and later write
        articles for   an online cooking     "magazine."  The    online cooking   magazine  has  the   potential to
        support learning and development of disposition toward scientific reasoning in several ways. It
        provides a place to hang scaffolding that promotes recognizing what's been learned, what led to
        successes,   and   how   science   contributed to   those   successes. It  also provides    a  context   for
        knowledge      building in   which  learners create  concrete   artifacts they can  share   outside  of  the
        Kitchen Science Investigators community. We found that with computers in the kitchen and an
        online magazine to contribute to, participants were stopping and reflecting in ways that we had
        only seen previously when a facilitator was prompting them.

Introduction
        How can we promote the kinds of reflection needed for deep and lasting learning and the development of
disposition toward   scientific reasoning    in the  context  of  an  informal    learning community?     In   busy  learning
environments  where    young  learners   are engaged   in exciting  hands-on   learning activities, it is easy   for them to
energetically engage   in activities but then   walk away   not  recognizing   what they   learned  (Blumenfeld,    Soloway,
Marx, Krajcik,   Guzdial,  & Palincsar,  1991).  The   problem   is a cognitive   one, but its  solution  will require some
attention to pragmatics as well. Although it is hard to get children to stop, reflect, and articulate what they have been
doing and learning while they are having a good time, finding ways to help learners do these things is important for
fully realizing the affordances of problem, project, and design based activities.       We'd like learners to come out of
these learning environments having mastered targeted content, reasoning skills, and practices. In addition, we would
like learners to have a disposition towards repeating the reasoning and practices they've learned (1). We seek to help
learners develop dispositions toward engaging in targeted reasoning and subsequently carrying it out of their own
free will. This happens only if learners recognize the usefulness and value of the reasoning they are doing (Bereiter,
1995) and have a chance to see that what they are learning has value within other social groups they participate in
(Lave & Wenger, 1991). We do our work in the context of informal after-school activities.

        In our Kitchen Science Investigators (KSI) project, fifth and sixth graders (ages 11 and 12) learn kitchen
science and   engage   in scientific reasoning  in the context   of cooking  and   baking  (Clegg,  Gardner,    Williams, &
Kolodner, 2006). We are using KSI as a platform for learning to what extent we can promote disposition towards
scientific reasoning through informal learning. We make available informal learning activities that learners choose
to participate in out of interest. Then, we help them organize themselves as a learning community and recognize the
systematic  scientific reasoning they   are  doing in  those activities that lead  to  success. Cooking   and   baking offer
opportunities for learners to reason scientifically about process and procedure while developing skills for systematic
inquiry as they iterate towards recipe perfection. Since many children this age and others in the community are
interested in cooking and baking, participants are afforded many natural opportunities for sharing what they are
learning in KSI with others in interdependent social groups (Barab & Duffy, 2000).

        We believe that if we can systematically help participants see the value of their KSI experiences by helping
them achieve and recognize some personal successes stemming from KSI activities through reflection, they will
more readily engage in the kinds of reflection and articulation that will promote additional success.          With cooking
and baking, such success might come in the form of liking their own creations, having someone else like what
they've prepared, offering tips to someone else who is cooking or baking, and engaging in "technical" conversation
about cooking and baking with people whose opinions they respect. Our CSCL goal is fivefold: (1) understand how

                                                             209                                                    CSCL 2007
to use technology to prepare learners for such success; (2) give learners resources for engaging in activities and
interactions that they feel have value outside of the informal learning community; (3) help learners recognize their
successes and what went into them; (4) provide a platform for community knowledge building; and (5) help learners
engage in interactions with others in interdependent communities.

         During KSI sessions, participants work in small groups to achieve cooking and baking challenges (e.g.,
making pudding with the right thickness using various starch thickeners).      In the first few sessions, participants work
on the same cooking challenges. These challenges are designed to help them learn the science behind the cooking
(e.g., how starches thicken) and to model processes for experimenting systematically (e.g., varying one ingredient at
a time). Once the groups complete the challenges in their small group, they compare and contrast what they have
done and discovered across all the KSI participants (Clegg et al., 2006). This allows them to see the effect that the
ingredient under investigation has on the outcome of the recipe as it is varied and allows them to understand how it
works. In the later sessions, they break into interest groups to pursue challenges of their own choosing ­ some
variation or combination of what they've done previously -- using the science they've learned to achieve their goals
(e.g., making pudding thick enough to support fruit in a pudding parfait).

         In pilot studies of KSI, we have found that participants excitedly report their learning inside and outside of
KSI. Between sessions some of them go home and share what they've been doing and many have had experiences
where others get quite excited about what they've learned. We want to support those kinds of experiences for all
participants, and we believe that this will require doing a better job of (1) supporting articulation of what they are
doing and learning as they collaborate in their small groups and (2) providing opportunities for practicing expression
of what they might share with others in order to show themselves and others the value of their KSI-related scientific
reasoning. Our CSCL research question is this: What roles can/should the computer play in an informal learning
community   to support    the kinds   of reflection that might  lead  towards  the development  of  scientific reasoning
dispositions? We see CSCL having at least two purposes in promoting disposition towards engaging in systematic
scientific reasoning: (1) supporting reflection while learners engage in activities that will lead them to recognize
their successes and the ways they achieved them and (2) supporting articulation that will prepare participants for
later conversations among their KSI peers and with others outside the KSI community. What they articulate during
KSI can serve not simply as a practice opportunity, but if it is articulated in writing, it can also serve as something
concrete to refer back to later when interacting with others.

         Previously, we have used computers to support KSIers in annotating recipes with observations, and we
have been disappointed that they didn't articulate more of what they were observing and learning (Gardner, Clegg,
Williams, & Kolodner, 2006). However, we had not focused on giving them a reason to take notes and observations
other than to perfect their recipes. In the study we report on in this paper, we gave them better reasons for reflecting,
taking notes, and writing -- namely to share with and teach others about the science behind cooking. In particular,
we made tools available to them for authoring an online cooking magazine that we hoped would provide them with
enough structure and scaffolding to promote reflection and learning but not get in the way of their engagement and
excitement. We found that with computers in the kitchen and an online magazine to contribute to, participants were
stopping and   reflecting as  part of their finishing-up  activities in ways that we had only  seen previously   when  a
facilitator was prompting them.

Design of the Software
         We focused on four issues in the design of the software. (1) How can we support reflection in a context
where learners don't want to leave the activity to write? (2) How can we support reflection without getting in the
way of their activities and turning them off? (3) How can we use software to support groups' purposeful note-taking
and written reflection?   (4) How     can we  prepare  participants  for later conversations within and outside   of the
informal learning environment?

         To begin answering these questions, we looked to our pilot studies in spring 2005 and 2006 (Clegg et al.,
2006; Gardner et al., 2006). We saw that learners were excited about the things they were learning and that they
wanted to share their recipes with and tell their stories to their friends and families both inside and outside of KSI.
We wanted to take advantage of the opportunities afforded by that natural interest and excitement and hoped that
they might periodically leave their activities to engage in jotting down those things that they wanted to share with
others. The literature suggests that if we could have them reflect in a way that was authentic to their interests and to
others outside of KSI, they would more readily think about what they where doing and what was worth writing

                                                            210                                                 CSCL 2007
down  (e.g., Papert, 1991;   Brown   &  Campione,  1990;   Barab    &  Duffy, 2000).  In addition,   since learners,  their
parents, and their friends often asked for copies of their KSI recipes to take home, having a way for participants to
access and share their recipes, stories, and advice online would help them reach an outside audience and give them
an opportunity to see the social relevance of their KSI experiences.

          We initially considered having learners author a cookbook, but because that medium limits contributions to
recipes and annotated recipes, we decided against that approach and opted to have KSIers author a magazine instead.
Cooking magazines have letters to the editor and requests for advice, stories, and how-to's in addition to recipes.
Many of these match the types of interactions participants already have with their peers and adults when they talk
about KSI. If we could support writing these things well in an online magazine, we could encourage productive
kinds of reflection and scaffold that reflection for purposes that participants already wanted to engage in. The online
magazine   idea enabled   us to achieve two   objectives. First, it created a purpose  for  participants'  reflection and
articulation that was consistent with their excitement about sharing their discoveries and recipes. Second, it allowed
for several kinds of writing products, each of which we could use as a platform for scaffolding.     While one can think
of many different ways of contributing to a cooking magazine, we began with three: (1) support for story writing
(i.e., what I did and learned), (2) support for advice giving and explanations (using explanatoids from Crowley &
Jacobs, 2002),  and  (3)  support for recipe annotation.  Figure    1 is a screenshot of the online   cooking  magazine
homepage. The upper left quadrant features explanatoids written by the KSIers. The upper right quadrant features
learners' KSI   stories. In the bottom  left quadrant learners   can   read advice column    letters requesting   cooking
assistance (this is one way we suggest cooking and science goals to participants), and they can read the annotated
recipes they and others have created in the bottom right quadrant of the page.

                                              Figure 1. Cooking Magazine Homepage

   In designing the reflection tools, we looked for direction on appropriate scaffolding for the type of learning we
wanted  to support.  Both   Scardamalia & Bereiter  (1991)  and   McNeill,   Lizotte, Krajcik, & Marx      (2006) suggest
allowing the environment to inform what type of support is necessary. We coupled this advice with our goal to
support reflection without making it onerous and opted for a design with minimal scaffolding.        While we knew we
would   find a  need for  additional scaffolding, beginning    minimally   would allow   us to assess  what  scaffolding
learners needed. We also adopted the Scardamalia and Bereiter (1991) usage of a community database to support
knowledge building for the purposes of reaching a broader community and to provide a context for persistent group
discussions. In KSI, small groups write entries together during activities, and refinement of ideas happens later when

                                                           211                                                  CSCL 2007
learners use their own entries and those of others as they address their own challenges that may occur either inside
or outside of KSI. In designing the minimal scaffolding to help learners make their contributions to the cooking
magazine, we used generic prompts (Davis, 2003) to remind learners to stop and think about what they are doing.
We use more "directed" prompts only to focus reflection, particularly to help participants make connections between
what they are experiencing and the science behind it.       Overall, our prompts serve as suggestions to help participants
articulate their experiences.

Story Telling Tool
         The Story Telling Tool (Figure 2) was designed to allow KSIers to record their cooking experiences as
stories. The scaffolding reminds them of the recipe they are working on and asks them to, "Tell us the story of your
experience today in KSI." Scaffolding is in the form of five suggestions: "Tell us (1) what you did, (2) why you did
it, (3) what you learned, (4) are there any unanswered questions from your experience, and (5) if there are any future
experiments you would like to do as a response." The prompting is very simple, reminding learners to connect what
they've done to what they can learn from it and suggesting that there may be more to learn. Overall, it provides a
"model" of what we want children to think about, as, Collins, Brown, and Newman, (1989) suggest and Owensby
and Kolodner (2004) demonstrate. The stories summarize their experiences so that they can use it as a resource
when the KSI experience is no longer fresh on their minds.

                          Figure 2. Story Telling Tool (Left) and Explanatoids Tool (right)

Explanatoids Tool
         One KSIer's mom told us about an in-depth discussion her son had with his piano teacher about how yeast
makes bread rise after he made pizza dough in KSI. The Explanatoids Tool (Figure 2) provides space for learners to
record mini  explanations  about     the things   they are noticing,  experiencing, and    seeing to support these kinds of
conversations. The generic prompt we chose for this tool was, "Did you know ..." Our goal here was simply to
prompt learners to make connections. We added an example of an explanatoid to provide additional guidance. Our
goal here, as Crowley and Jacobs (2002) suggests about explanatoids, was to give learners freedom to explain at the
depth they were capable of and wanted to express. The prompting in this tool is very generic, as it doesn't give
specific instructions  on what  to   write   or   how  to write  it. Davis (2003) reported   that  such simple suggestions
promoted productive connection making, our goal for this tool.

The Recipe Annotation Tool
         It is sometimes  necessary      to take   notes while engaging   in activities to remember   enough  to be able to
reason or   talk about them   later. For    this, we provided  a   Recipe Annotation    Tool (not shown). In  previous KSI
implementations, we've had a hard time getting participants to make and write down observations. We conjectured

                                                               212                                                 CSCL 2007
that the goal of authoring articles in the cooking magazine might provide learners with more of a purpose for jotting
down notes about their recipes so that they would remember later the things they wanted to include in their stories
and  explanations.  Thus, we have  renamed     our old  Cooking   Observations    Tool the Recipe Annotation  Tool.  The
prompting we provide is simple structuring. Next to each step in a recipe there is space to type. After they finish
preparing a recipe, participants can also upload pictures and add additional annotations.

Methods
Study Details
         In summer 2006, we used this software in a week-long science summer camp with 60 rising fifth          and sixth
grade children from a variety of school districts around the metro Atlanta area.     The summer camp was offered by a
Georgia Tech K-12 outreach center as part of a summer science camp. Children were recommended by a teacher and
had at least a B average. While participation in the study was free, children paid to participate in the camp. KSI was
offered as the afternoon activity Monday through Wednesday and all day Thursday (15 hours total). Participants
were split across three different rooms, 20 KSIers in each, all running in parallel. Within each room, learners were
broken up into smaller groups of four or five to carry out investigations.     Each room was facilitated by three local
elementary and  middle    school teachers who     we trained  two  weeks   before. This implementation  of  KSI focused
learners on the role of starch thickeners (e.g. cornstarch and instant tapioca) in making puddings and fruit pies.

Data Collection
         Each group of five children had one laptop running the KSI software in a web browser. All entries in the
software  were recorded   on a  remote server.    Database   entries indicated the time each  software entry  was  made,
edits/updates to the entries and time those were made, and the group and activity they were associated with. We
collected the entries made   by  participants  in Rooms  A    and  B.  We    also have video recordings of  sessions and
researcher field notes.

Data Analysis
         We   analyzed  the  software  entries to  find out   the extent  to which  our ideas about   using the cooking
magazine and the authoring tools promoted reflection with respect to addressing the aforementioned four issues we
considered when designing: (1) How can we support reflection in a context where learners don't want to leave the
activity to write? (2) How can we support reflection without getting in the way of their activities and turning them
off? (3) How can we use software to support groups' purposeful note-taking and written reflection? 4) How can we
prepare participants for later conversations within and outside of the informal learning environment?

         The data was analyzed for usage, number and quality of entries and edits, and who made them and when.
Our goal was to gauge the extent to which the magazine promoted articulation (and the reflection that goes with it)
and the content and quality of children's writing. Abundant usage might indicate that the tools were appropriately
matched to learners' interests for sharing (design issues one and two). To address the third design issue, we looked
at the types of things they wrote about and the quality of those writings with respect to the supports provided. For
this part of the analysis we looked at the things they were motivated to write down and how they wrote them as
indicators of the purposefulness of their reflection. The fourth issue was addressed indirectly through these analyses.

         The analysis presented in this paper focuses on the usage of the Story Telling and Explanatoids tools, as
they were  the primary   supports for  making     reflection more  purposeful. We   analyzed  entries using a grounded-
theory-like approach, allowing the data to inductively indicate its categories and patterns. In the next section, we
present results from learners using both tools with respect to (1) usage (number of entries and edits made by who
and when), (2) types of things written about, and (3) quality of content.

Results
Story Telling Tool: Usage
         This  tool was   used  during the last   two  sessions   of  the week.   Usage was  encouraged  by   facilitators
prompting and encouraging the learners to write stories. For this tool, the data are from Room A, where a facilitator
prompted use of this tool by bringing it up on each of the groups' computers. There were four stories written, one by
each of the groups in Room A; one group edited their story.

                                                             213                                                CSCL 2007
Story Telling Tool: Types of Things Participants Wrote
         All four entries in the Story Telling tool focused on making Strawberry Pie, which all the groups had just
finished preparing. Three out of four groups used the tool to give recipe ingredients and steps. Two groups told the
stories of  their particular  group   experience  making   the   strawberry   pies  in first person  narrative. The  other two
groups told their stories as instruction, using the second-person pronoun "you". This suggested that learners had one
of two goals when writing stories: instructing someone else or describing their experience.

Story Telling Tool: Quality of Stories
         Table 1 shows examples of two stories KSIers wrote using the Story Telling Tool. Story S1 describes a
group's  experience     and S3 gives   instructions. Three    out   of four entries  show    groups  usage  of  the prompts        as
scaffolds  to  structure  the writing   of  the  stories. One   of   the four  entries was    incomplete.   It provided partial
instructions for making the dish; we were unable to assess whether or not they would have used the prompts to
structure the remainder of their writing. Three out of four of the entries included in the stories what the group did --
as suggested by the first prompt -- by writing the recipe's ingredients and steps. The other entry summarized the
group's cooking experience in a single sentence. Three entries show that the groups identified the activity's learning
goals. (e.g., "We made the strawberry pies to see what would happen if you put a different amount of tablespoons
[of cornstarch]." "The Moon's did this to learn more about the science behind starches.") We believe that they did
this because they took into consideration the second prompt, "Why you did it."           These same groups built upon these
responses by taking into consideration the third prompt, "What you learned." (e.g., "We learned that if you [add
more] tablespoons of cornstarch, it will be heavier and it will look alot darker," "We learned that more starches
thicken things more and make them better.")

Table 1: Examples of KSI Stories (2)

 S.1 The Strawberry Blues We, the gold beaters had a good time making the strawberry pies. We made the strawberry pies to
 see what would happen if you put a different amount of tablespoons. We learned that if you tablespoons of cornstarch, it will
 be heavier and it will look alot darker. We would like to know what would happen if you put in to much water and not
 enough cornstarch. We think that if you do that it will come out watery and sogey. We would like to do an expriment with
 smores, to see what different temputures will make the best tasting smores.
 S.3 The Moon's Strawberry Pie Strawberry pie isn't hard to make. All you need is 3tsp of cornstarch, 32 strawberries, half a
 cup of sugar, half a cup of water, and 6 graham cracker crusts. You will also need a potato masher, paper cups, saucepan,
 measuring cups and spoons, and 4 cup storage containers.
 Next you will have to place the strawberries in the saucepan, and mash them with the potato masher. It will look pretty
 nasty,  but  we'll see about that later. Stir your water  with  the strawberries. Put the  saucepan on the  over your burner
 (hopefully you'll have one)and put it on meedium heat, until the mixture begins to boil for about 5 minutes. In a seperate
 bowl, measure and mix your 3tsp of cornstarch until blended well. Once the strawberries come to a boil, sprinkle the
 cornstarch sugar mixture a little at a time, stirring after each sprinkle to make sure that it is well blended. Stir it until the
 mixture thickens. Then boil it for a minute and cool it for 10 minutes. Your last step is to take a 1/4 measuring cup and put it
 in each crust. Wala!!
 The Moon's did this to learn more about the science behind starches. We learned that more starches thicken things more and
 make them better. The Moon's want to do future experiments with cooking such as what happens when Mentos and Diet
 coke. We all hoope you enjoy your specail for today, enjoy!!

         The two stories in Table 1 are complete with respect to what the prompts in the tool suggested they write;
however, the stories are quite different. We think this is because the two groups had different goals. The group that
wrote story S1 had the goal of describing their group's experience. Suggestions from prompts four and five fit very
nicely into the telling of their strawberry pie-making experience. While it seems like they are posing an unrelated
experiment in their last sentence, they are actually reflecting on the model/process of the science experiment they
did in the previous session to perfect thickening their pudding.          The group writing story S3, on the other hand,
seemed   to  be   writing  instructions   for  someone    else. In   achieving their   goal  they did   not have  to  take into
consideration   prompts   4 and 5,  the   unanswered     questions   and related experiment(s)    prompts.  Nevertheless,  they
included in their story an unrelated experiment that they were interested in pursuing.

         Story    telling seemed   to come     naturally  and be   quite enjoyable   for some   of  the groups.   Some  groups
personalized their entries with narrative flow, personal notes, humor, and "style" (e.g., "Next you will have to place
the strawberries in the saucepan, and mash them with the potato masher. It will look pretty nasty, but we'll see about
that later." +  "Put the saucepan on the over your burner (hopefully you'll have one)" +           "Then...Wala!!" and     "We
all hoope you enjoy your specail for today, enjoy!!"). Although this is a small sample set (4), the stories give us

                                                                214                                                   CSCL 2007
clues as to what participants were attending to and noticing while cooking. Furthermore, their varying goals suggest
that in future software, it makes sense to better separate out story telling from instructing.

Explanatoids Tool:         Usage
           The Explanatoids tool was used during three sessions and by both rooms of children. Participants wrote 20
entries total, with the bulk coming from Room B.    In room B, the average number of entries per group was 4.5, and
each group made an average of 2 edits each (Table 2). Edits of their writing suggest that they had some investment
in it.

Table 2: Usage of Explanatoids Tools

       By Whom         # of Entries     Edits                         When (# of Entries created)
       Group B1        7                3 (edited 3 diff. entries)    Session 2 (1), Session 3 (edit) Session 4         (6)
       Group B2        5                None                          Session 2 (1), Session 4
       Group B3        3                2 (edited 1 entry twice)      Session 2 (1), Session 4
       Group B4        2                1                             Session 2 (1), Session 4
       Group B?        1                None
       Group A1        1                None                          Session 4
       Group A?        1                None                          Session 4

Explanatoids Tool: What Learners Wrote
           A grounded theory-like analysis of these writings showed groups writing with one of three primary goals:
expression, informing, or explaining. We define expression as making known one's opinions or feelings (e.g., "today
we made chocolate tapioca pudding and the teachers and other people older than us liked it. we made it with corn
starch too, it tasted really good."). Two entries out of twenty were coded as "expression". We define informing as
communication     of procedure,  data, and knowledge   obtained     from investigation, study, or       instruction   (e.g., "We
heated cornstarch and water, to see how long it took to thicken. It took about 10 min. to start thickening. We knew it
was thick when it started to stick to the back of the metal spoon. Every 5 min. the temperature seemed to rise about
10 degrees.").    Thirteen out  of twenty entries were coded     as "informing".  We   define  explaining         as providing  a
reason for the occurrence of something beyond one's personal experience (e.g., "After a long time of stirring and
cooking,   the pudding  thickened  because  of the arrowroot.    The  starch in arrowroot  thickened          because the starch
sucked up the water and swelled up."). Five entries out of twenty were coded as "explaining".

Explanatoids Tool: Quality of Explanations
           We coded each of the explanatoids for the presence and quality of explanations (attempts to use science
rather than just descriptions of experience), identifying for each the presence of cause, mechanism, and/or why the
phenomenon they are presenting is important. Cause, as we use it, is the reason for the phenomenon being explained
(e.g. "because when you add water to a starch,it becomes thicker," and "Eggs and other objects that help water and
oil mix are called emulsifiers"). See Table 3 for the full text of the explanatoid entries. Mechanism is the underlying
process responsible for a phenomenon (e.g., "this kind of starch does like water, so it absorbs the water"). We coded
entries for having identified why the phenomenon was important when they included contextualized examples of the
phenomenon or other discussion of the phenomenon's importance and relevance (e.g., "For example, in brownies
water and oil are used as ingredients, but since they don't mix eggs were added in the recipe.").

Table 3: Examples of Explanatoid Entries

     Pudding               "The brown rice flour thickened when we stirred it because when you add water to a starch,it
                           becomes thicker and this kind of starch does like water, so it absorbs the water."
     Emulsifiers           "Water and oil don't mix, but if you add an egg, water and oil do mix. Eggs and other objects
                           that help water and oil mix are called emulsifiers. For example, in brownies water and oil are
                           used as ingredients,but since they don't mix eggs were added in the recipe,"

           Nine out of the twenty entries had content that was coded as a cause. Two out of twenty entries had content
that   was coded  as a mechanism.    Three out of  twenty entries    had content  that  was coded       as    the reason  why   a
phenomenon     was   important. Several categories of explanations    emerged   from these  codes:       (A)   Description   of a
Phenomenon (effect), (B) Description of a Phenomenon (effect) + its importance, (C) Description of a Phenomenon
(effect) + why (cause), (D) Description of a Phenomenon (effect) +       why (cause) +  how (mechanism). The majority

                                                           215                                                         CSCL 2007
of entries were of types (A) Description of a Phenomenon (effect) and (B) Description of a Phenomenon (effect) +
why (cause). Table 4 shows a breakdown of the number of entries coded in each category and its definition.                Of the
20 entries, 12 had some sort of explanation, while eight simply described something they observed.

Table 4: Four Categories of Entries in the Explanatoids Tool

 Explanation Type                             Description                                                             # of coded
                                                                                                                      entries
 a)   Description of phenomena (effect)       Describes an observable effect of the cooking process                   8
 b)   Description of phenomena (effect)       Describes an observable effect of the cooking process and adds          3
      + its importance                        information about why it is important
 c)   Description of phenomena (effect)       Describes an observable effect of the cooking process and why it        7
      +  why (cause)                          was caused
 d)  Description of phenomena (effect)        Describes an observable effect of the cooking process, why it was       2
     +   why (cause) + how (mechanism)        caused, and the mechanism of how it was caused

         In discerning the quality of the entries, we looked for attempts to use science. We identified five uses of
science in 12 out of 20 entries. Table 5 illustrates examples of each and their usage, noting in bold type the part that
was coded and in italics our clarifying notes.

Table 5: Examples of Attempts to Use Science

 Quality of Science                Entry (Example in bold and notes in italics)                                         Overall
                                                                                                                        usage
 (1) Definitions                   Water and oil don't mix, but if you add an egg, water and oil do mix. Eggs and       1
                                   other objects that help water and oil mix are called emulsifiers. For example,
                                   in brownies water and oil are used as ingredients, but since they don't mix eggs
                                   were added in the recipe.
 (2) Attempt at qualifying         Out of the 4 brownies #2 was the best (opinion) because it had the right             1
      an opinion by science        amount of eggs (science).It also had the most flavor and the most greasy.
 (3) Experienced science           Water and Oil don't mix. The eggs mixed the water and the oil. The brownies          4
     (cause & effect)              became bigger (effect) when more eggs were added (science cause). The first
                                   brownie was the smallest because only one egg was added.
 (4) Use of science to             After a long time of stirring and cooking, the pudding thickened because of the      3
     explain the cause             arrowroot (4). The starch in arrowroot thickened because the starch sucked
 (5) Use of science to             up the water and and swelled up. (5)                                                 2
     explain the mechanism

         From this data, we see that participants composed explanations at varying degrees of specificity, and some
didn't explain at all but only wrote observations.    Nine     out  of 12  entries that were  coded   as explanations     were
written by three out of the five groups. We also see that most of the groups were able to articulate at least the cause
and effect of phenomenon they experienced through program activities, and some were able to use the science to
describe the cause and the mechanism.

Discussion
         While   this  research study had  a  very small     data set, it was   interesting nonetheless  because      the study
participants actually stopped to write, and the writing shows they are learning more than we originally thought. This
is especially interesting because in the past we found it difficult to get learners to reflect during activities and even
sometimes after they finished. When we did get them to reflect and articulate, they rarely revisited notes or refined
them  over   time. The  usage   analysis presented here  suggests    that the   cooking magazine     and its  authoring   tools
provided a successful medium for promoting reflection and articulation. Not only did participants record some of
what they learned, but they sometimes took the time to revisit what they wrote. Edits included revising mistakes in
science understanding and adding more relevant details as they emerged in the learning environment. The recording
and  editing practices  from  this study also suggest that    providing   authoring  tools  with authentic   purpose    elicited
group reflection. In addition, the length of the stories and quantity and length of the explanation entries suggest that
learners will invest time into such authoring if they value the purpose of the writing.     Though not presented here and
not  yet analyzed   at depth,   we also  saw  that learners   made   far  more    notes while  cooking   (using     the Recipe
Annotation tool), further suggesting that participants valued the authoring they were doing.

                                                              216                                                     CSCL 2007
         In analysis of what participants were motivated to write down, we see that learners were capable of doing
the type of reflection we think is necessary for later sharing. We also see that they needed help with consistently
linking the science they are learning to what they are doing and articulating that science. Learners told stories about
their experiences  -- adding  in observations,  personal   comments     and opinions, and  questions   about issues   they
wanted   to learn more   about. They  were  even   motivated to begin   devising experiments   to find answers  to  those
questions. While these results don't suggest that they had arrived at the point of recognizing relevance, they do
suggest that they were doing the reflecting necessary for a disposition toward scientific reasoning to develop.

         We want participants to use the science they are learning and recipes they've created at home with friends
and family. To use the science, they need to have recognized that they know it and have enough understanding to try
to use it. Our results show many learners identifying the science they were learning from the KSI activities and
using it in explanations they wrote. Most groups were able to write about the cause and effect of phenomena they
experienced, similar to what we have seen in the past. Our results exceeded past performance in the quality of the
science  included  in their writing and  the subsequent    connections   they made  between   their experience  and    the
science. These   results resemble the quality   of science talk we  observed    previously only   when a  facilitator was
engaging a group in conversation and helping them relate their experiences to the science behind it. We are happy to
find that artifacts of these conversations were recorded with the tools and that learners were engaging in this type of
reflection in their small groups without the presence of a facilitator.

         Between the two tools, we saw that learners had different goals (e.g., giving details about or describing
their experience, instructing, informing, and explaining) that seemed to affect their ability to connect the things they
were experiencing to the science behind it.   Our results also seem to show a relationship between the goals and the
prompts we provided. When the prompts built upon one another, the groups that had goals of telling the story of
their experience were able to use the prompts to weave a story together naturally (two groups out of four).      On the
other hand, the group that had the goal of instructing was able to see the value in what they had done but were not
motivated   to wonder  about  what  the prompts    were suggesting. This    may be due  to the fact  that thinking about
unanswered questions does not naturally follow the goal of giving advice to others. Davis (2003) reported that this is
one of the downfalls of using directed prompts, as some children have difficulty understanding what the prompts are
asking for and subsequently just choose not to respond or flounder in their answers. In this case, we think they had
problems with the prompts because they were writing something different than what the authoring tool they chose
was intended for.  We will need to identify the range of authoring tools that are needed and scaffolding that "flows"
for each. In the Explanatoids Tool, where prompting was more generic, we saw more varied goals and expressions
related to those goals, but not all entries were rich in science content.   This suggests that the tool allowed learners
the freedom to explain at a depth they were capable of and wanted to express. However, some groups might have
produced better explanations with more directed scaffolding.     We still need to better understand the tradeoffs and
tensions in designing more and less directed scaffolding. It is important that scaffolding doesn't seem like school by
making explanation-making seem onerous.      On the other hand, we want to give learners help in expressing scientific
connections as technically as they can.

Conclusion
         Authoring articles for an online magazine was a good motivator for getting children to stop, reflect, and
record. Why is this relevant to the CSCL community? In this KSI enactment, the computer played an important role
in eliciting productive group reflection beyond what we have seen in past KSI implementations. Our results suggest
that the kind of collaboration tools we provided helped participants ready themselves for productive interactions
within and outside the community of learners they were engaging with, an important prerequisite to developing
disposition. Analysis of the discussions learners were having within their small groups and as a learning community
would tell us more about the actual effects of the authoring tools we provided and the authoring purpose we chose.
Our next steps will include extending the software to include more support for interactions across and between
communities, better scaffolding for explanations, and additional authoring tools. Our next studies will look not only
at the  potential of  such  authoring tools  to promote    learning and   communication,   but  will also  follow   those
interactions to show us other needs in developing tools for connecting interdependent communities and the extent to
which such interactions are promoting productive science discussions and learning over time. Future studies will
also look at the extent to which learners find value in the science they are learning and the scientific reasoning they
are doing, and if learners are developing the dispositions we are targeting.     These studies will help us address our
fourth design question: How can we prepare participants for later conversations within and outside of the informal
learning environment?

                                                           217                                                 CSCL 2007
Endnotes
(1) For the purposes of this study, disposition toward scientific reasoning refers to taking initiative to connect evidence to claims
     and to connect mechanism to cause and effect relationships.    More generally, we think of disposition toward scientific
     reasoning as taking initiative to participate in the whole range of practices scientists tend to practice inside and outside of
     their labs ­  asking questions, wanting   to understand how  and  why  things work,  designing          and  running experiments,
     producing and using evidence, generating explanations, and so on.

(2) Text of learners' writing has been left unaltered, meaning no changes were made to spacing or grammar. However, where
     needed text was inserted in [ brackets] to clarify the point of the text to reflect its context.

References
Barab, S., & Duffy, T. (2000). From Practice Fields to Communities of Practice. In D. Jonassen, and S. Land (Eds.),
           Theoretical   Foundations    of Learning    Environments     (pp.   25-55). Mahwah,              NJ:   Lawrence  Erlbaum
           Associates.
Bereiter, C. (1995). A dispositional view of transfer. In A. McKeough, J. L. Lupart, & A. Marini (Eds.), Teaching
           for transfer: Fostering generalization in learning (pp. 21-34). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Blumenfeld,     P. C., Soloway,    E., Marx,   R. W., Krajcik,  J. S., Guzdial,  M.,   & Palincsar,            A. (1991). Motivating
           project-based learning: Sustaining the doing, supporting the learning. Educational Psychologist, 26, 369-
           398.
Brown, A. L., & Campione, J. C. (1990). Communities of learning and thinking, or a context by any other name.
           Human Development, 21, 108-125.
Clegg, T.,   Gardner,     C.,   Williams,  O.,  &   Kolodner,  J.  (2006).   Promoting   Learning              in Informal  Learning
           Environments.     In S. Barab,  K.   Hay,  & D.   Hickey    (Eds.), Proceedings             of  the Seventh International
           Conference of the Learning Sciences (pp. 92-98). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Collins, A., Brown, J. S., & Newman, S. E. (1989). Cognitive Apprenticeship: Teaching the Crafts of Reading,
           Writing, and Mathematics. In L. B. Resnick (Ed.), Knowing, Learning, and Instruction: Essays in Honor of
           Robert Glaser (pp. 453-494). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Crowley, K., & Jacobs, M. (2002).       Building Islands of Expertise in Everyday Family Activity. In G. Leinhardt, K.
           Crowley,    &  K.  Knutson   (Eds.),   Learning   Conversations   in Museums               (pp. 333­356).   Mahwah,  NJ:
           Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Davis, E. A. (2003). Prompting Middle School Science Students for Productive Reflection: Generic and Directed
           Prompts. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 12, 91-142.
Gardner, C. M., Clegg, T. L., Williams, O. L.,        & Kolodner, J. L. (2006).     Messy Learning Environments: Busy
           Hands and Less Engaged Minds. In S. Barab, K. Hay, & D. Hickey (Eds.), Proceedings of the Seventh
           International  Conference    of the    Learning   Sciences  (pp.  926-927).  Mahwah,             NJ:   Lawrence  Erlbaum
           Associates.
Lave,  J., & Wenger,      E. (1991).   Situated Learning:  Legitimate   Peripheral  Participation.           New   York:  Cambridge
           University Press.
McNeill, K. L., Lizotte, D.J., Krajcik, J., & Marx, R. W. (2006). Supporting Students' Construction of Scienific
           Explanations by Fading Scaffolds in Instructional Materials. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 15, 152-
           191.
Owensby, J. N., & Kolodner, J. L.      (2004). Case Application Suite: Scaffolding use of expert cases in middle-school
           project-based inquiry classrooms. In Y. Kafai, W. Sandoval, N. Enyedy, A. Nixon, & F. Herrera (Eds.),
           Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference of the Learning Sciences (pp. 310-317). Mahwah, NJ:
           Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Papert, S. (1991). Situating constructionism. In I. Harel & S. Papert (Eds.), Constructionism: Research reports and
           essays, 1985-1990 (pp. 1-11). Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Scardamalia,    M., & Bereiter, C., (1991). Higher Level of Agency for Children in Knowledge Building: A Challenge
           for the Design of New Knowledge Media. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 1, 37-68.

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Tamara L. Clegg and Alex Rudnick for their work on the software; CEISMC for their help
organizing the summer camp; the teachers who volunteered as KSI facilitators; and reviewers, including Brad Jones,
for their feedback and suggestions. This work was partially supported by an NSF grant granted to the second author.

                                                              218                                                            CSCL 2007
