                       Fostering Peer Collaboration with Technology

Introduction
          In this symposium we address recent developments in learning environments, including logging,
data mining, authoring, and collaboration tools that have opened new doors for research. In           particular we
present projects that afford logging students' data in a very fine-grained way and data mining techniques to
characterize students'  learning beyond    their  mouse  clicks. These   systems   have   enhanced   our ability to
support students in collaboration while learning and well as track students' collaboration. Gobert's paper
will discuss a collaborative learning study focused on collaborative model-building and peer critique which
used the WISE infrastructure. Slotta's paper will present a new generation of a technological infrastructure,
SAIL, which is based on WISE and logging from the Concord Consortium.              The paper by Clarke and Dede
will focus on data mining of rich data while students used the River City MUVE Environment.              The paper
by Gijlers   et al will address  the  interaction between   the  tools used    for inquiry and  students'  inquiry
processes.   Lastly, the paper by Koedinger will present methodologies, etc., developed by the Pittsburgh
Science of Learning Center (PSLC) which support data collection and analysis in order to contribute to
what we know about "robust learning".

          Many   of the papers   will  focus on  data mining   since  it offers  a potentially  powerful   analytic
framework for many educational interventions that generate rich data sets and data-streams about student
learning. For   example,  text mining   analytics could  aid  in identifying   patterns in  the explanations   and
critiques of the two thousand students engaged in WISE model-based activities described in Gobert et al.
Gijlers et al could conduct similar analyses on the text generated by their chat tool, looking for patterns
related to argumentation, collaborative reasoning, and elaboration. The SAIL scalable architecture Slotta
describes could provide a common framework for structuring the databases on which various researchers
conduct data mining. The PSLC LearnLab testbed illustrates the type of venue that could generate the large
amounts of data and substantial numbers of students for which data mining is particularly powerful and
appropriate. In  recognition  of this, research  using data  mining   is already   taking place   in the intelligent
tutoring systems community.

          Collectively, these  projects represent  advances   to this  area of   research  offering  the following
affordances: (1) data collection, such that they afford accurate capture of students' actions; (2) authoring
and customization, which enables researchers to develop, and teachers to tailor curriculum materials that
target research questions or student populations; (3) tracking, which allows materials and assessments to be
accurately managed, versioned, etc.; (4) integration, which enables materials to be seamlessly incorporated
into instruction;   (5) reach,   which    enables  researchers   to  conduct    studies anywhere,     collect  data
automatically, and easily make updates to materials for any school worldwide; and 6) open source, namely,
that since many of these technologies are interoperable and open-source, dynamic development and rapid
evolution are possible.

          In this one and a half hour symposium, there will be a short introduction to the session followed
by a presentation   of  each project.  Dr. Dan   Suthers will then  serve   as a   discussant for the session. Dr.
Suthers is presently Associate Professor in the department of Information and Computer Sciences at the
University of Hawai`i at Manoa, where he directs the Laboratory for Interactive Learning Technologies
(http://lilt.ics.hawaii.edu) and co-directs Hawai`i Networked Learning Communities (http://hnlc.org). His
research  is generally  concerned    with  technology-supported     collaborative  learning   and online  learning
communities, with applications to K-12, university and professional development contexts, making him an
ideal discussant for this symposium. Dr. Suthers obtained his M.S. (1988) and Ph.D. (1993) degrees in
Computer Science from the University of Massachusetts. Subsequently he worked at the Learning Research
and Development Center of the University of Pittsburgh before coming to the University of Hawai`i.

                                                        21                                                    CSCL 2007
Fostering collaborative model-building and peer critique on-line

Janice Gobert
The Concord Consortium, Concord, MA
         Model-based   teaching   and  learning   (Gobert   &    Buckley    2000)  is  an effective   cognitive  and
pedagogical framework for scaffolding students' understanding of complex science domains such that the
various  components   of  the domain,  i.e.,  the spatial, causal,  and   temporal    features can  be  successfully
integrated into rich mental models (Gobert, 2000). Peer collaboration has also been found to be a successful
strategy for deepening   and  promoting   students'  knowledge      building   in many    different disciplines  (cf.
Scardamalia & Bereiter, 1994; Gobert & Pallant, 2004). In this project, these two powerful pedagogical
approaches are combined, namely model-building, and peer collaboration, in order to evaluate the efficacy
for students' learning and characterize the affordances of this rich form of peer collaboration.

         Two  thousand    middle  and   high   school  students     from    demographically     diverse  schools  in
California and Massachusetts collaborated on-line about plate tectonic activity in their respective location
using WISE, Web-based Inquiry Science Environment (Linn, 1998). The curriculum engaged students in
many  inquiry-oriented,  model-based   activities  which   relied   heavily on   peer  collaboration.  For  example,
students were scaffolded  in  WISE   as they:  a)  drew    initial models   of plate  tectonic phenomena     in their
respective  area using   WISE;    b) wrote    explanations    of   their models   and    shared their   models   and
explanations with students on the opposite coast (east vs. west); c) were scaffolded to critique their peers'
models; d) revised their models based on this feedback; e) questioned their peers about plate tectonics on
the opposite coast, and f) discussed the differences between E and W coast geology in an on-line forum.
Previous analyses on this project have focussed on measuring content gains and epistemological gains for
which significant gains for were found for both (Gobert & Pallant, 2004). Additionally, analyses of a small
subset of data illustrated the nature of model revisions which students made on the basis of their peers'
critique. For this presentation, a deeper analyses of the students' model revisions, peer critiques, and peer
questions will be presented in order to provide a context for undertstanding more deeply how peers can
influence knowledge building and model revision.

Supporting Collaborative Inquiry: New Architectures, New Opportunities

James Slotta
University of Toronto
         This paper will present recent progress in an open source technology framework that enables the
development, exchange and interoperability of richly interactive learning materials. Building on ten years
of success in the Web-based Inquiry Science Environment (WISE), but also responding to key limitations
in the WISE technology architecture, Slotta and his colleagues have created a new Scalable Architecture
for Interactive Learning (SAIL).  SAIL enables the design and development of java-based learning content,
with the goal of supporting an international open source exchange community. Departing from the server-
client architecture of WISE, inquiry curriculum is distributed as a peer-to-peer network of local hosts that
serve classrooms, schools and districts. Next-generation learning environments will be able to utilize the
full functionality of student computers, benefiting from the strength of locally hosted networks and peer-to-
peer functionality. Expanded functionality will emphasize Java-based modules that support a diversity of
user experiences, including   models   and   simulations   such     as those   developed  by   other cognitive   and
educational  researchers. For   example,   the    European CoLab       project   will be  integrated   into a   SAIL
framework,   allowing multi-user  CoLab      modules to    be supported    in  a scaffolded    learning environment
similar to WISE. SAIL will enable a greater range of user interfaces (e.g., immersive game- like interfaces,
menu driven interfaces, or distributed, hand- held interfaces) as well as a wealth of user functionality for
synchronous   design   spaces,  online communities      for   teachers    and    mentors,  or   language    learners
and multilingual communities.

         The  paper will  present an  overview of   SAIL,     then  discuss  its implications  for  (1) the delivery
of innovations to a broad audience, (2) the easy collection of user data (e.g., work done by students) for
purposes  of feedback  and assessment,    (3) the  promotion     of content   communities   (e.g.,  an  earth science
curriculum   community)    and (4)    the  support   of    an    open    source   developer     community     across

                                                        22                                                      CSCL 2007
numerous projects    that employ   the  SAIL   architecture, leading   to a  greater dynamic    evolution   of our
innovations, as well as interoperability across projects. Next, the paper will demonstrate a new wiki-based
community for the learning sciences called the Community for Open Resource Exchange (CORE) that is
currently supporting exchanges between numerous research labs.           Finally, an early phase project will be
demonstrated:   the  SAIL   Smart Space:   A  configurable  smart space   capable  of   being  shared as an   open
source research platform to enable studies of this important domain.         SAIL Smart Space allows for the
configuration   of micro  servers within   a  classroom, RFID    nodes,   and emphasizes    curricular  coherence
across the following dimensions:      physical space (i.e., within the 3 dimensions of the classroom, online,
offline, at home, and on field trips); time (i.e., coordinating curriculum at all points of time and across
numerous iterations); social context (i.e., supporting social groupings, jigsaws and exchanges); curricular
space (i.e., various levels of variables, conditions, stages or other curricular phases).   The paper will close
with  a discussion   of the implications   of open source   research  infrastructure  for  the learning  sciences,
particularly with respect to computer supported collaborative learning.

The River City MUVE

Jody Clarke, Chris Dede, Harvard University
         As described in the National Research Council report, Knowing What Students Know (Pellegrino,
Chudowsky    &   Glaser,  2001),  sophisticated  educational   media  now   enable the   collection of  very   rich
datastreams  about   individual  learners. For example,    the River  City  MUVE     has  a customized    `plug-in
server' that contains   a data-tracking  system.  The  data-tracking   system    allows us  to collect, store, and
retrieve information on the moment-by-moment movements, actions, and utterances of each student as they
explore the River City MUVE environment.          All items in the world that students can interact with have
been tagged with identification codes.     Every time a student clicks on a virtual object (picture, resident,
sign, map, etc) or speaks to either a resident or teammate, the record is stored in a table in a relational
database on the server. These data allow us to record the trajectory of each student as they work through the
curriculum   in the  form   of detailed log   files--something   that is not  possible  in  traditional classroom
practices. These log files provide extensive time-stamped records of where the students went in the world,
what virtual objects they clicked on, who they talked to, and what they said.

         We will share how we are using "data mining" techniques to make sense of our log file data and
also present preliminary findings.  "Data mining" is the process of selecting, exploring, and modeling large
amounts of data to uncover previously unknown patterns (Gayle, 2000).             The business world has been
using this approach to identify patterns and behaviors of customers successfully for years (Gayle, 2000;
Shaw, Subramaniam, Tan, Welge, 2001).         Analyzing these rich datastreams of student participation using
"data   mining"  can  potentially  yield   formative, diagnostic  feedback    (Feng   &   Heffernan,    2005)  and
summative assessment      (Hulshof, Wilhelm, Beishuizen, & Van Rijn, 2005) on student performance.          It may
also provide  insights  about  complex   patterns and  dynamics   of  student behavior   and   learning (Ketelhut,
Dede, Clarke, Nelson, & Bowman, in press) and collaborative problem solving and team learning processes
(Avouris,  Komis,    Margaritis, &  Fiotakis,  2004;  Linton,  Goodman,     Gaimari,    Zarrella, &   Ross, 2003;
Suthers & Hundhausen, 2003) that will be beneficial to the education community.

Interaction between tool and talk, how support for inquiry processes influences
peer communication

Hannie Gijlers1, Nadira Saab2, Wouter van Joolingen1 & Ton de Jong1
1 University of Twente
2 University of Amsterdam
         Various studies show that under specific conditions, collaboration can improve learning (Webb &
Farrivar, 1999). This improvement depends strongly on the nature of peer interaction during collaboration
(Webb,  Nemer,     & Zuniga,   2002). Elaborate   responses  and the  extent  to which  students   operate  on the

                                                        23                                                    CSCL 2007
contributions of their peers (level of transactivity) are associated with positive learning outcomes (Teasley,
1997; Webb et al., 2002). Recently, researchers have started to investigate the combination of collaborative
learning and inquiry learning and designed scaffolds to support the collaborative inquiry learning processes
(Bell, 2004; Gijlers & de Jong, 2005; Saab, Van Joolingen, & Van Hout-Wolters, 2005). Traditionally,
tools designed   to support  collaboration  aim   at supporting  the   communication   between    group  members.
However, guidance directed at the processes of inquiry, may indirectly influence group communication as
well as support student learning gains.

          The results presented in this study are based on a re-analysis of data from two research projects.
The main objective of the re-analysis is to examine the relation between nature and quality of students'
communicative processes and the characteristics of the different task related scaffolds. In both projects,
secondary  school   students  (approximately  16     years) worked,   in dyads,  with  a  simulation  environment
within a physics domain (collisions or one dimensional kinematics) and communicated through a chat tool.
Students' chat discussions as well as their inquiry learning activities were logged. During their interactions
with  the learning  environment   students  were  supported    through   one of the following  tools:  1) a shared
hypotheses scratchpad, that was designed to facilitate the collaborative construction of hypotheses, 2) a
shared hypothesis table, that confronted students with differences in their individual opinions about specific
propositions and 3) a concept mapping tool, that allowed students to collaboratively build a representation
of the relations  within  the  domain.  All  scaffolds focused     on  the process  of generating  and  discussing
hypotheses but differed on concrete vs. abstract and directive vs. restrictive dimensions.

          The  scheme   used  to code   students' chat communication       distinguishes different communicative
acts including various forms of argumentation, collaborative reasoning, and elaboration. Analysis of the
coded discourse focuses on the characteristics of the student chat discourse in relation to the similarities
and   differences between   the  scaffolds. The   results   of a preliminary    analyses  of students'  interaction
suggests  that the  characteristics  of the different  scaffolds   not only  affected  students'  inquiry learning
processes but also affected their communication and argumentation processes, more specially the level of
transactivity and consensus building process. For instance, it was found that the more restrictive tool (the
shared hypothesis table) resulted in less elaborate argumentation when compared to the more open tools, in
which learners build more on each others arguments. In the symposium the full results will be presented.

          The work by Gijlers, Saab, van Joolingen and de Jong is based on a re-analysis of log files of
students'  interactions   with   the learning  environment       (including  tools) as   well  as  students'  chat
communication.    The   re-analysis  focused  on  the  relation  between    the nature   and quality  of  students'
communicative processes and the characteristics of the inquiry learning environment students worked with.
The information extracted from the log files showed that the characteristics of different scaffolds aimed at
supporting  the   inquiry learning   process  also   influenced  collaborative   learning  process  and   students'
communication. The results provide valuable input for the development of learning materials that stimulate
collaborative reasoning and elaboration.

Technology Support for In Vivo Experiments on Collaboration and Metacognition

Ken Koedinger, Carnegie-Mellon University
          The Pittsburgh Science of Learning Center (PSLC) is a 5-year center, $25 million funded by the
US    National  Science   Foundation    (see  learnlab.org).    PSLC's     main goal   is to  advance     scientific
understanding of "robust learning", learning that transfers to novel situations, is retained for long periods,
and  accelerates  future  learning.  Toward  that  goal,  we   are creating  technological   resources that afford
learning research: - faster and easier authoring of advanced educational technologies, - intelligent tutoring
systems and on-line courses to run tightly-controlled experiments in classrooms, - technologies to collect
fine-grained longitudinal learning data, - data sets available to researchers, - machine learning techniques
for data mining.  PSLC supports researchers around the world in making use of these resources in scientific
investigations of robust learning. In particular, PSLC provides a means for researchers to run experiments
in the context of one of seven technology-enhanced courses in math, science, and language learning. These
full courses are in use in hundreds of high schools and numerous colleges and PSLC has arrangements with
a number of these sites that allow tightly-controlled studies to be performed in the live context of these

                                                         24                                                   CSCL 2007
courses, that is, as "in vivo learning experiments".    Current in vivo studies are exploring a wide range of
issues including    supporting  collaboration  within   and   around intelligent tutoring systems,  supporting
metacognition, learning from observation, forms of self-explanation. This talk will summarize results from
some of these studies including evidence that collaboration scripting improves learning in the context of the
Algebra Cognitive Tutor.

References

Avouris N., Komis, V., Margaritis, M., & Fiotakis, G. (2004) An environment for studying collaborative
       learning activities, Journal of Technology & Society, 7 (2), pp. 34-41.
Bell,  P. (2004).   Promoting   students' argument     construction  and  collaborative debate  in the   science
          classroom. In M. Linn, E. A. Davis & P. Bell (Eds.), Internet environments for science education
          (pp. 115-143). Mahwah (NJ): Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Feng,  M.,    & Heffernan,   N.T.  (2005).  Informing   teachers   live about student   learning: Reporting in
       assistment   system.  Proceedings   of  AI-ED    workshop    1:  Usage  analysis   in learning  systems.
       Amsterdam, 18-22 July.
Gayle, S. (2000). SAS white paper: Data mining in the insurance industry. Raleigh, NC: SAS, Inc.
Gijlers,  H., &  de  Jong,  T. (2005). The    relation between  prior   knowledge  and  students'  collaborative
          discovery learning processes. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 42, 264-282.
Gobert, J. (2000). A typology of models for plate tectonics: Inferential power and barriers to understanding.
          International Journal of Science Education, 22(9), 937-977.
Gobert, J. & Buckley, B. (2000). Special issue editorial: Introduction to model-based teaching and learning.
          International Journal of Science Education, 22(9), 891-894.
Gobert, J.D., Pallant, A., (2004).  Fostering students' epistemologies of models via authentic model-based
          tasks. Journal of Science Education and Technology. Vol 13(1), 7-22.
Hulshof, C. D., Wilhelm, P., Beishuizen, J. J., & Van Rijn, H. (2005). FILE: A tool for the study of inquiry
       learning. Computers in Human Behavior, 21, 945-956.
Ketelhut, D., Dede, C., Clarke, J., Nelson, B., & Bowman, C. (in press). Studying situated learning in a
       multi-user   virtual environment.   In E. Baker,    J. Dickinson,   W. Wulfeck,    &  H.   O'Neil (Eds),
       Assessment of Problem Solving Using Simulations. Erlbaum.
Linton, F., Goodman, B., Gaimari, R., Zarrella, J., & Ross, H. (2003). Student modeling for an intelligent
       agent in a collaborative learning environment. In Proceedings of the International Conference on
       User Modeling, Johnstown, PA.
Pellegrino, J. W., Chudowsky, N., & Glaser, R. (Eds.). (2001). Knowing what students know: The science
       and design of educational assessment. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
Saab, N., Van Joolingen, W. R., & Van Hout-Wolters, B. H. A. M. (2005). Communication in collaborative
          discovery learning. Britisch Journal of Educational Psychology, 75, 603-621.
Scardamalia,    M., &  Bereiter, C. (1994).   Computer     support  for knowledge-building   communities.  The
       Journal of the Learning Sciences, 3(3), 265-283.
Shaw, M. J., Subramaniam, C., Tan, G. W., and Welge, M. E. (2001). Knowledge management and data
       mining for marketing. Decision Support Systems, 31, 127-137.
Suthers, D., & Hundhausen, C. (2003). An empirical study of the effects of representational guidance on
       collaborative learning. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 12(2), 183-219.
Teasley, S. D. (1997). Talking about reasoning: How important is the peer in peer collaboration? In L. B.
          Resnick, R. Säljö, C. Pontecorvo & B. Burge (Eds.), Discourse, tools and reasoning: Essays on
          situated cognition (pp. 364-384). New York: Springer.
Webb, N. M., Nemer, K. M., & Zuniga, S. (2002). Short circuits or superconductors? Effects of group
          composition  on   high-achieving students'   science performance.   American   Educational  Research
          Journal, 39, 943-989.

                                                        25                                                 CSCL 2007
