  Intuitive moderation styles and beliefs of teachers in CSCL-based
                                                argumentation
         Julia Gil, Baruch B. Schwarz, and Christa S. C. Asterhan, the Hebrew University, Jerusalem, Israel
                    Email: ju17@walla.co.il, msschwar@mscc.huji.ac.il, kooij@mscc.huji.ac.il

         Abstract: CSCL learning environments provide new contexts for discussions and are thought to
         provide new opportunities for learning. At the same time, such environments often do not provide
         guidance on how to act during the discussion. The purpose of this paper is to initiate research on
         moderation in synchronous discussions in a CSCL environment. The first study contrasts teachers'
         beliefs on good discussions and good moderation pertaining to face-to-face discussions with those
         pertaining to  synchronous,    CSCL-mediated      discussions.  The   second   study  focuses on  the
         strategies teachers intuitively enact in synchronous discussions.

The challenge of moderation in CSCL-based argumentation
         Learning processes in classrooms are influenced by the quality of discussions in which the teacher engages
with the students, and particularly the teacher's moderation practices (Mercer, 1995; Chi, Siler, Jeong, Yamauchi &
Hausmann, 2001; Wegerif, 1996; Atzmon, Hershkowitz & Schwarz, 2006). Oral discussions are generally teacher-
centered. The teacher raises questions, directs answers, stresses important issues, selects speakers, summarizes and
presents new points into the conversation. CMC tools such as CSCL learning environments provide new contexts for
discussions and are thought to provide new opportunities for learning: they enable learners to follow the developing
interactions among others, to mutually examine the extent and nature of their own involvement in the process, and at
the same time and to create awareness of the processes of self-thinking (Lave, 1991). At the same time, such
environments rarely provide guidance or direction concerning how to act during the discussion (Soller, 2001).

         Types of discussions in classrooms are varied. Among these types, collective argumentation is particularly
important for learning purposes. The object of argumentation, the elaboration of arguments, has been recognized as
central in knowledge acquisition (Driver, Newton, & Osborne, 2000; Schwarz, Neuman, Gil & Ilya, 2003; Zohar &
Nemet, 2002), and epistemological understanding of knowledge construction (Duschl & Osborne, 2002; Erduran,
Osborne, Simon,  2004;   Sandoval   &   Reiser, 2004).  However,   several   researchers have  pointed at the  difficulty
teachers have at mediating collective argumentation. They need to continuously evaluate students' knowledge and to
enact argumentative moves timely and adequately in order to promote understanding: asking for new perspectives,
pointing at contradictions, inviting   to participate, inviting to  give  explanations,  etc. (Yackel, 2002;   Schwarz,
Dreyfus, Hershkowitz, & Hadas, 2004).

         The  complexity in  sustaining   argumentation  has   led scientists to elaborate  CSCL   tools for supporting
collective argumentation in peer interaction. These tools (also called CSCA tools) have to be differentiated from
knowledge representation tools (Bell, 1997; Van Bruggen, Kirschner, Jochems, 2002), since they support collective
argumentation by affording argumentative moves to be taken by various speakers through discussion. The Digalo
environment   (Glassner  &  Schwarz,   2005)  presents  an   approach that   integrates these two  models  of  fostering
argumentation: the   model   emphasizing    "knowledge     representation",   or "argument    representation", and   the
supportive model in the argumentative process. Using this tool synchronously enables textual multiple-talk through
which each of the subjects adds messages through mediation of graphical icons representing categories in collective
argumentation and in argument construction (these categories are called the ontology of the environment). The
underlying assumptions of the designers of this tool were that visual ongoing representation of the discussion can
help students to reflect upon    their argumentative   steps and   their components,    and that discussants  will enact
practices of productive discussion (Glassner & Schwarz, 2005). And indeed, synchronized communication amongst
subjects, mediated by ontologies characterizing collective argumentation (such as 'claim', 'argument', 'explanation',
'comment', 'question') as well as relational categories (such as 'support', 'opposition' or 'reference'), appeared to be
productive (Glassner & Schwarz, 2005). In other words, adequate ontologies may have a mediating effect in the
sense that when learners use the tools, they take more into consideration crucial features of collective argumentation,
among them the reference to others as well as criticism and justification. The persistence of the argumentative map
suggests the  clear articulation of opinions,   inspection of  the map    to  decide whether  the contribution  is new,

                                                           219                                                 CSCL 2007
reflection to  evaluate  understanding    of previous moves,    and to  possibly request  additional  explanations,   etc.
However, these suggestions have been empirically corroborated without considering the role of human moderation,
a role that was recognized as crucial in the long run (Shahar, 2003; Hakkarainen, Lipponen, & Järvelä, in press).      It
is then imperious to focus on the role of human moderators in helping students while discussing with CSCL tools.

          To begin with in this endeavor, we use the general term 'moderation' to designate any kind of support given
by a human to help at reaching the goal of the e-discussion. Researchers used different terms such as 'scaffolding', or
'mediating' to delineate teaching actions aimed at supporting construction of knowledge. Since we adopt a bottom-up
approach, we will use 'moderation' as a general term but we will preserve terms used by researchers      Three types of
mediations have been identified in CSCL literature for either synchronous or a-synchronous interactions (Ashton,
Roberts, & Teles, 1999): pedagogical scaffolding; social scaffolding; and technological scaffolding. Pedagogical
scaffolding refers to moves aimed at achieving predetermined learning goals in order to help the learner complete
his/her   assigned task (Mercer,   1995;  Muukkonen,    Hakkarainen    &  Lakkala,  1999; Wegerif,    1996). It includes
positive  reactions, instructions, providing  information  and   opinions, advising, pointing  out   preferences, raising
questions, and a summary of students' remarks concerning external sources. Various researchers adopted different
strategies. For example, Chi and colleagues (Chi et al., 2001) proposed an approach according to which interaction
between    teacher and  student can    be planned  by   asking  generic  questions, such  as: "Can   you explain...",  or
"Articulate it with your own words", "What are you thinking about the issue?", "Could you add anything about the
subject?" (See also Baker and Lund, 1997, for a similar approach that yielded positive outcomes). While Wegerif
(1996) proposes a similar approach with scaffoldings in the form of questions such as: "What are you thinking?",
and "Why are you thinking that way?", his perspective is less cognitive than ethical and dialogical since he is eager
to instill ethical norms of argumentation rather than to instigate dialectical processes. Social scaffolding refers to
support based on empathy, humor, and personal assistance. Technical scaffolding includes technical support with the
software   and interface  for students    working in  a CSCL     environment.  These  and  other  kinds  of  distinctions
concerning kinds of moderation were done either theoretically or by observing teaching practices. In this paper, we
adopt   a bottom-up   approach  as  we  both   consider both   beliefs and practices of  teachers in  a  specific case ­
synchronous e-discussions, so as to distinguish between kinds of moderation in that case.

          The nature of human moderation in synchronous e-discussions and its influence on the quality of such
discussions are open questions. These questions are relevant to ARGUNAUT (IST-2005027728 ­ partially funded
by the  EC  under   the 6th  Framework    Program, http://www.argunaut.org),   a project  aimed   at providing  tools for
supporting the moderation of synchronous e-discussions. The present paper represents an initial step in this program.
First of all, we need to learn about teacher beliefs and practices concerning moderation of synchronous discussions.
The first  study   contrasts teachers' beliefs concerning  good    discussions and   good  moderation    in  face-to-face
discussions and in synchronous, CSCL-mediated discussions. The second study focuses on the actual strategies
teachers intuitively enact in synchronous discussions. In the two studies, the populations were different. This was
due to difficulties in recruiting and training teachers to be moderators in synchronous discussions. The results of the
two studies suggest the elaboration of suitable awareness tools to help teachers in mediating CSCL discussions.

The Research questions
    1.    How do teachers characterize and describe what constitutes a good discussion in oral classroom settings, as
          opposed to discussions in CSCL-based argumentation?
    2.    How do teachers characterize and describe what constitutes good moderation of oral classroom discussions,
          as opposed to moderation of discussions in CSCL-based argumentation?
    3.    How do teachers actually moderate synchronous, collective argumentation?

Study 1: Teachers beliefs about good discussions and moderation of discussions

Participants
          The questions were investigated in the framework of an in-service teachers program aimed at promoting
dialogic thinking in classrooms. Ten teachers from two different high-schools participated in the study: seven (six
women and one man) from the first school and three (two women and one man) from the second.

                                                            220                                                 CSCL 2007
Procedure
       Two questionnaires were administered, one before and one after teachers designed a Digalo-based learning
activity and implemented this in their classroom. Before the implementation teachers were asked to answer the
following questions: "What is in your view a good classroom discussion?" and "What is in your view a good
moderation  of classroom  discussions?" Following   the classroom     implementation, they answered  two additional
questions, namely: "What is a good Digalo discussion?" and "What is good moderation of Digalo discussions?" The
ten teachers from the two schools answered the first questionnaire. Due to technical problems, only the seven
teachers from the first school answered the second questionnaire.

Table 1. Relative frequency (in %) of different teacher response categories to the question:
"What is a good discussion in classroom/Digalo?"

                                                                                 Classroom   Digalo
                                        Category                                 Discussion Discussion
                                                                                  (n=10)      (n=7)

                                 Participation                                     40%          57%

              Social dimension   Collaboration                                     0%           28%
                                 Interaction                                       40%          57%

                                 Attention / listening                             60%          0%

                                 Mannered verbal content                           50%          14%

                                 Mannered turn-taking                              50%          0%
              Ground rules for   Preventing domination of specificdiscussionpupils 20%          0%

                                 Quiet atmosphere                                  0%           14%

                                 Preventing  students' "flight" (e.g.surfing internet)0%        14%
                                 Task-focus and relevancy                          60%          0%

                                 Relevancy to the topic                            30%          0%

                                 Construction of knowledge                         60%          0%
                                 Valid of Argument                                 60%          28%
              Cognitive          No repetition                                     10%          0%
              dimension
                                 Students' interest                                0%           14%
                                 Deep discussion (not superficial)                 0%           14%

                                 Clear map structure -  organization  of nodes     0%           57%
                                 Clear map structure - coherent ontology           0%           57%

       Table   1 demonstrates  the differences in  teacher beliefs concerning  qualitative oral versus Digalo-based
collective argumentation on the  cognitive dimension:   Most    of the  teachers mentioned  that  a good classroom
discussion is focused on task and relevant to the topic proposed, leads to the construction of knowledge and is
characterized by valid arguments. They did not indicate, however, these categories for a good Digalo discussion,

                                                         221                                                CSCL 2007
except for the validity of the argument. On the other hand, teachers described good Digalo discussions as those in
which students' interest is high, in which the maps that students created during the discussion seemed well organized
and in which students made adequate use of the ontology proposed.

Table 2. Relative frequency (in %) of teacher response categories to the question: "What is
good scaffolding/moderation in classroom/Digalo discussions?"

                                                                     Classroom           Digalo
                                    Category                         Discussion        Discussion
                                                                      (n=10)               (n=7)
                                Participation                           20%                43%
                                Discourse norms                         100%               71%
                     Social                                             30%
                 dimension      Interaction                                                14%

                                Eliciting more perspectives             20%                57%
                                Focus                                   70%                28%
                                Organization / constructionof knowledge 60%                43%
                                Posing challenges to students           30%                43%
                 Cognitive      Increasing interest                     20%                28%
                 dimension
                                Asking for clarification                 0%                43%
                                Digital mediation of teacher         irrelevant            43%
                                Correct use of ontology              irrelevant            14%
                                Technological aspects                irrelevant            57%
                                Learning design                          0%                14%

         Table 2     shows that for oral and    Digalo discussions,  good moderation   means  primarily mediation   for
participation, for adequate discourse norms and for interaction. Fulfilling norms of discourse was less important for
digital discussions,  though. In general,   the criteria for quality of moderation  in the two   media were quite   big.
Concerning the cognitive dimensions, 'focus' which was so central in oral discussions was far less important in
digital ones. Interestingly, a very different aspect, somehow orthogonal to 'focus', 'eliciting more perspectives' was
considered as a good moderating action. Teachers also mentioned 'asking for clarifications' as central for digital
discussions whereas    this action  was  not  mentioned    as reflecting quality of mediation  in oral  discussion. Of
course, 'technological aspects' did not appear for the oral discussion. These two categories did not appear in the
teachers' answers when evaluating the moderation of oral discussions in classrooms.

         In addition to written responses, teachers sometimes clarified what they meant. Many teachers stressed the
importance of prerequisites for the success of any Digalo-based learning activity. They stressed the importance of
investing a lot of effort and thought in (a) becoming well acquainted with the tool, (b) preparing and designing the
sequence of activities, and (c) organizing social settings (e.g., assigning students to small groups based on their
learning abilities).

Study 2: How teachers intuitively moderate Digalo discussions

Participants
         Twenty MA students at the Hebrew university participated. The study was conducted in the framework of a
course on the role of the teacher in technological classrooms. The course was delivered at the School of Education.
About 90% of the students were in-service teachers.

                                                             222                                               CSCL 2007
Procedure
         The          course consisted             of 14        meetings.     Although     the course   describes                         the various roles          of  teachers  in
planning activities         (including            designing          activities   with the  help of  flexible  technological                        tools)          and  the role  of
technologies in evaluating learning and teaching processes in general, it focused more on e-discussions and the role
of the teacher before, during, and after the discussion. The course included the following themes: (a) the role of the
teacher in planning, orchestrating, and evaluating lessons; (b) general overview of possible roles of technologies in
supporting          such teachers'           endeavors;             (c) types of  classroom     dialogues and    strategies                      for  sustaining          them;   (d)
familiarization         with the            Digalo    tool          for e-discussions;   (e)  extracting  arguments                           from a  text          that  presents a
controversial         issue in         a    Digalo  map;            (f) discussing  the  same   issue   with   the Digalo                       tool  in           small groups;  (g)
evaluation  of        [e-]discussions:             ground           rules, indicators; (h)  scripts for discussions,                          participation         in e-discussions
according to agreed ground rules, evaluation of such e-discussions; (i) the role of the teacher in designing [e-]
discussion activities; (j) the mediating role of the teacher in [e-]discussions, especially for constructing knowledge;
(k) experiencing moderation in Digalo e-discussions and evaluation of the moderation. At the end of the course, the
students were randomly assigned into 5 groups (4 students in each group). In each of the groups, one of the students
was randomly assigned the moderator's role. The only explanation these moderators received was that they should
moderate (run/manage) the discussion according to their own views and/or school experiences. The task the groups
discussed revolved around an educational dilemma ­ whether to give a prize to a student whose achievements are
very high, but who shows disdain for his peers and demonstrates anti-social behavior. The participants in each group
(excluding          the moderators)              were asked          to    choose a role   to play: being    a school                         principal, a         class teacher,  or
educational advisor. Each person had to represent the role he/she chose. We should note that although subjects
underwent a 28 hours long course, the strategies the students enacted in moderating e-discussions could still be
considered intuitive since they only experienced moderation once before.

Results
         The discussions yielded 5 Digalo maps that represented the products of the 5 discussion groups. Figure 1
displays two          of these         maps.       Every       shape       represents  a   contribution that   a participant                       created           throughout   the
discussion.         The  links         between      the       shapes       shows  the  rhetoric relationship   between                         the contributions           (support,
opposition, [neutral] reference). The darkened shapes represent the contributions of the moderator.

                            Map A                                           Initiation                    Map B

                                     1                                                                                                  1

                    6                4

                                                                                                                                                                23
                 16                      24                20

                                              30                 36

                                                                                  End - solution

                                            Figure 1: Two Digalo maps built by two different groups

         The maps in Figure 1 show two very different types of discussions. In map B, the moderator intervened
only at the end of the discussion when the group had to decide on the solution to the problem. In map A the
moderator intervened nine times during the discussion. However, although the moderator linked his contribution to
the participants, on six occasions no one reacted. So as to identify different moderation practices, we conducted both
qualitative and quantitative analyses. In the first stage, we analyzed and characterized the content of the moderator
contributions and identified five different moderation styles. We then turned to a quantitative analysis of a number

                                                                                       223                                                                                 CSCL 2007
of discussion-map features and examined whether these confirm the different moderation styles identified earlier.
We will present the results according to this order:

Content analysis of moderator contributions
         Interestingly, the content analysis revealed that each of the five discussion groups was characterized by a
distinctively different moderation style:

         In group 1 (map A in Figure 1),        the moderator encouraged discussants to start the discussion, drew their
attention towards the proper choice of ontology, commented on the need to arrange graphical moves on the screen to
prevent  their  overlapping    each other,  and  directed  the 'school  principal' to a question   referring to  her. Typical
moderator's interventions were "Girls, what's up. You should express your opinion" and ³'The principal, a question was
asked, please   answer it".  Six out of the nine moderation moves in the first group were identified as aiming to
encourage the group members to act.         We termed such a moderation move as organizing moderation. As it was
predominant in group 1, we identified the moderation style as an organizing style.

         In group 2, six out of the nine mediation moves concerned what we could identify as 'guiding':                     The
moderator presented directive questions and asked for clarifications. For example, the moderator wrote "I'm sure that
your idea is interesting, but can you explain and sharpen your argument more" or "In your opinion, is it enough that Shai excels
in learning? What about social value and social relationships?"    We referred to this kind of moderation move guiding
moderation. As it was predominant in group 2, we identified the moderation style as a guiding style.

         The    moderator   in  group 3 was   not active   during  the  discussion  (as shown   in  map  B   in Fig.  1).   His
moderation consisted of presenting the issue to be discussed and the conclusion reached by the group. At the end of
the discussion he only summarized the group decision concerning the educational dilemma: "The group decision is to
not allow the award of excellence to Shai". We refer to this kind of (absence of) moderation an observing style.

         Six  out of the nine moves in   group 4  interfered with the flow of collective argumentation.       The moderator
spelled out his opinion, involved himself as an equal-status participant, to be involved as another discussant. For
example he wrote "It's not true«. Have you forgotten all the problems he caused« or "I am not willing to let him (Shai) stay in
school «". We named this moderation move as involved and since this move was predominant, we define the style
of the moderation as involved moderation.

         In group 5, all four mediation moves were of an assertive or authoritative type.           However, the moderator
did not interfere throughout the discussion.     He allowed the members to present their views, yet toward the end of
the discussion he used his authority in order to 'impose' his solution. He wrote at the end of the discussion "I think
that the teachers should propose a list of recommended children for getting the award , and we will vote for appropriate students
from the list".  We termed this kind of moderation move an authoritative move. Since all moderation moves              in this
map were of this kind, we identified here an authoritative style of moderation.

         Of course, the five styles we discerned do not represent the full range of moderation styles. One could
easily imagine   combinations    between    the  styles we  identified. Additional    studies are  needed  to   identify  more
moderation styles. However, the information we collected so far not only indicates first directions for research on
moderation styles but also on the extent to which such styles are desirable and on how moderators function when
adopting them. We analyzed the discussion maps on the following moderation-relevant features: (a) the types of
ontology shapes the moderators used; (b) the types of links used; (c) the number of moderator interventions in the
Digalo   discussion;   (d)  the distribution  of these   interventions  throughout    the discussion; and    (e) discussants'
responsiveness to moderator interventions. The combined results of these analyses are presented in Table 3, which
displays the five aforementioned features of discussion maps for the five discussion groups.

Type of moderator shapes
         Table 3 shows a crucial feature of moderation and of the maps in general, namely that the five moderators
used   different argumentative    moves     from  the   argumentative   ontology   proposed,   and  this  use   reflects  their
moderation style: For group 1, the organizing style of moderation was embodied in 'comment' and 'question' shapes,
the style they adopted; in group 2, the guiding style was embodied in 'comment', 'question', and 'argument shapes;
for group  3,   the observing   style was   embodied    in one  'question' and one    'explanation' shape;   in  group   4, the
predominance of 'argument' and 'claim' shapes reflects well the involved style of moderation; only in group 5, the

                                                               224                                                   CSCL 2007
use of 'idea' and 'question' shapes do not allude directly to an authoritative style of moderation. However, it is clear
that the moderator chooses the shapes according to deliberate decisions. This choice expresses that the subjects
participated in a course in which they learned to express themselves in e-discussions in terms of a given ontology.
The analyses we conduct concern only students for which the use of the ontology has become fluent to some extent,
since they participated in a preparatory phase in which they learned to use the tool and the ontology in e-discussions.

Table 3. Features of the discussion maps by moderation style

                                      Moderation style
                                          Group 1        Group 2         Group   3      Group 4         Group 5
                                       Organizing        Guiding         Observing      Involved        Authoritative
Number of contributions createdby moderator 9                  9               2               9              4
% of total map contributionscreated by moderator33          26                 9           30                16
Distribution of moderator
interventions (%)
   Beginning                                44              33                50           11                25
   Middle                                   44              22                 0           67                 0
   End                                      12              45                50           22                75
Moderator contributions in terms
of shape-ontology (%)
   Claim                                    0                  0               0           23                 0
   Information                              0                  8               0           10                 0
   Argument                                 0               23                 0           43                25
   Comment                                  45              23                 0               0              0
   Question                                 45              46                50           13                25
   Idea                                     10                 0               0               0             50
   Explanation                              0                  0              50           10                 0
% of total map links created bymoderator    29              15                24           21                14
Links created by moderator (%)
   Neutral                                  88              55                50           50                100
   Supportive                               0               12                 0           16                 0
   Oppositional                             12              33                50           34                 0
% of moderator contributionsdiscussants responded to33      44                50           55                100

Types of moderator links
        The types of links used by the moderator were not uniform across groups (see Table 3), although most of
them were neutral. This finding is not surprising for organizing and guiding styles of moderation. In these cases, the
moderator   does not  express    personal  beliefs concerning    the  issue under  discussion. For  the   involved and
authoritative styles of moderation, the use of neutral links was more surprising. This seems to suggest that the choice
of link type is demanding as it necessitates understanding discussants' contributions in context, and moderators
prefer to use a neutral choice.

Relative contribution of the moderator
        Another interesting finding in Table 3 concerns the relative contribution of the moderator. Contrarily to
classroom discussions held face-to-face, in which teachers are usually very active (Mercer, 1995), it appears that
most of the contributions are made by the discussants and not by the moderator/teacher. Here also the frequency in
the moderator's contributions reflects the style adopted: For the observing style, it is of course very low, and for the
organizing, guiding, and involved style of moderation, it is higher but does not reach more than a third of the overall
contributions. This suggests that the students are actively engaged in collective argumentation. For reasons of space
limitation, we cannot show      here that they are debating    ideas and problems  amongst each    other, challenge or

                                                           225                                                CSCL 2007
elaborate each  other's ideas,  and share    `social' experiences  which   are  not directly related to  the  task. The
interventions of the moderator are then naturally scarcer.

Distribution of moderator interventions along e-discussions
         Table 3 shows another interesting feature of e-moderation: We adopted a timeline approach (de Laat, &
Lally, 2003) to observe    the  distribution of moderation   along  the  e-discussion. Table 3  nicely  shows  that this
distribution is very different for each of the moderation styles: In the middle phase of the discussion, the 'observing'
and 'authoritative' did not interact with the participants. On the other hand, the 'organizing' moderator was active in
this part of the discussion. The guiding moderator was active as well. For both of them, moderation was an on-going
process. Beyond the trivial findings that this perspective opens, it appears that easily computable data such as the
distribution of moderation over time can give appropriate information which is compatible with information drawn
from direct content analysis of interventions.

Responsiveness of discussants to moderation
         The last perspective to which we refer here concerns the responsiveness of discussants to the moderators'
interventions. Table 3 shows that for the organizing style of moderation, most of the moderator's contributions
remained unanswered. At turn 4, the moderator wrote "Girls, what is happening«start to sound out your attitudes".
In this move, the moderator encouraged the group toward action, but no place was left for further interaction with
the group. At turn 13, the moderator wrote "Girls, try to make your shapes smaller, so we can read your message
easier". This kind of moderating action is aimed at drawing the group's attention to handier visual organization of
the map.  In this case too, no room is left for further interaction between the moderator and the participants. At turn
16, the moderator wrote "The principal, a question was asked, please answer it". . . Here the moderator directs the
school's principal (a role played by one of the participants) to the question she was asked, asking her to address it.
Here as well, there is no place for continued interaction. In this discussion, in one instance only, did the moderator
ask for an argument following an argumentation: At turn 3, a student wrote "In my opinion, Shai does not deserve
the title of ³Excellent Student". The moderator asked her subsequently "Could you give the reason for that?" After
the student gave her explanation, no further interactions developed. In summary, in the case of this e-discussion, the
lack of responsiveness of the discussants is natural since the organizing style of moderation is inherently directed at
helping without interfering.

         In group 2 which was characterized by a style of guiding moderation, nine guidance moves were enacted
by the moderator during the discussion, out of which five were not responded to by the participants.        In addition,
most of the interactions referred to a specific intervention move: at turn 8 the moderator wrote "Do you think that it
is enough that Shai excelled in his studies ± what about social values and interpersonal relationship?" At turn 15
Dina linked her response to turn 8 with a neutral link: "I am for it (to honor Shai with the award), and what do you
think of the idea?" Although Dina linked her response to the question of the moderator asked her, she did not
address it directly. At turn 17, Maria also linked her contribution to the question of the moderator at turn 8 with a
link of support: "(We) come to school not only to study, but also to develop and construct personality. . ." At turn 19,
she reacts again to the same question: "As a counselor, I think he deserves the prize, not because of the learning
issue, but rather due to his influence in the social-personal domain by using a neutral link. She goes on reacting in
turn 24: "Maybe it is worth noting the social meaning of the prize, and that the person who receives it, gets it not
only for what he has done, but also for what he can still do, again with a neutral link. Finally she reacts also at turn
27: This prize expresses the school¶s ideology as to what constitutes a good student; it does not only mean academic
achievement, but also   a  trustworthy human    being"  with   a neutral link. It appears that  despite the moderator's
mediation to provide further aspects of the issue under discussion, not all the responses are directly connected to the
moderated  subject itself.   In addition, the   large number   of one   student's responses  to the same    mediation is
surprising. The small number of references to the moderation makes one wonder: why did this happen? In a post-
discussion interview we conducted with the participants, it appeared that the discussants found it hard to distinguish
between the contribution of the moderator as a moderator and the roles they had to play. It seems that concurrent
flow of information from various speakers caused an overload, hence difficulties to relate to each other. It appears
then that the lack of responsiveness of students in this case stems from the difficulty discussants have to take the
moderator's guiding intervention into consideration because they are too much engaged in their discussions.

         As for the other three groups, responsiveness was high, but this achievement was neither surprising nor
interesting. It was not surprising that students responded to the unique question asked by the observing moderator ­
a question that simply stated the question to be discussed. Also, it was not surprising that in group 4, characterized

                                                           226                                                 CSCL 2007
by involved moderation, the discussants responded to the moderator's interventions, since he acted as a discussant.
In group 5, the style of authoritative moderation allowed responsiveness to "orders" at the beginning and the end of
the discussion, but, as we already noticed, the moderator did not intervene during (in the middle of) the discussion
(see Table 3).

        In conclusion, in all discussions except for the 'guided one', the lack of responsiveness did not present a
problem in itself since the style of the moderation invited a lack of responsiveness. As for the guided discussion, it
was difficult for students to respond. Such a phenomenon is important since guidance is a central kind of moderation
with the potential of leading to cognitive gains. It seems in this case that the environment should provide new tools
for both the discussants and the moderator to be able to interact.

Discussion
        In   this  study, we   identified   five styles  of intuitive moderation     in   synchronous discussion:    organizing,
guiding, observing, involved and authoritative. Cognitive styles derive from abilities, beliefs and constraints of the
environments   in   which     persons  act.  In  the  case  of moderation,     the   style  derives  also   from  practices  the
moderator/teacher enacts in his/her class. The variety of styles we could identify suggests that antagonist forces
influence the behavior of the teachers. On the one hand, teachers in classrooms often see themselves at the center:
they make their own decisions, initiate questions, evaluate answers, and reformulate or re-voice them, and generally
summarize discussions in classes. They are generally authoritative, and assertive. On the other hand, the Digalo tool
encourages   autonomy     of  discussants    through   interaction  with   peers.  Teachers    are certainly  sensible  to   such
affordances.  This  is one    of the  main   findings  in  Study  1 that   showed    that teachers believed  that  good   Digalo
discussions are different from face-to-face discussions in the classroom. Scrutiny over Table 2 suggests teacher's
recognition that good moderation moves are essentially organizational and guiding.

        In Study 2, moderators had to act and this was a very different story. In light of the dialogic stance our
group adopts in teaching and learning activities (Schwarz & Glassner, 2003), two out of the five teachers showed
undesirable moderation styles (authoritative and observing).. The involved style of moderation is not extremely
welcomed, either, since the moderator should always be aware of his/her role (however, we think that 'involvement
as an equal-status move' ­ and not a style, may be very good strategy). In Study 2, the subjects attended a course in
which  we    tried to encourage      students/teachers  to  guide  and accompany      learning    processes rather   than to use
authority for transmitting knowledge. The ground rules we proposed implicitly suggested organizing and guiding
styles of moderation. We think that the fact that only two moderators chose these styles may be understood by the
difficulty shown by the moderator that adopted the guiding style of moderation in interacting with students. For him,
it was difficult to interact and discussants often claimed that they did not notice his contributions throughout the
discussion. It appears that the Digalo map created simultaneously by several participants presented an overload both
for the students and the moderator. Such a situation requires high concentration from the participants in order to
follow  the  flow   of written    contributions.  It   discourages  some    moderators     from    guiding  and  accompanying
discussions.

        The number of participants in these studies is of course extremely limited. However, in-service teachers
programs we currently animate on the use of Digalo in classrooms seem to confirm what Study 2 suggests, the fact
that teachers  are  intrigued    by  a tool  that shows     potentialities for learning,   but experience    difficulties to use
effectively.  One   first step   for promoting    better  Digalo   discussions    is to   provide  specific scripts  to teachers
beforehand in order to help them in facilitating collaboration in synchronous Digalo discussions. The EC-funded
ARGUNAUT project (IST-2005027728) is aimed at providing teachers with awareness tools (graphs summarizing
participation  or  links  between    discussants,  pop-ups,   messages,     etc.) that  help them   and     students in viewing
characteristics of the discussion without disrupting the flow of the on-going collective argumentation.

References
Ashton, S.,   Roberts,    T., &  Teles,   L. (1999).    Investigating  the  role  of  the  instructor in    collaborative online
        environments. Poster presented at the CSCL conference, Palo Alto, Stanford University, CA, USA
Atzmon, S., Hershkowitz, R. & Schwarz, B. B. (2006). The role of the teacher in turning claims to arguments.
        Proceedings of 30th Conference of the International Group for the Psychology of Mathematics Education.,
        Vol 5 (pp. 65-72). Prague.

                                                               227                                                      CSCL 2007
Bell, P. (1997). Using argument representation to make thinking visible for individuals and groups. In R. Hall, N.
         Miyake, & N. Enyedy (Eds). Proceedings of the 2nd Conference on CSCL (pp. 10-19). Toronto.
Baker, M., & Lund, K. (1997). Promoting reflective interactions in a CSCL environment. Journal of Computer
         Assisted Learning, 13, 175-193.
Chi, M.T.H., Siler, S., Jeong, H., Yamauchi, T., & Hausmann, R. (2001). Learning from human tutoring. Cognitive
         Science, 25, 471-534.
De Laat, M. F., & Lally, V. (2003). Orchestrating collaborative learning: Software design to support online learning
         and tutoring strategies. Paper presented at the Ed-Media, Honolulu.
Driver, R., Newton, P., & Osborne, J. (2000). Establishing the Norms of Scientific Argumentation in Classrooms,
         Science Education, 84, 287.
Duschl, R. & Osborne, J. (2002). Supporting and promoting argumentation discourse. Studies in Science Education,
         38, 39-72.
Erduran, S., Simon, S., & Osborne, J. (2004). TAPping into argumentation: developments in the application of
         Toulmin's argument pattern for studying science discourse. Science Education, 88(6), 915-933.
Glassner, A. & Schwarz, B. B. (2005). The Role of Floor Control and of Ontology in Argumentative Activities with
         Discussion-Based Tools. Paper presented at the CSCL conference, Taipei, Taiwan.
Hakkarainen, K., Lipponen, L., & Järvelä, (1998). Epistemology of inquiry and computer supported collaborative
         learning. A paper presented at the American Educational Research Association (AERA) Annual Meeting,
         San Diego.
Henry,  F. (1992).  Computer   conferencing and content  analysis.  In A. R.  Kaye  (Eds.), Collaborative    learning
         through computer conferencing: The Najaden papers (pp. 115 - 136). New York: Springer.
Lave, J. (1991). Situated learning in communities of practice. In L. B. Resnick, J. M. Levine & S. D. Teasley (Eds.),
         Perspectives  on  socially  shared cognition   (pp.  63-84).  Washington,  DC:  American    Psychological
         Association.
Mercer,  N. (1995)   The  Guided  Construction  of Knowledge:     talk amongst  teachers and  learners. Clevedon:
         Multilingual Matters
Mercer, N., Littleton, K., & Dawes, L. (2003). Computers and Learning Conversations. Paper Presented at the
         'Learn IT' Seminar, Gothenburg, Sweden.
Muukkonen, H., Hakkarainen, K., & Lakkala, M. (1999). Collaborative Technology for Facilitating Progressive
         Inquiry: Future Learning Environment Tools. In C. Hoadley & J. Roschelle (Eds.), Proceedings of the
         CSCL '99: The Third International Conference on Computer Support for Collaborative Learning (pp. 406-
         415). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum
Sandoval, W. A., & Reiser, B. J. (2004). Explanation-driven inquiry: integrating conceptual and epistemic scaffolds
         for scientific inquiry. Science Education, 88, 345-372.
Schwarz, B. B., Neuman, Y., Gil, J., & Ilya, M. (2003). Construction of Collective and Individual Knowledge in
         Argumentative Activities: An Experimental Study. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 12(2), 219-256.
Schwarz, B. B., & Glassner, A. (2003). The blind and the paralytic: fostering argumentation in social and scientific
         issues. In J. Andriessen, M. Baker, and D. Suthers (Eds.) Arguing to Learn: Confronting Cognitions in
         Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning environments, (pp. 227-260). Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Schwarz, B. B., Dreyfus, T., Hershkowitz, R. & Hadas, N. (2005). Teacher Guidance of Knowledge Construction.
         Proceedings of 28th Conference of the International Group for the Psychology of Mathematics Education, 4,
         169-176.
Shahar, N. (2003). Patterns of behavior and types of mediation by teachers in argumentative e-discussions. M.A.
         Thesis. The Hebrew University, School of Education (in Hebrew).
Soller, A. (2001). Supporting Social Interaction in an Intelligent Collaborative Learning System. IJAIE, 11.
Suthers, D.  (1998).  Representations for   Scaffolding Collaborative   Inquiry on Ill-Structured Problems.    Paper
         presented at the 1998 AERA Annual Meeting, San Diego, California.
Van Bruggen, J. M., Kirschner, P. A., & Jochems, W. (2002). External representations of argumentation in CSCL
         and the management of cognitive load, Learning and Instruction, 12, 121-138.
Wegerif, R. (1996) Using computers to help coach exploratory talk across the curriculum. Computers and Education
         26(1-3), 51-60.
Yackel, E. (2002). What we can learn from analyzing the teacher's role in collective argumentation. Journal of
         Mathematical Behavior, 21, 423-440.
Zohar, A. & Nemet, F. (2002). Fostering students' knowledge and argumentation skills through dilemmas in human
         genetics. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 39(1), 35-62.

                                                         228                                                 CSCL 2007
