Using Online Social Networks to Support Underrepresented Students'
             Engagement in Postsecondary Education
 Christine Greenhow and Kimberly Schultz, University of Minnesota, Digital Media Center, 212 Walter Library,
               117 Pleasant Street SE, Minneapolis, MN         55455, Email: greenhow@umn.edu

       Abstract: Participation in elective online social networks that enhance learners' connections to
       their local community and to distant others they perceive as similar may be especially important to
       the educational attainment and engagement of low-income students traditionally underrepresented
       in higher education compared to their upper-to-middle income peers.        This poster presents the
       conceptual framework for the design and implementation of an online social network aimed at
       increasing the educational attainment, leadership and social engagement of such students.

Needs Assessment
       Today there is widespread concern about providing equitable access to higher education and equitable
learning opportunities for today's youth. Changing demographics in the U.S. over the next two decades, with a
disproportionate increase in low-income and minority youth, are projected to lead to a decline in the educational
level and per capita income of the U.S. workforce. Research has shown that students from low-income backgrounds
do not currently earn admission to college or graduate at the same rates as middle-and upper-income students
(NCES, 2001; St. John, 2000). Often these students are also first-generation college students who need more
academic, social and other types of supports to stay in college and obtain their degrees than do their more affluent
peers (NCES, 2001; Tinto,1998). Initiatives that enhance students' engagement and connections to their local
community and with others they perceive as like them, can positively influence students' academic learning,
persistence and retention in college (Zhao & Kuh, 2004; Bransford, Brown, & Cocking, 2000; Tinto, 1998).

       Moreover, schools and colleges are increasingly concerned with developing technological fluency and 21st
century skills among all students (e.g., capacity for creativity, collaborative problem-solving, research, digital
literacy, and citizenship) as innovation and "knowledge creation are fast becoming the most important sources of
new material and intellectual wealth" (Hakkarainen & Muukkonen, 2006; NRC, 1999; Barron & Kafai, 2006).
Online social networking and Web 2.0 technologies offer under-explored solutions to supporting students' social
engagement and collaborative knowledge creation in ways we have yet to comprehend (Stahl, Koschmann, &
Suthers, 2006; Paavola, Lipponen, & Hakkarainen, 2004). They represent potential changes in the former "read-
only" Internet, transforming it into a "read and write" Internet: a simple definition of Web 2.0, in which Internet
users have much more control over their "data" in releasing it to certain groups and not others, allowing select
groups or individuals to edit or transform a user's original data. While there have been a wealth of editorials of how
Web 2.0 social networking tools such as MySpace are advancing young people's social lives, there is, to date, a lack
of theory-based models and empirical evidence that suggests the educational implications of these networks.

       This poster presents the preliminary phase of a design-based research project (Barab & Squire, 2004)
involving low-income high school and college students across 14 institutions in an informal online social
networking environment. Our goal is to examine whether and how participating in such a network impacts students'
educational attainment, leadership and social engagement. Below we introduce our emerging theoretical framework
and design implications.

Theoretical Framework
       In our increasingly Internet-dependent society, there has been some move away from traditional classroom-
based, location-specific instruction to virtual-learning environments. At the same time, the social context within
which schools and colleges operate has in some ways moved away from hierarchically arranged, densely knit
location-bound groups to social networks where boundaries are more permeable and hierarchies are flatter and more
recursive (Wellman, Koku, and Hunsinger, 2006). Although substantial research has been conducted to examine
formal online learning communities, fewer studies have tried to illuminate the types of interpersonal interactions,
exchanges of support, trust, sense of belonging, and social identity that characterize loosely bound, online social
networks of interpersonal ties (not tied to a particular educational program) and how students utilize these ties to
advance their education (Wellman, 2001a; Wellman & Gulia, 1999; Granovetter, 1973; Haythornthwaite, 2002).

                                                          229                                                 CSCL 2007
       Penuel & Riel (2007) define a social network as a set of people and the relationships among them. These
relationships can be concentrated in small subgroups, and the larger network can be defined in terms of the
connections between subgroups. Conducting analysis social networks helps us understand how advice, information,
and resources transfer from person to person and from subgroup to subgroup in the social structure. Recently,
researchers have begun to use social network analysis to examine educational practices, such as sharing of expertise
in online university research networks (Koku & Wellman, 2004) and in teacher networks (Penuel, Frank, & Krause,
2006). The social network approach can further illuminate computer-supported informal learning environments: how
such environments affect the structure and functioning of social systems (e.g., within educational institutions) and
how social structures affect the way computer-mediated communication unfolds (Garton et al., 1997).

       Our emerging theoretical foundations for an online social network architecture aimed at K-12 and college
students draws on: studies of network ties in the social network literature (offline and online); concepts of social
engagement and its relation to school engagement; and recent applications of social capital in the educational
literature. First, the social, informational, or material resources a pair exchanges characterizes their tie (Granovetter,
1973). Haythornwaite (2002) argued that as relational ties strength increases from weak to strong, so does the
motivation to communicate, the amount of support communicated, and the amount and types of
information/resources exchanged. However, strong ties (as occur in families) can require much time and attention to
maintain. Donath and Boyd (2004) in studying online social networking sites claim that although online ties have
been found to be weaker than ties established in real-world settings, such weak ties can prove extremely valuable in
the midst of a life change or situation where one's local network is limited. Reviewing the social network literature,
Mergel and Langenberg (2006) propose four characteristics that help to predict whether ties are sustainable or
abandoned over time: individual, dyadic/group, structural, and content related characteristics. For example, younger,
more extraverted actors going through a transition (i.e., college entry) who share preexisting friendship ties, values,
or common membership in a group are likely to sustain online ties. Structural characteristics (e.g., whether or not a
person is at the core of the network and the presence of "bridge-spanners") and content characteristics (e.g., whether
ties are more emotion-loaded) also relate to tie sustainability, with the core network actors and experienced bridge-
spanners and emotion-loaded ties as more sustainable.

       Second, concepts of social engagement have attracted increased attention as a solution to declining
academic achievement and retention (Fredericks, Blumenfeld, & Paris, 2004). However, researchers have focused
less on the peer group than on teachers as a factor in the socialization of engagement (Ryan, 2000). Students who
perceive that race and class constrain their educational opportunities, but who also have social supports that promote
the development of agency and strategies for confronting difficulty are more likely to remain engaged in school
(Conchas, 2001; Stanton-Salazar, 2001).

       Third, a review of the educational literature suggests that social capital, the economic, cultural or symbolic
benefits accruing to individuals by virtue of their ties with others, is positively linked to educational attainment and
educational development (engagement, motivation, identity-formation). For example, peer group academic values
and expectations, number of close friends attending the same school, seeing close friends weekly, discussion about
jobs and education with adults were just some indicators of social capital that could positively influence educational
attainment and development (Dika & Singh, 2002).

Design Implications
       From this initial (condensed) review of the literature we offer the following design suggestions: 1) Ensure
that network values (e.g., to graduate from college, become a leader, and support low-income K-12 peers) are
transparent and embodied in the design; 2) Organize network activities around collaborative creation of meaningful
knowledge artifacts; 3) Trust is a core resource. Create a structure where members can learn quickly about and from
one another; 4) Create core connectors by pairing a few team members who already know each other; 5) Ensure that
bridge spanners comprise 15% of the network; 6) Ensure that the site offers easy-to-use tools for collaboration, idea-
exchange, publishing success stories, and access to outside expertise.

References
       A complete list of references is provided at http://christinegreenhow.net/research/cscl07paper

                                                         230                                                CSCL 2007
