  Evaluating the Effect of Feedback from a CSCL Problem Solving
Environment on Learning, Interaction, and Perceived Interdependence

                                Gahgene Gweon, Carolyn P. Rosé, Emil Albright, Yue Cui,
                        Carnegie Mellon University, 5000 Forbes Avenue, Pittsburgh PA 15213,
                                        {gkg,cp3a,ealbrigh,ycui}@andrew.cmu.edu

         Abstract:     In this paper,   we   explore the  effect   of the  form of  feedback  offered   by  a computer
         supported collaborative learning (CSCL) environment on the roles that students see themselves as
         taking and that their behavior reflects.     We do this by experimentally contrasting collaboration in
         two feedback configurations, one which is identical to the state-of-the-art in intelligent tutoring
         technology (Immediate Feedback), and one which is based on a long line of investigation of the
         use of worked out examples for instruction (Delayed Feedback).               While our conclusions remain
         tentative due to the small sample size, the data reveal a consistent gender by condition interaction
         pattern across questionnaire, test, and discourse data in which male students prefer and benefit
         more from collaboration in the Immediate Feedback condition where they are more likely to take
         on the role of a help provider rather than a help receiver while the patterns is the opposite for
         females.

Introduction
         In this paper we present an empirical investigation of issues related to the design of a collaborative problem
solving  environment    that builds  on  prior  work  related    to   the development   of  intelligent tutoring  technology   for
individual learning.    We argue that the state-of-the-art in intelligent tutoring technology has been optimized for
success in an individual learning scenario, and that many interaction design issues may need to be revisited in order
to achieve success in a collaborative learning setting.        In this paper we specifically investigate issues related to the
timing of feedback from the intelligent tutoring environment.             Immediate feedback involving indications of correct
versus incorrect problem solving actions and hints on demand or unsolicited hints during problem solving are the
hallmark of state-of-the-art intelligent tutoring technology.        However, it is not clear whether such feedback from the
intelligent   tutoring  environment     will be  helpful    or  harmful   in  a collaborative  learning   setting.    This   paper
investigates   the hypothesis   that the   typical state-of-the-art   form   of intelligent  tutoring feedback    interferes with
collaborative   learning  because    it can   be treated    as  a  replacement   for  the   interaction  between   students    that
collaborative learning is meant to encourage.        Because math has been a very popular domain for exploration in the
intelligent tutoring community, we conducted our explorations in that domain.                In particular, we selected fraction
arithmetic as a unit of material because of its importance and difficulty for middle school students, which is our
target student population.

         For decades a wide range of social and cognitive benefits have been extensively documented in connection
with collaborative learning.     Based     on  Piaget's   foundational    work  (Piaget    1985), one   can argue   that a  major
cognitive benefit of collaborative learning is that when students bring differing perspectives to a problem solving
situation,  the interaction  causes   the    participants   to consider   questions  that  might  not   have  occurred   to  them
otherwise.    This stimulus could cause them to identify gaps in their understanding, which they would then be in a
position   to  address.   This  type  of cognitive   conflict    has  the  potential to lead  to  productive   shifts in  student
understanding.     Related to this notion, other cognitive benefits of collaborative learning focus on the benefits of
engaging    in teaching   behaviors, especially  deep    explanation   (Webb,    Nemer,    & Zunita   2002).  Other work    in the
computer supported collaborative learning community demonstrates that interventions that enhance argumentative
knowledge      construction, in  which   students    are  encouraged      to make    their differences  in  opinion   explicit  in
collaborative   discussion,    enhances    the  acquisition     of   multi-perspective  knowledge       (Fischer, et. al   2002).
Furthermore, based on Vygotsky's seminal work (Vygotsky 1978), we know that when students who have different
strengths and weaknesses work together, they can provide support for each other that allows them to solve problems
that would be just beyond their reach if they were working alone.            This makes it possible for them to participate in a
wider range    of  hands-on  learning   experiences.     It is in  connection   with this  Vygotskian   model   of  collaborative
learning that we see a conflict with the design of feedback, sometimes called scaffolding, that is the hallmark of the
state-of-the-art in intelligent tutoring technology and is based on the same principles, and thus designed to meet the
same needs.    Our hypothesis predicts that the presence of typical intelligent tutoring style feedback in a collaborative

                                                                 231                                                    CSCL 2007
problem    solving  environment     will  reduce  the  amount   of  interaction  students   will engage    in.  Furthermore,   a
reduction in collaborative interaction may then lead to a reduction in the exchange of alternative perspectives on
problem solving, thus also interfering with the benefits of collaboration from the Piagetian perspective.

          While these cognitive benefits of collaborative learning are valuable, they are not the only positive effect of
collaborative learning.   In fact the social benefits of collaborative learning may be even more valuable for fostering a
productive classroom environment. By encouraging a sense of positive interdependence between students, where
students see themselves both as offering help and as receiving needed help from others, collaborative learning has
been used    as a form   of social  engineering   for  addressing   conflict in multi-ethnic,   inner-city classrooms   (Sharan
1980).   Some     examples   of documented      social benefits of  successful   collaborative   learning  interactions include
increases  in   acceptance  and  liking  of others  from  different   backgrounds,   identification  with  and  commitment    to
participation in a learning community, improvements in motivation, and aptitude towards long term learning (Sharan
1980).  These social benefits of collaborative learning are closely connected with the Vygotskian foundations of
collaborative learning because the positive interdependence that is fostered is related to the exchange of support, or
scaffolding, that we hypothesize will be replaced with the scaffolding offered by the environment where typical
intelligent tutoring technology is used.

          In our  experimental     approach, we   seek   to balance   concerns  related  to internal  and  external validity  by
running our experiment as a controlled experiment in a realistic setting (i.e., within a pair of real classrooms using
material from their actual curriculum).     Classroom settings present experimental challenges because there are always
more factors beyond our control than in a lab setting.       The two classes we worked with were small, having only 30
students in total across the two sets of students.     Thus, with small such sample size, we struggle with issues related
to  statistical power.    To  increase   our certainty   in the conclusions     we draw   from   our   data, we   consider only
significant (p < .05) and marginally significant (p < .1) effects, making a distinction between these two in terms of
certainty. Furthermore, we rely on a form of triangulation, to verify that we see a consistent story across multiple
channels   of   data.    We  investigate    the  impact  of  this  experimental    manipulation   on   perceptions   about    the
collaboration revealed by a questionnaire, evidence of learning from tests and quizzes, and a qualitative analysis of
the collaborative problem solving process from coded chat logs collected during the collaborative problem solving
sessions.  We measure process oriented outcome measures such as observed help offered and observed help received
through analysis of chat behavior.      Furthermore, we measure perceived help offered and perceived help received by
means of a questionnaire.    We also measure cognitive benefits of collaboration, such as learning as measured by pre
to post-test gains in domain knowledge.        The data do not support the strong form of our initial hypothesis.       Rather,
we find a consistent gender by condition interaction across all forms of data we collect in which male students prefer
and benefit more from the Immediate Feedback condition while female students prefer and benefit more from the
Delayed Feedback condition.        While the results we present are not conclusive enough to warrant offering concrete
design principles yet, they raise important questions to resolve in subsequent work.

Infrastructure for Supporting Collaborative Problem Solving
          In this section we discuss the experimental infrastructure used to conduct our investigation, both in terms of
the technology    we  used   and   in how   we  set up  the lab where   the  students worked.     Because of its tremendous
effectiveness for individual learning with technology, we are planning to build our eventual collaborative learning
infrastructure on the foundation of Cognitive Tutors (Koedinger, et. al 1997).           Other development work related to
supporting   collaborative   learning  in connection   with  Cognitive  Tutors    is found  in   (Walker   2005).   Our  current
infrastructure   was  built with   the Cognitive  Tutor  Authoring    Tools,  which   support   quick  authoring  of Cognitive
Tutor style problem solving systems.      As mentioned, the purpose of our study is to explore issues relating the design
of  the problem     solving  feedback     offered   by  the  environment     during  collaborative    problem   solving.    The
infrastructure used in this study is a simple extension of the typical structured problem solving interfaces that are
characteristic   of Cognitive   Tutors   and other   tutors in  the model    tracing tutor  tradition.  This   infrastructure is
designed to support experimentation with alternative feedback designs keeping all other aspects of the student's
experience constant across conditions.

          In our  study  we  are   contrasting  two  designs   for feedback   from   the environment,   which   we   refer to as
Immediate    feedback    and Delayed     feedback.     These  alternative feedback    paradigms    have   been  experimentally
contrasted   in  individual  learning   settings in  the past  (e.g., Bjork   1994,  Nathan    1998).   Typically,   immediate
feedback   consists   of what   is called flag  feedback,   which   signals  to students  after  each  problem   solving   action

                                                               232                                                    CSCL 2007
whether it was correct or not, and hints on demand, which are typically arranged in hint sequences, beginning with
less directive hints and ending with more directive hints. In a delayed feedback setting, flag feedback is typically
withheld so that students must use their own self-monitoring skills to detect their errors. Furthermore, hints may be
withheld altogether or changed in nature so as not to be as focused narrowly on the correct solution path so that
students have a greater responsibility for keeping themselves on track.   In our study, both flag feedback and hints
were withheld from students in the Delayed feedback condition.      Instead, when students decided that their solution
was complete, they submitted the solution and then were presented with a fully worked out version of the problem,
with some explanation about how the solution was constructed.       In order to control for information access between
conditions, the instructional content in the explanation was constructed by concatenating the content encoded in the
hints that students had access to in the Immediate feedback condition.

          Based on prior work, we know there are trade-offs between immediate and delayed feedback for individual
learning,  especially regarding  efficiency and retention  (Bjork   1994,   Nathan 1998).   Studies  have  shown   that
immediate feedback is more efficient because students are never allowed to stray too far from the correct solution
path. Therefore, a shorter amount of time is required to solve each problem, and in practice, students solve more
problems (Corbett & Anderson 2002). Yet, other studies show that students get a deeper understanding of material
in a delayed feedback setting since they have time to reflect on their errors and also that they have the opportunity to
develop self-monitoring skills.  This was shown in cognitive tasks such as learning genetics (Lee 1992) as well as in
motor   tasks such as learning  arm movement    motions  (Schmidt   &  Bjork 1992). Most    state of the art intelligent
tutoring systems such as Cognitive Tutors have adopted an immediate feedback approach because in practice, the
greater efficiency leads to higher learning gains in an individual learning scenario because of the relatively large
numbers of problems students are able to work through.     However, we conjecture that the optimal problem solving
feedback design in a collaborative learning setting may be different.

                         Figure 1. Problem solving interface for Immediate Condition.

          As the students worked in the lab session, their computer's display was composed of two panels that were
next to one another.  In the panel on the left hand side of the screen, displayed in Figure 1, was the problem solving
interface. Using RealVNC's Virtual Network Computing (http://www.realvnc.com/), this panel was shared between
the screens   of the respective computers of a  collaborating  pair so that they were both   free to contribute to the
evolving joint solution. In the panel on the right hand side of the screen was an MSN messenger window in which
students could chat about their joint problem solving. The arrangement of the lab in which our study was conducted
was such that each student was sitting at his own computer in such a way that collaborating pairs could not easily
talk face-to-face since in all cases there was a row of desks with computers in between that student's row and the
row where the partner student was sitting. The students did not know who their partner was or where they were
seated. The purpose of this arrangement was to encourage communication through the chat interface so that it could
easily be recorded and eventually processed on line during collaboration.

                                                          233                                                 CSCL 2007
Method
Experimental Design and Procedure
        We designed an experiment to test the hypothesis that if students are working together in an environment in
which they can obtain immediate feedback and help from the environment that is always correct, they would be less
likely to turn to each other for help and feedback.   This hypothesis predicts that in an environment with this form of
feedback students would give and receive less help, would perceive less help given and received, and would benefit
less from the collaboration.   In   the control condition, students  get immediate   feedback   from  the cognitive tutor
(Immediate   Feedback  condition),     whereas  the  experimental   condition students  get delayed   feedback   (Delayed
Feedback condition).  Both of these feedback configurations are described in detail in the previous section.

        The experimental procedure extended over 4 school days, with the experimental manipulation taking place
during days two (i.e., Lab Day 1) and three (i.e., Lab Day 2), which we refer to as the first and second lab day since
the students  worked together    in pairs  in a computer  lab at  their school. The  fourth day   of the experiment  was
separated from the third day of the experiment by a weekend.        Because our study is a within subject manipulation,
we used two different units of material, each of which was experienced by each pair in only one condition or another
so that we could distinguish learning resulting from work in one condition from learning resulting from work in the
other condition.  The two units were fraction addition and subtraction (AddSub) and fraction multiplication and
division (MultDiv).  We    counter-balanced     the order of the units  and conditions  in  order to control for ordering
effects as displayed in Table 1.

                                             Table 1. The  experimental setup

                                       Pairs    Lab Day 1                 Lab Day 2
                    Class 1            1~4      AddSub, Imm               MultDiv, Delay
                                       5~8      MultDiv, Delay            AddSub, Imm
                    Class 2            9~11     AddSub, Delay             MultDiv, Imm
                                       12~15    MultDiv, Imm              AddSub, Delay

        On the first day of the four day study, students took a pretest, which lasted for about 30 minutes, to assess
how much they knew about the subject matter. We also provided a short collaboration training manual, where the
teacher gave  an  example   of good    collaboration  conversation. In  addition, pairs of students  were teamed  by the
instructor. Teams remained stable throughout the experiment.        The students were instructed that the teams would
compete for a small prize at the end of the study based on how much they learned and how many problems they
were able to solve together correctly.    The second and third days were lab days in which the students worked with
their partner on one of the units in one of the conditions.  On each lab day they worked through a different unit in a
different condition from what they were in the previous day.      Each lab session lasted for 35 minutes.  At the end of
each lab period, the students took a short quiz, which lasted about 10 minutes. At the end of the first lab day only,
students additionally filled out a short questionnaire to assess their perceived help received, perceived help offered,
and perceived benefit of the collaboration. On the fourth experiment day, which was two days after the last lab day,
they took a post test, which was designed to be isomorphic to the pre test and was used for the purpose of assessing
retention of the material.

Subjects and Materials
Thirty sixth grade students from a suburban elementary school participated in the study. The students were from 2
different classes taught by the same teacher, with 16 students in the first class and 14 students in the second class.
Students were arranged into arbitrary pairs by their instructor.    Students were not told who their partner was.    We
had a mixture of mixed-ability and homogenous ability pairs.        Furthermore, out of 15 pairs who participated in the
study, 12 of them were mixed gender pairs, 2 of them were all female pairs, and one of them was an all male pair.
Because only a small number of pairs were homogeneous gender pairs, we cannot draw any conclusions from this
data about   the relative  merits   of mixed   gender  versus   homogeneous    gender   pairs.  Furthermore,  we  cannot
distinguish between gender effects that are specific to mixed gender pairs, versus gender effects that are independent
of group composition.

                                                            234                                                  CSCL 2007
          The materials for the experiment consisted of the following:

    ·     A mathematics tutoring program. The two mathematics chapters were fraction addition & subtraction and
          fraction division & multiplication.
    ·     2 extensive isomorphic tests (Test A and Test B) were designed for use as the pre-test and the post-test.
          These tests each consisted of 16 near transfer and 8 far transfer problems, balanced between the two units
          of material. Likewise, we had Quiz A and Quiz B, which were designed to be isomorphic to a subset of the
          pre/post tests. Thus, quizzes are shorter versions of the tests, administered after each lab day.      Thus, we
          were able to use pre to post test gains as a measure of retention (since there was a two day lag between the
          last lab day and the post-test day).
    ·     Questionnaire.   As a subjective assessment of socially oriented variables, we used a questionnaire with 8
          questions related to perceived problem solving competence of self and partner, perceived benefit, perceived
          help received, and perceived help provided.     Each question consisted of a statement such as "The other
          student depended on me for information or help to solve problems."      and an 11 point scale ranging from -5,
          labeled "strongly disagree", to +5, labeled "strongly agree".

Results
Questionnaire
          We  began  our   analysis  by  investigating  the socially   oriented  variables   measured  by  means   of  the
questionnaire, specifically perceived problem solving competence of self and partner, perceived benefit, perceived
help received, and perceived help provided.     Neither of our experimental conditions maximized all of these outcome
variables for both genders.   Instead we see a consistent gender by condition interaction across perceived benefit,
perceived help received, and perceived help offered, although it is only significant in some cases and marginal in
others.   Specifically, in the Delay condition boys rated themselves as offering more help and receiving less as well
as benefiting less, whereas the pattern was the opposite for girls, although the effect was not as strong.

          Consistent with prior work investigating the well known gender gap in math achievement for middle school
children, we  found  a main   effect of  gender  whereby  boys   rated themselves     on the questionnaire as being more
competent problem solvers F(1,29) = 5.01, p < .05, effect size .7 s.d., although there was no significant difference in
grade so  far in the class  reported  by their  teacher F(1,29)  = 0.46,  p   = n.s.  There  was,  however, a  significant
difference in pretest score whereby boys scored higher than girls F(1, 29) = 6.13, p < .05, effect size 1.2 s.d., thus
demonstrating that they came into the experiment with more prior knowledge about the specific material covered.
In terms of perceived benefit from the collaboration, boys rated themselves as benefiting significantly less than girls
did F(1,29) = 2.15, p < .05.  As mentioned, there was a significant interaction with condition such that the difference
is only significant in the Delay condition F(1,29) = 4.63, p < .05, effect size 2.5 s.d.     This effect did not seem to be
related to the relatively higher pretest scores of boys since there was no significant correlation between perceived
benefit and either the pretest score of the student or that of their partner. Related to perceived help provided we also
found a significant gender by condition interaction F(1,29) = 4.84, p < .05.     Specifically, girls' ratings of the extent
to which they offered help was significantly lower than that of boys, but only in the Delay condition.        There was a
corresponding marginal gender by condition interaction F(1,29) = 2.62, p = .1 whereby girls' ratings of the extent to
which they received help were higher in the Delay condition, whereas the opposite was the case for boys.

Learning Gains
          The learning gains analysis is consistent with the interaction between gender and condition observed on the
questionnaire and offers some weak evidence in favor of the Delay condition on learning overall.           There was no
measurable gain on far transfer items either within conditions or over the whole population, thus we suspect that the
far transfer items may have been too difficult for these students, and we consider only learning on near transfer
items for the remainder of our analyses to distinguish between conditions.       We focus first on immediate learning.
For our measure of immediate learning, we measured learning gains that occurred locally within each single lab
session.  Recall that the pre and post test were more extensive than the two quizzes, but contained a section that was
isomorphic to the quizzes in order to enable a consistent measure of growth in understanding of the material over the
4 days of the experiment.   The post test for each lab session was the quiz administered on the day of the session.   For
the first lab session, the  pretest  was the   score on the subset  of  the   pretest from   day 1 of the  study that was
isomorphic to the quizzes.   The pretest for the second lab day was the quiz score from the first lab day.       We only
considered data from the 12 out of 15 pairs for which both students were present for the pretest and both lab days.

                                                            235                                                  CSCL 2007
         For this analysis we used an ANCOVA model with post-test score as the dependent variable, condition,
pair nested within condition, unit of material, time point, and gender as independent variables, and pre-test score as
the covariate. The purpose of this ANCOVA design was to control for all of the factors that may have accounted for
performance differences on the test, such as which units of material the students had been exposed to, when the test
was administered, and gender (since we observed gender effects in the data).     There was a marginal effect of pair on
learning gains F(11,32) = 1.94, p = .07, but no effect of unit of material (i.e., AddSub versus MultDiv) or time point
(i.e., lab session 1 versus lab session 2). We see a marginal crossover interaction between gender and condition on
near transfer items such that there was a trend for girls to learn more on average than boys in the Delay condition,
and for boys to learn more on average than girls in the Immediate condition F(1,32) = 3.43, p = .07.          While it was
true that boys came in to the experiment with higher pretest scores, we do not find a significant or even marginal
aptitude-treatment interaction that might provide an alternative explanation for the gender by condition interaction
on learning.

         Because the strongest evidence presented thus far is for the Delay condition to be bad for boys, and only
marginally significant evidence in favor of the benefit of the Delay condition for girls, one might argue that the data
suggest that the most reasonable implication of these results would be to choose the Immediate feedback condition
for all students.  However,  on  the   retention test, there was  only   a significant pre  to post test gain in the Delay
condition.  For this analysis, because each student learned each unit of material in a different condition, in order to
measure learning per condition, it is necessary to separate the test questions into subsets related to each unit. If a
student learned the AddSub unit in the Delayed Feedback condition, then that student's pre and post test score for
the Delayed Feedback condition would be the score on the part of the pre and post tests that were related to AddSub,
and the corresponding portions of the tests related to MultDiv would be that student's pre and post test scores for the
Immediate Feedback condition.     We dropped from the analysis data from segments of material that students were
absent for.  One student did not take the post test, and 3 students were absent on the second lab day, one in the
Immediate Feedback condition and 2 in the Delayed Feedback condition.           Thus we have 56 pairs of scores, 29 for
the Immediate condition and 27 for the Delay condition.

         We computed the significance of the pre to post test difference using 2-tailed paired t-tests.       Note that this
analysis controls for pair effects and gender effects since all comparisons are for scores pertaining to an individual
student. As mentioned, the difference was significant in the case of the Delay condition t(26) = 1.58, p < .05, but
not in the case of the Immediate condition t(28) = 2.27, p = .12. This is consistent with the findings from other
studies  in that delayed   feedback fosters  deeper  understanding    of the material  and  thus  would   be  beneficial  for
retention of the material.
Process Analysis
         The student chat logs contain rich data on how the collaborative problem solving process transpired.            We
conducted a qualitative analysis of the conversational data recorded from MSN messenger in order to illuminate the
findings from the tests and questionnaire data discussed above.     Based on the analysis of the questionnaire data, we
expected  to find  that boys offered   more  help in   the Delayed  Feedback   condition   but  received more   help in  the
Immediate Feedback condition, and that the opposite would be the case for girls.           However, we found on the one
hand some    surprising  relationships between   chat  behavior   and questionnaire    data and  on  the  other hand  more
straightforward relationships between patterns in the chat data and how much students learned.       Specifically, we find
that the condition where students offer more help is the condition where they perceive more benefit and learn more.

         In  order to make   the sometimes    cryptic  statements  of students clearer  during   our analysis,  and  also to
provide an objective reference point for segmenting the dialogue into meaningful units, we merged the logfile data
recorded by the tutoring software with the chat logs recorded with MSN messenger using time stamps for alignment.
We then segmented the data into episodes using the log files from the tutoring software as an objective guide.        Each
episode was meant to include conversation pertaining to a single problem solving step as reified by the structured
problem solving interface. All entries in the log files recorded by the tutoring software refer to the step the action is
associated with as well as any hints or other feedback provided by the tutoring software.

         We approached the design of our coding scheme with some focal questions in mind.                 For example, we
wanted to investigate how many times each student requested help in each condition.            Furthermore, we wondered
how their partners responded to their help requests.       A preliminary cursory analysis of the MSN messenger logs
revealed that frequently students requested help but did not receive any verbal response from their partner.      We also

                                                             236                                                  CSCL 2007
observed signs of frustration between students and some cases where students explicitly refused to help one another.
Because our focal questions all pertain to issues related to help seeking and help provision, we designed a coarse
grained coding scheme to identify the regions of the integrated logfiles where this help seeking and help providing
behavior is found.   In the future we may code additional types of behaviors or make finer grained distinctions.         Our
current coding scheme has 5 mutually exclusive categories, namely (R) Requests received, (P) Help Provision, (N)
No Response,    (C)   Can't    Help, and  (D)  Deny    Help.   Along  with the "other"  category,  which    indicates that   a
contribution  does   not contain  either  help seeking   or    help providing behavior, these  codes    can be  taken    to be
exhaustive.   A  sample     of coded  dialogue is  found    in Table1  where  the   second and   third columns  contain     the
assigned codes.  Each column is associated with a single conversational participant.

          The  first type   of  conversational    action  we   coded   were   Help   Requests  (R).     Help Requests       are
conversational  contributions    such as  asking   for  help on  problem   solving, asking an  explicit question  about     the
domain content, and expressing confusion or frustration.         Not all questions were coded as Requests.    For example,
there were frequent episodes where students discussed coordination issues such as whether the other student wanted
to go next, or if it was their turn, and these questions were not coded as help requests for the purpose of addressing
our research questions.     Adjacent to each coded help request, in the column associated with the partner student, we
coded four   types   of responses.   Help   provisions  (P)  are actions that  attempt to  provide  support  or substantive
information related to the other student's request, regardless of the quality of this information.       These actions are
attempts to move toward resolving the problem. Can't help statements (C) are responses where the other student
indicates that he  or   she cannot   provide help  because   he  or she  doesn't know  what   to do either.  Deny help      (D)
statements are where the other student responds in such a way that it is clear that he or she knows the answer but
refuses to stop to help the other student. For example, "Ask [the teacher], I understand it" or "Hold on [and the other
student proceeds to solve the problem and never comes back to answer the original question]" are type D statements.
And finally, no response (N) are statements where the other student ignores help requests completely.

Table 2: Example Coded Conversation.         Note that for simplicity, portions of the integrated logfile related to the
interaction with the problem solving interface have been removed.

  Line         S23       S24         speaker: content
  92                                 s24: ur turn
  93                                 s23: k
  94           R          P95        s23: is it 1/20?
  95                                 s24: no it is 4/20
  96           R          P97        s23: y?
  97                                 s24: cause to get 5 to 20 you need to multiply it by 4 and what you do to the
                                     bottom you must do to the top
  98                                 s23: oooooo
  99                                 s23: IM SO SRY
  100                                s23: :$
  101                                s24: thats ok
  102          R          P103       s23: i feel like a dope
  103                                s24: :D
  105                                s23: your turn
  106                                s24: k
  107          P108      R           s24: you have to subtract right
  108                                s23: yea
  110                                s24: k
  113          P114       R          s24: do you want to do the simplify it
  114                                s23: Sure
  137          C138       R          s24: whats wrong with it
  138                                s23: idk [I don't know]

                                                               237                                                 CSCL 2007
        Each  log  file was  coded    separately  by 2  coders  who   then  met and  resolved    all conflicts. Using   this
consensus coding, we then tabulated the number of occurrences of each code in each condition associated with each
gender. An example of one such interaction is displayed in Table 2.      Here students take turns working out parts of a
math  problem (line 92,  105,  103).     When   help is requested,   the other student   provides  an  answer   with some
explanation (line 97). Such successful interactions in which students benefit from help received from their partner
and also see themselves as contributing to the success of their partner promote feelings of positive interdependence
between students (Sharan 1980).       In Table  3 we display    the average  counts of   actions within a  single problem
solving session. We tabulated the codes from the perspective of each student so that for each student we obtained a
count for help requests made during the associated session as well as help requests received.         We also noted how
many problems were solved by that student working with his or her partner during the associated lab session as well
as how many conversational segments there were in the integrated logfile.

Table 3 Average numbers (and standard deviation) of coded categories per session.        Note that statistical comparisons
in the body of the paper are presented both in terms of raw numbers and proportions.

                      Males Immediate (7)         Females Immediate (9)        Males Delay (8)       Females Delay   (6)
 Problems Solved      10.0 (7.19)                 6.0 (5.6)                    5.0 (2.4)             4.7 (2.8)
 Segments             21.7 (11.6)                 17.1 (11.2)                  15.1 (4.4)            16.8 (3.6)
 (R) Requests         5.6 (3.3)                   2.4 (1.2)                    4.6 (3.5)             6.5 (4.5)
 Received
 (P) Help             3.3 (1.9)                   0.6 (0.7)                    2.0 (1.9)             3.3 (3.1)
 Provision
 (N) No Response      1.7 (1.4)                   1.3 (1.1)                    2.2 (1.6)             2.2 (3.9)
 (C) Can't Help       0.3 (0.5)                   0.6 (0.7)                    0.1 (0.4)             0.7 (0.8)
 (D) Deny Help        0.3 (0.8)                   0 (0)                        0.3 (0.7)             0.3 (0.8)
 R Given              2.6 (0.8)                   4.8 (3.4)                    5.4 (4.4)             5.5 (3.5)
 P Received           1.0 (1.0)                   2.3 (2.3)                    2.5 (3.7)             2.7 (1.8)
 N Received           1.1 (.9)                    1.8 (1.4)                    2.1 (3.4)             2.3 (1.5)
 C Received           0.4 (.8)                    0.4 (0.5)                    0.5 (0.7)             0.2 (0.4)
 D Received           0 (0)                       0.2 (0.7)                    0.25 (0.7)            0.3 (0.8)

        As a manipulation check, after we tabulated the number of occurrences of each code in each integrated log
file, we first checked to see whether there was a significant effect of condition on patterns of occurrence of the
codes.  For this analysis, each count pertained to a single lab session, but we used data from both lab sessions.
There  was a marginal   main   effect of  condition  on number   of  problems   solved   F(1,44) =   3.49, p =  .07, and  a
significant main effect of condition on number of segments F(1, 44) = 9.45, p < .005, with no interaction with
gender. The larger average number of problems solved and larger average number of segments was found in the
Immediate Feedback condition.      This is to be expected based on prior findings that immediate feedback increases
problem solving efficiency.    While     there was a significantly   larger number  of   conversational  segments    in the
integrated logs from the Immediate Feedback condition, the proportion of segments that contained a help request
was not stable across conditions.  Thus, there was no significant main effect of condition on raw numbers of either
help requests received or offered. There was, however, a significant gender by condition interaction on raw number
of requests received F(1,42) = 4.79, p < .05, and a marginal gender by condition interaction on both help requests
given and help requests received when the raw counts are normalized by number of segments: F(1,42) = 3.62, p =
.06 and F(1,42) = 3.10, p = .09 respectively.   In all cases there was no significant or marginal gender effect except in
the Immediate feedback condition, where males received more requests than females as well as participating in a
higher proportion of discourse segments in which they received a request than females did. In contrast, females
participated in a higher proportion of segments in which they made requests than males did.

                                                            238                                                   CSCL 2007
         Taking into consideration that the majority of collaborating pairs were mixed gender pairs, this analysis
suggests that in the Immediate feedback condition, we find an asymmetric collaboration pattern in which males
appear  as the  help   providers and females  appear  as the   help receivers. To   further investigate this finding,  we
compared counts of response types across conditions, normalized by number of requests.            Data from transcripts
where no requests were received were dropped from this analysis.       There was a significant main effect of condition
on number of Can't Help responses such that a larger proportion of requests were met with a Can't Help response in
the Immediate Feedback condition than in the Delayed Feedback condition, with no interaction with gender F(1,42)
= 4.86, p < .05, effect size 1.5 standard deviations.   This suggests that the nature of help requests may have been
different in the two conditions.  Our coarse grained coding of the collaborative behavior does not allow us to further
address the question of what caused this difference at this time.

         For the other three response types, we see a significant gender by condition interaction but no main effect
of condition: Help Provision F(1,40) = 4.84, p < .05; Deny Help F(1,40) = 3.96, p < .05; No Response F(1,40) =
4.91, p < .05.   For girls, the proportion of Help Provision and Deny Help responses is lower in the Immediate
Feedback condition than in the Delayed Feedback condition, but higher for No Response responses.          The pattern is
almost the opposite for boys, where proportion of Deny Help responses remains stable between conditions, but the
proportion of No Response responses is lower in the Immediate Feedback condition than the Delayed Feedback
condition, and the proportion of Help Provision responses is higher in the Immediate Feedback condition than the
Delayed Feedback condition.      Thus, the asymmetric collaboration pattern reverses directions between conditions
when we examine responses to help requests.       Whereas girls offer more help in the Delayed Feedback condition,
boys offer more help in the Immediate Feedback condition.

         We examined relationships between patterns of occurrence of those codes in the collaborative process and
the quantitative social  and  cognitive  outcome   measures  coming     from  the questionnaire  data and  the tests  and
quizzes.  These findings are described in the following two sections.    Our purpose has been to inform the design for
a  collaborative learning   environment  that will  enhance  positive   interdependence   between  students   as  well as
facilitating learning. However, based on the questionnaire data, neither of our conditions consistently maximized all
three of our socially oriented dependent variables, namely perceived benefit, perceived help received, and perceived
help offered.  The surprising finding is that it appears that girls perceive themselves as benefiting more and receiving
more help in the condition in which they are actually offering more help, and conversely, boys see themselves as
receiving more help and benefit in the condition in which they are offering more help.       Specifically, what we found
was a male preference for the Immediate feedback condition and a female preference for the Delayed feedback
condition such that girls perceived themselves as receiving more help and more benefit in the Delayed Feedback
condition, whereas the pattern was the opposite for boys.  In terms of perceived help offered, there was no difference
between how girls and boys rated themselves in the Immediate Feedback condition, but girls rated themselves as
offering significantly less help in the Delayed Feedback condition than boys did.      As mentioned, what we observed
based on our corpus analysis is that girls responded to a higher proportion of help requests with a substantive answer
in  the Delayed  Feedback    condition,  whereas   boys  responded   to a higher    proportion of help   requests with  a
substantive answer in the Immediate Feedback condition.

         One possible explanation for perceiving more help where one is in fact offering more help is that the act of
offering help is an instructionally beneficial activity, and then when students engage in this activity, they perceive
themselves   as receiving   help and benefit  because they are  learning.    Recall that in  the learning gains   analysis
reported  above  with   the quantitative analysis, we   observed  that  girls learned  more  in  the  Delayed  Feedback
condition where we see them offering more help, whereas boys learned more in the Immediate Feedback condition
where we see them offering more help.        As further evidence of this connection we see a significant correlation
between total number of Help Provision responses and learning when we compute a multiple regression with pretest
score and number of Help Provision responses as independent variables and posttest score as the dependent variable
(R2=.84,   p =  .001,  N=30) and  a  significant gender by condition    interaction on total number   of  Help Provision
occurrences that mirrors the earlier analysis with respect to proportion of Help Provision responses F(1,26) = 7.79,
p=.01.  A Bonferroni posthoc analysis reveals a marginal difference between number of Help provision statements
made by girls in the Delayed Feedback condition and that in the Immediate Feedback condition (effect size .89
standard deviations) and a marginal difference between number of Help provision statements made by boys in the
Immediate Feedback condition and by girls in the Immediate Feedback condition (effect size .86 s.d.).

                                                           239                                                  CSCL 2007
Conclusion
          We have investigated the hypothesis that the presence of typical intelligent tutoring system style feedback
in a collaborative problem   solving  interface  would interfere  with collaboration and   dampen   its positive effects.
While our data do not support the strong version of this hypothesis, we are left with the challenge of reconciling the
dichotomous needs and preferences of girls and boys.    Further experimentation is required to identify a satisfactory
solution.  One obvious follow-up study that we plan to run is to replicate the design from this study except using
only homogeneous gender pairs rather than mixed gender pairs.      This would allow us to separate gender preferences
that are specific to mixed-gender pairs from those that are more generally gender based.    Further analysis of the data
from  this investigation might  yield additional   insights that  would allow us to     identify other possible ways of
reconciling the different needs and preferences of girls and boys.     For example, while we have evidence that our
experimental manipulation lead to increases in productive behavior for learning in one condition for boys and the
other for girls, we do not know why they responded more positively to different conditions. There may be deeper
differences in the interaction styles characteristic of each feedback condition that are obscured by our coarse grained
analysis of the data. We believe a deeper analysis of our conversational data would yield new insights.

This work was supported by National Science Foundation grant number IERI REC-043779.
References
Anderson, J.R., Boyle, C.F., Corbett, A., Lewis, M.W.   (1990). Cognitive modeling and intelligent tutoring.
          Artificial Intelligence, 42, 7-49.
Bjork, R. A. (1994). Memory and metameory considerations in the training of human beings. In J. Metcalfe and A.
          Shimamula (Eds). Metacognition: Knowing about knowing. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 1994, 185-205
Corbett, A. T., and Anderson, J. R. (2002). Locus of feedback control in computer-base tutoring: impact on learning
          rate, achievement and attitudes. In Proceedings of CHI 2002, ACM 2002, 245-252
Elbers, E., De Hann, M. Dialogic Learning in the Multi-Ethnic Classroom. Dialogic Learning: Shifting Perspectives
          to learning, instruction and teaching.
Fischer, F., Bruhn, J., Gruesel, C & Mandl, H. (2002). Fostering collaborative knowledge construction with
          visualization tools. Learning and Instruction, 12, 213­232.
Koedinger, K. J., Anderson, R. J., Hadley, W.H., Mark, M.A. (1997). Intelligent Tutoring Goes to School in the Big
          City. International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education. 8, 30-43
Lee, A. Y. (1992). Using tutoring systems to study learning: An application of HyperCard. Behavior Research
          Methods, Instruments, & Computers, 24 (2), 205-212
Nathan, M. J. (1998). Knowledge and situational feedback in a learning environment for algebra story problem
          solving. Interactive Learning Environments, 161-180
Palinscar, A.S., Brown, A. L. (1984). Reciprocal teaching of comprehension-fostering and comprehension-
          monitoring activities. Cognition and Instruction 1 p.117-175.
Piaget, J. (1985). The equilibrium of cognitive structures: the central problem of intellectual development, Chicago
          University Press.
Rummel, N., Spada, H., Caspar, F., Ophoff, J. G., Schornstein, K. (2003). Instructional support for computer-
          mediated collaboration ­ results from process analyses. In Proc. CSCL 2003, 199-208.
Schmidt, R. A., & Bjork, R. A. (1992). New conceptualizations of practice: common principles in three paradigms
          suggest new concepts for training. Psychological Science, 3 (4), 207-217
Sharan, S. (1980). Cooperative Learning in Small Groups: Recent methods and Effects on Achievement, Attitudes,
          and Ethnic Relations. Review of Educational Research, Vol 50, No. 2, 241-271
Vygotsky, L.S. (1978). Mind and society: The development of higher mental processes. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
          University Press
Walker, E. (2005). Mutual Peer Tutoring: A Collaborative addition to the algebra-1 Cognitive Tutors. Young
          Researchers Track at AIED 2005
Webb, N., Nemer, K., Zuniga, S. (2002). Short Circuits or Superconductors? Effects of Group Composition on
          High-Achieving Students' Science Assessment Performance, American Educational Research Journal, 39,
          4, 943-989.

                                                            240                                                 CSCL 2007
