 Reality television, fan behavior, and online communities of practice

  Erica Halverson, University of Wisconsin ­ Madison, 1086 Educational Sciences, 1025 W.
                    Johnson St., Madison, WI 53706, erhalverson@education.wisc.edu

          Abstract: In this paper, I describe participation in reality television online communities as a case
          of "cultural convergence" (Ito, in press; Jenkins, 2006) across "old" fan fiction and "new" online
          community practices. The ways in which reality TV fans engage as media producers parallels the
          ways  in  which   researchers  who    study other   new   media   such as video   games   describe   the rich
          discourse, enduring community, and media mixing required to participate in these settings (Ito, in
          press; Steinkuehler, 2006). I argue here that the characterization of these worlds as communities of
          practice (Lave & Wenger, 1991), the dominant analytic framework for online communities, does
          not  fully  capture  the   way  learning   (and    therefore  becoming)   happens    in  reality  TV  online
          communities     and suggest    ways   to reframe   this model.   Finally, I propose   directions  for future
          research    focused on   understanding     reality  TV   online  fan  communities     as  informal   learning
          environments that require participants to engage in rich cognitive and sociocultural media literacy
          activities.

Reality television, communities of practice, and the new media literacy
          In this emerging strand of media literacy research, I bring together three different bodies of work ­ media
studies and the culture of fandom (e.g. Ito, in press; Jenkins 1992, 2002, 2006), communications studies with a focus
on reality television (e.g. Nabi et al., 2003; Reiss & Wiltz 2004; Thompson, 2001), and learning sciences research
around online learning communities (e.g. Barab, Kling, & Gray, 2004)             - to describe how fans of reality television
participate in  online  learning  communities.     Much    research    around online  learning  communities     takes Lave    and
Wenger's    (1991;    Wenger,   1998)    seminal   communities      of practice  theory    to  characterize  learning   in these
environments. Distilled from extended studies of apprenticeship practices such as tailors and butchers, the central
metaphor    for learning,   and   therefore     becoming,  is   a developmental     progression    from  legitimate   peripheral
participation to full participation over time. Barab et al. (2004) define online learning communities as, "persistent,
sustained [socio-technical] network[s] of individuals who share and develop an overlapping knowledge base, set of
beliefs, values, history, and experiences focused on a common practice and/or mutual enterprise" (p. 23). While this
definition  captures   the  features of  reality   TV online    learning   communities,    the hierarchical  view  of   learning,
movement from legitimate peripheral to full participation, does not capture the way reality TV online communities
function,  nor  does   it describe   the way     participants become    community     members.     A   primary  reason   for  this
disconnect,   I believe,    comes   from  the    treatment   of   literacy in  traditional communities      of  practice   as the
consumption, critique, and (sometimes) production of text. Ito (in press) argues that new media literacies blur the
line between production and consumption, disturbing our traditional conception of legitimate peripheral participant
as consumer and full participant as producer. Here, I treat the literacy practices embedded in participation in reality
TV online communities as a productive technology-based, multi-modal activity that allows participants to master the
design grammar by which messages are effectively communicated across these various media, many of which are
non-text based (Gee, 2003; Ito, in press).

          While  "reality   television"  has    been around   since    Candid  Camera    debuted    in 1948,   The Real    World
precipitated a wave of new shows (Thompson, 2001) that comprise distinctive television genre, defined by Nabi et
al. (2003) as, "programs that film real people as they live out events (contrived or otherwise) in their lives, as these
events occur"   (p.   304). Early studies    of television fandom    in online  communities    (Jenkins  1992,  2002,    see  also
Baym,  1999;    Lancaster,   2001)   looked   at Usenet    groups   around  shows   such   as  Twin  Peaks,  to understand    the
construction of meaning and the production of cultural artifacts through participation in these communities. These
studies, however, could not have possibly predicted the explosion of technological innovation that would result in
the creation of online communities as rich and sophisticated as massively multiplayer online games (MMOGs) (Gee,
2003; Steinkuehler, 2006), fantasy sports (e.g. Jenkins, 2002; Smith & Sharma, 2005), and learning communities
across the  k-16  system    (Barab,  et al., 2004).  While    the information  sharing,  text  production,  and  dialoging    that
Jenkins, Baym, and Lancaster describe are integral parts of these communities, participation in online communities
necessarily means participating in social and material practices beyond the comprehension and composition of text,

                                                                241                                                   CSCL 2007
in both  synchronous    and   asynchronous    spaces    (Steinkuehler,  2006).   Extending    the  work   of Jenkins    (2006) on
cultural convergence and reality television, I argue that reality television online fandom serves as the prototype for
modern cultural fandom and the expression of that fandom through multi-modal online communities of practice.

Participation in reality TV online communities
          Along with the recognition that participation in new media television fan communities involves much more
than the consumption of a variety of texts comes the need to describe and classify what it means to participate in
these communities. Ito (in press) characterizes participation in communities such as these by, "[a shift in] structures
of participation in  the production/consumption       matrix."  Learning    in online   communities     such as  these  cannot be
defined by the traditional dichotomy of production and consumption; reality television show fans are more than just
television  watchers  ­  they  are producers   of   a   participatory  cultural  experience   (Jenkins,  2006).    Drawing  from
models for participation outlined by Ito and Jenkins, I propose two primary ways in which the model for learning in
reality TV   online   communities    differs  from    the often-employed       communities      of practice  framework:   1)   the
trajectory for learning is non-hierarchical linear and, as a corollary; 2) the tools, venues, and products involved in
participation (and therefore becoming) are dispersed. I will provide brief examples of each of before turning to a
research agenda that can explore this model for learning in new media literacy environments such as these.

Trajectory for learning as non-hierarchical
          There  are myriad   ways   of becoming    a   member   of  a reality   TV online   community,     all of which  require
different literacy practices, methods for participation, dedicated amounts of time, and interaction with others. While
I  have not  yet   unpacked   all of  the  trajectories for learning    involved    in  participation,  some    popular forms  of
participation  include:  critique;  immersion      and; "fantasy"    play.  Critique   is likely   the  most  popular   form   for
participation,  and  is  also the  most    similar  to  the   prototypical    structure  for participation   in  online   TV   fan
communities described in earlier studies. Participants engage in critique primarily through a weblog, opportunities
for fans to express their opinions and dialogue with one another about the show, the contestants, the judges, and any
information relevant to the show. While participating in a weblog is a popular activity for fans across reality TV
online communities, it is particularly interesting to look at weblogging across game show-style reality shows with a
job search focus, such as the Apprentice, America's Next Top Model, or Project Runway. The focus of these shows
is to choose one person to follow through a series of challenges related to core competencies in the given profession,
who is anointed by a group of industry professionals as "the next big thing" in their field. Since competitions are
centered on identifying "the best" contestant in their field, weblogging serves as an opportunity for fans to try out
and demonstrate their knowledge of that field by sharing their opinions on contestants' products as well as judges'
choices.

          What if, however, as a fan of a reality show, you are more interested in how contestants will fare than in a
sophisticated, critical analysis of the show itself? Competitive fandom as a model for participation               draws heavily
from the world of fantasy sports, where players take on the role of team owner and assemble teams of real-life ball
players to accumulate the players' statistics throughout a season. The New York Times (May 16, 2006) reported that
15 million  people   spend  1.5   billion  dollars annually   on  fantasy   sports, creating    an active,  participatory culture
around online sports fandom. The metaphor of "owning a fantasy team," has been seamlessly and enthusiastically
embraced    as another   participation  structure  for  reality  TV    fandom.   For   example,    through   fantasysurvivor.net,
participants can earn points by choosing who on the show will win challenges, be voted off the game, be immune
from voting,   and  other  in-show   categories.   As of  the writing   of  this paper,   there were   646  independent   leagues
registered on the website, with a variety of different community characteristics including public or private and free
or with charge.

          Finally, reality TV  has   begun  to capitalize   on  the popularity   of MMOGs,         and particularly Second  Life,
immersive   digital  worlds   where   users  take  on   virtual selves. MTV's     documentary-style      show,   Laguna   Beach,
chronicles  the lives of   privileged high   school   students  living  in  a town  in   Orange    County,  California.  Through
MTV's website, Laguna Beach fans have the opportunity to create an avatar within the Laguna Beach world, inhabit
places  the show's   characters   inhabit, and participate  in  virtual Laguna    Beach    events   including   throwing  parties,
attending concerts, and shopping (http://www.vlb.mtv.com). From these brief descriptions, it easy to see how the
practices   embedded    in these   forms   of  participation    are  vastly   different,  do  not   necessarily  require  mutual
participation, and all represent reality TV fandom in different ways.

                                                                242                                                     CSCL 2007
Tools, venues, and products involved in participation are dispersed
          The communities to which these participants belong are not mutually constituted, and not simply because
some   watch  Survivor   while  others  are hooked   on   The Apprentice.   The  three activities described briefly  above
constitute fundamentally different modes of participation in reality TV fandom. Part of the reason for this is that fans
have access to a rich set of media tools, from which they can pick and choose to learn about and from and to use
across these different trajectories of community membership. Media tools used for participation include: anytime
access to past   series episodes,  access to "never  before   seen"  footage, opportunities for   conversations with show
contestants or   "characters,"  through web  chats,  web   casts, or by their reading  online journals. These   multimedia
tools contribute to the constellation of literacy practices in which fans engage, facilitating their capacity as media
producers. For example Bravo TV, the network that sponsors Project Runway, (a show focused on the profession of
fashion design), gives fans the option of creating their own runway shows, using fashions created throughout the life
of the show,  from   both winners   and losers.  Using  a  simple  drag-and-drop interface, participants  can select clips,
music, and special effects, share their videos and rate others' videos. In this way, fans have the opportunity to "try
on" the role of designer, creating a hybrid construction of work from multiple designers, reframing the original work
through a fan's eyes.

Future studies on reality television, participation structures, and online
communities
          In this paper, I have argued why reality television represents the prototypical domain for a new media
literacy version of fandom and the online communities created as a result. Additionally, I proposed that the
communities of practice framework for understanding how learning looks in these communities is appropriate, but
incomplete, considering the myriad participation trajectories available that do not necessarily mirror the hierarchical
movement from legitimate peripheral to full participation outlined in Lave and Wenger (1991) and the literature
around online communities. I have begun to describe what these participation structures look like, but this is simply
the beginning of a line of research aimed at understanding reality TV online fan communities as prototypical
examples of cultural convergence. The strand of participation I have termed "competitive fandom," seems a fruitful
line of research aimed at characterizing learning as consumption and production that disturbs the peripheral to full
participation hierarchy.

References
Barab S. A., Kling, R., and Gray, J. H. (2004). Designing for virtual communities in the service of learning. New
          York: Cambridge.
Baym, N. (1999). Tune in, log on: Soaps, fandom, and online community. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Ito, M. (in press). Technologies of the childhood imagination: Yugioh, media mixes, and everyday cultural practices.
          In J. Karaganis and N. Jeremijenko (Eds.), Structures of participation in digital culture. Duke University
          Press.
Gee, J. P. (2003). What video games have to teach us about learning and literacy.       New York: Palgrave/Macmillan.
Jenkins, H. (1992). Textual poachers: Television fans and participatory culture. New York: Routledge.
Jenkins, H. (2002). Interactive audiences? The `collective intelligence' of media fans. In D. Harries (Ed.), The new
          media book. London: British Film Institute.
Jenkins, H. (2006). Convergence culture: Where old and new media collide. New York: NYU Press.
Lancaster, K. (2001). Interacting with Babylon 5: Fan performances in a media universe. Austin, TX: University of
          Texas Press.
Lave, J., and Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. New York: Cambridge.
Lewis, L. A. (1992). The adoring audience: Fan culture and popular media. New York: Routledge.
Nabi,  R. L., Biely,  E. N.,   Morgan,  S.  J., and Sitt, C.  R.  (2003). Reality-based television  programming   and   the
          psychology of its appeal. Media Psychology, 5, 303-330.
Reiss, S., and Wiltz, J. (2004). Why people watch reality TV. Media Psychology, 6, 363-378.
Smith, B.   K.,  and Sharma,    P. (2005).  Fantasy  sports  games   as cultures for  informal  learning. Proposal   to the
          National   Science   Foundation,   Informal   Science   Education   section  (funded,   October 05).   Retrieved
          November 17, 2006, from http://homepage.mac.com/macdaddy_b/bsmith.html.
Steinkuehler,   C. A.   (2006). Massively   multiplayer   online  video   gaming as  participation in a  discourse.  Mind,
          Culture, and Activity, 13(1), 38-52.
Thompson, R. (2001). Reality and the future of television. Television Quarterly, 20(6), 20-25.
Wenger, E. (1998). Communities of practice: Learning, meaning, and identity. New York: Cambridge.

                                                             243                                                 CSCL 2007
