                    Principles and Grand Challenges for the Future:
  A Prospectus for the Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning
                                               (CSCL) Community
                                                      Eric R. Hamilton
 Center for Research on Learning and Teaching, Institute for Information Technology Applications, US Air Force
                                   Academy CO 80840-6200, eric.hamilton@usafa.af.mil

      Abstract:      Six principles  of  future learning  environments    have    emerged from    the  CSCL   research
      community.        These   include:  greater   "sightlines"   into  learner, teacher  and    peer cognition;   an
      increasingly      salient role for  modeling; increased      connectivity between  people,   concurrent   with   a
      greater sense of individualization or "one-to-oneness"; fluid contextual mobility in learning, such as
      between virtual and real contexts or interoperability of individual, social and machine knowledge
      forms; and higher interactional bandwidth, or capacity of the environment to mediate meaningful
      content. Four grand challenges ­ large, worthy, and difficult tasks should occupy the attention of the
      CSCL community. Each is a frontier: a more visible and vibrant role for the tools and metaphors of
      the CSCL community in a troubled era of globalization; means for extending collaboration beyond
      cognitive     models  to   a  broader  range of  human    experience;  vitality in learning  and    collaboration
      through the life cycle; and unlocking group "flow" in the science of collaboration.

Introduction
          There are    two purposes   to  this paper.  The   first is to discuss  six  principles or  metaphors    for  learning
environments    of  the  future. The  second    purpose   is to  identify four    grand challenges    for the CSCL     research
community. The paper thus takes the form of a prospectus for directions that are underway as a result of work by this
community   and    for  directions  that are possible. A   grand   challenge    can be  taken to  mean    a large  task  for the
community, one that is vital, difficult and noble. It can be simply formulated, as in "put a man on the moon." In this
context, though, attainment is evolutionary and not readily documented by a single event but rather by a pattern of
events and trends. Grand challenges are worth organizing people and resources. The outcomes of a grand challenge
are not certain and the consequences of failure are high. In contrast, the principles of future learning environments
are in motion. What is at stake in not whether we realize or attain these principles, because in fact they are being
realized. What is not known is how thoroughly the principles are elaborated -- and how well the community exploits
them to accomplish the larger grand challenges.

          The paper is prepared from a somewhat unusual background as a former division director at NSF involved
in funding and in being able to observe many of the most important research projects in this community until 2003.
More recently, our research center at the US Air Force Academy (USAFA) has been involved in developing and
researching new approaches to future learning environments, with NSF-supported work in networking pedagogical
agents over collaborative workspaces using new interfaces (2004) and in advancing work originated by Lesh, Kaput
and others on models and modeling as a foundation for future mathematics education (Lesh, Hamilton et al. 2007).
Additionally, we have organized various research community development projects under NSF support in the areas
of new teaching pedagogies and more recently in distributed learning and collaboration (e.g., Hamilton, Carmona et
al. 2006). These three vantages ­ as a funder, as a researcher developing new learning environment frameworks, and
in research community development ­ contribute to the analysis here of principles for future learning environments
and grand challenges for the CSCL community.

          The six principles are not meant to be provocative so much as to encode some of the large accomplishments
of the field and to suggest some important aspects of them. There is no shortage of candidate principles, or indeed of
potential grand  challenges     for  the future for the   CSCL     community.   This   paper  does not    claim to  offer  ideal
formulations.   Bell   and Sabelli   (2006),   Koschmann     and    colleagues  (Koschmann,    Hall    et al. 2002;    Bereiter,
Koschmann   et  al.  2004)  and  others   have  reflected on  CSCL     directions and   have encouraged     dialog about  those
directions. They have forcefully advocated deepening the integration and strengthening of the multiple theoretical
frameworks that guide the community. That integration is an ongoing and daunting task. While this paper cites work
from multiple theoretical frameworks, such integration is beyond the paper's contribution. The central goal of the
paper instead is to stimulate additional discussion within the CSCL community about the ways we describe future

                                                              244                                                    CSCL 2007
learning  environments    and   the ways     we
understand   the   largest, most    vital andconsequentialtasksonourhorizon.Do·Increased sightlines in the classroom ­ a greater ability for everyoneinaclassroom,teachersandstudentsalike,toseeusablerepresentations of conceptual models used by others in the classroom;
these resonate? Do they clarify where weare going and where we should go? What·Increasedemphasisonmodelsandmodeling­agreaterstressonsystems of ideas and relationships both in how learning "tasks" are
might be more accurate or insightful ways                structured and in how assessment is carried out;
to describe forward progress, opportunityand responsibility?·Increased connectedness ­ learners more meaningfully connected toeach other and those outside of the classroom;
          Two more preliminary notes. For            ·   Increased      "one-to-one-ness"­       greater   individualization      and
the   purposes   of  space,   much     of    thediscussion below, at least on principles ofcustomization for the individual learner under the management of ateacher, emulating a one-to-one tutoring experience.
future learning environments, is confined            ·   More    fluid contextual   mobility  in learning  ­ transfer to  and   from
to P16 formal   educational   settings.   Suchsettings may include physical classroomsvirtualsystems,greateremphasisonheterogeneouscompetenciesfunctioningatunison,greaterintegrationofcognitive,socialandaffectivedimensionsoflearning,morehybridizationand
or more distributed and/or online settings.              interoperability of individual-social-machine knowledge forms.
Many     elements     of    these   principles       ·   Increased     interactional  bandwidth   ­ the  capacity  of  the  learning
characterize other types of environments,                environment       to   mediate    meaningful     content  and     affective
such   as    companies    or    networks     as          representations that are shared by participants in that environment.
"learning organizations" or broader social                              Table 1: Six Principles of Future Learning
structures    and    communities.       These                                        Environments
principles,  while  not  comprehensive,      are
attempts to be both simple in formulation and deep in substance. The discussion of grand challenges is not confined
to formal   educational  settings.  Second,    the expression     "computer-supported        collaborative   learning"  conveniently
fixes some   baseline assumptions    about     the CSCL    research    community.     Its principal  pursuits  are about    deep   and
effective  collaboration,   about  deep   and  effective learning,     and  how   collaboration     and  learning  can   interact  and
enhance one another. Investigating how information and communication technologies such as computers mediate or
help to co-create learning and collaboration as the central work of the community is a given. That is, these themes
can  rightly be  stipulated  as   both  principles  of  future    learning    environments    and   grand    challenges.  Given    that
stipulation ­ that we are all seeking means to advance deep and effective learning and collaboration ­ this paper
seeks to elaborate on some dimensions of our common quest.

Principles for Learning Environments of the Future
          In a recent global colloquium on engineering, our research group summarized three important metaphors
and principles for future learning environments (Hamilton 2006), to which this discussion adds three others.

Principle 1: Increased "sightlines" in the classroom
          The  "classroom   of  today"    is a vague   but  still useful   starting   point  for any discussion    about    the future
because today's classroom structures commonly have so many evident shortcomings. One characterization, though,
that is not frequently invoked may be one of the modern classroom's most deleterious shortcomings. Classroom
environments are steeped in a culture of guesswork by teachers about what students bring to class conceptually, how
they are cognitively and affectively engaged while in class, and what they have learned by the time that a class
session or grading period has concluded. And classrooms are steeped in a culture of guesswork by students about
conceptual structure, what they should know, what is salient to the teacher, and what they know relative to their
peers. (Although the latter is to be expected, in collaborative environments the ability to assess the knowledge of
one's peers is important.) The mass production classroom is a social structure that requires constant sensemaking
inference   and  speculation    by  teachers   (and  students     also, in    a different    way)   about  what   the   students   are
experiencing, and what instructional or classroom management decisions are appropriate based on those inferences
and speculations. Of course, successful educators hone their intuitions about their students to an impressive level of
accuracy. But we have become so inured and adapted to following large hunches and guesses about learner, teacher
and peer cognition that we accept it as a fixed limitation. It no longer needs to be so.

                                                                 245                                                        CSCL 2007
         And     guesswork       extends  to   content    matter.      ·   Teachers will see learner cognition more clearly.
Textbooks and other pre-digital tools are inherently limited           ·   Students will see structure more clearly
in  exposing     structural   relationships  in     mathematical,      ·   Students   will see each other's  cognitive states
scientific and social phenomena. Search tools and other just-              more clearly.
in-time  media   are becoming     more   ubiquitous   for instant      ·   Social cognition will be more visible.
access to declarative knowledge and data. In this light, most          ·   Students will see teacher cognition more clearly.
or all  of  the   CSCL   community       would   agree  that   the     ·   Ontologies and visual maps of cognition relative
traditional but   superficial   information-dispensing    role of          to content more refined
schools is increasingly subordinate to a more critical role of
building    competencies      in  understanding,     connecting,              Table 2: Types of New Sightlines
making   sense    of and     manipulating   dynamic,    complex
systems and social structures. This requires, perhaps above all else, greater tools for visual representation of the
structure of ideas that are shared and co-generated, and for visual representation of student and teacher conceptual
structures. Virtual systems, games and simulations, by dint of exposing new structural relationships, certainly fall
into this category.

         Learning environments of the future will have a greater functionality in multiplying what might be called
"sightlines" into learner cognition. New conceptual and electronic tools for teachers and students ­ both learners ­
provide ways to see concepts and cognition far more accurately than in the past. Such classrooms will provide richer
and more effective ways to allow a teacher to understand the cognitive and motivational state of students. The CSCL
research community has played an essential role in multiplying the lines of sight in learning environments. One of
the most vivid examples or metaphors in this area, for purposes of illustration, involves participatory simulations
(e.g., Colella 2002;  Wilensky      and Shapiro  2003;  Stroup,    Carmona   et al.  2005), using   visualization tools  that a)
change the types of mathematical thinking students can undertake; b) allow students to see real-time representations
of their own mathematical behavior more clearly; c) allow students to see real-time representations of their peers
mathematical   behavior   more   clearly, and    d) allow teachers   to  see  representations  of  the  thinking  of all of   the
students. This example is vivid but not lonely. Being able to see more ­ in terms of cognition, conceptual structure,
and social networks -- is an implicit (and often explicit) theme of a large slice of CSCL research.

         A very rudimentary example of new sightlines involves classroom or audience response systems (Roschelle
and Penuel 2003; Banks 2006), that sample student responses periodically during an instructional sequence. More
substantive response, feedback and interaction systems such as the Classroom Presenter (Anderson, Anderson et al.
2007), WriteOn (Tront, Eligeti et al. 2006) and GroupScribbles (DiGiano, Tatar et al. 2006) are now coming on line.
Each involves tablet computing and the more powerful knowledge modeling that they permit. One potent example
involves  the  blending  of   fully collaborative   workspace   networks   of   tablet devices, allowing    the  teacher to   see
thumbnails or full screens of each student engaged in writing activity (such as in mathematics). When the teacher can
see more representations of cognition (such as in a workspace), the role that the teacher exerts will fundamentally
shift and become more informed. This applies, further, to tools that give researchers a greater line of sight into
learner activity. Examples    include   through  innovative  video  observation     systems  (Pea,  Mills et al.  2004), use  of
model-eliciting   activities  (below)   and  the refinement    of  ontologies   that   expose  cognitive  pathways     taken  by
individuals and collaborative teams (Hoppe, Pinkwart et al. 2005). More examples follow in the discussion of the
other principles of future learning environments, because increased sightlines plays such an important role in them.

Principles 2: Increased "modeling" in the learning environment
         Modeling and its emphasis on formation of connected knowledge forms, the adaptation of large ideas to
new contexts, just-in-time learning, and complex reasoning in collaborative arrangements is a healthy departure from
the traditional and persistent tendency of schools to function primarily as dispensers of declarative and procedural
knowledge.   There   are many    flavors of modeling   in  education   research.  Collectively,  they  form  a  viable  suite of
approaches   for  rethinking    and "re-mixing"     curriculum  in  future learning    environments.    A common       theme  in
modeling research involves variations of emphasis on systems thinking, abstract reasoning and the role of developing
mathematical   and   scientific  interpretations from  context.   This  trend has   a  well-established lineage   in the CSCL
community (e.g., Hmelo, Holton et al. 2000; Kolodner, Camp et al. 2003). In science education, the Modeling Across
the Curriculum (MAC) project (Buckley, Gobert et al. 2004) leads and exemplifies this trend with the development
of replacement modules across multiple areas of the high school curriculum. In mathematics, Lesh, Yoon et al (2007)
turn a phrase associated with teachers who make "mathematics practical", gently suggesting instead the possibility of
making "practice mathematical." Work in mathematical modeling in the curriculum has included a strand referred to

                                                               246                                                    CSCL 2007
as model-eliciting activities or MEAs (Lesh and Doerr 2003), that is largely the basis of efforts advocating modeling
as a foundation for future mathematics curriculum (Lesh, Hamilton and Kaput, 2007).

          NSF's   Research,  Evaluation  and  Communication     Division    (now   part  of  the Division   of  Research   and
Learning), which plays a prominent role in supporting PIs associated with this community, routinely has relied on
metaphors   such  as modeling    and   simulation  to describe  features  of   its research  investments.   Many   of    those
investments  fall into the   different category  of modeling    in artificial  intelligence. Virtual  reality  environments,
including those that transition games to learning, will simply overpower more traditional instructional environments
as their features more authentically structure formal educational goals as primary design considerations that are not
subordinate to entertainment design. This community is on the vanguard of such developments (Dede 2003; Galas
and Ketelhut 2006; Shaffer 2007; Ketelhut, Dede et al. (in press)). One prominent instantiation of modeling in the
future will involve variations of intelligent tutoring systems (e.g., Koedinger, Aleven et al. 2003). Similarly, the
interaction of artificial pedagogical agents and avatars is promising. Advances in gesturology, affect, and personality
engineering in agents enhance their anthropomorphic credibility and usability (Cole, Vuuren et al. 2003; Baylor and
Kim 2005; Maldonado, Lee et al. 2005).

Principles 3 and 4: Increased "connectedness" and "one-to-one-ness" in the classroom
          Learning environments that furnish greater sightlines into learner cognition and that emphasize, highlight,
or rely on modeling lead to greater connectedness in collaboration. In our "Agent and Library Augmented Shared
Knowledge Area" (ALASKA) project we look for ways to use collaborative workspaces and pedagogical agents to
allow the teacher to see the work of students as they engage in their own work using tablet computers (Hamilton
2004). Such systems also enable peers to more effectively see what their classmates are doing when collaboration is
allowed. Another example of the change in sightlines is the nascent movement in open-learner-modeling (OLM)
(Bull, Abu-Issa et al. 2005). OLM offers promise to a student giving a better sense of how the learning environment
is tracking the student's cognitive modeling, by creating what are called "scrutable models" allowing the student to
see how the system is representing their cognition against an ontology related to the particular subject matter.

          These are among developments afforded by learning technologies and artificial intelligence systems that
increase what teachers and students see in the classroom. They address the primitive of the CSCL community ­
deeper connectedness, the third principle of future learning environments. Such connectedness is a raison d'etre of
the CSCL    community.  Every    paper  in this conference   reflects  efforts to  exploit  communication    technologies   to
create social spaces that foster learning. The examples highlighted here emphasize how connectedness changes when
lines of sight change. Sight that allows one to see the structural contribution of collaborators will be fundamentally
clearer and less ambiguous in the future than it is now. Representational tools that clarify or highlight conceptual
structure  manipulated  by   others  makes    deep  collaboration  possible.   They   allow  structure   rather than    merely
constituent elements to be salient and visible.

          The example of OLM is important, because it stretches our understanding of the notion of collaboration ­
collaboration  intrinsically refers to  working  with  others,  at least by    the light of  traditional  interpretation.  Yet
increasingly learning scientists acknowledge and investigate the meta-roles of self in learning, the self collaborating
with self.  Metacognitive    and self-regulatory   behavior, for   example,    corresponds   to  one  set of   functionalities
observing, managing traffic, and directing other functionalities. Learning environments of the future will not only
permit deeper  collaboration   between  individuals,  but will  permit  the individual   deeper     harmony with  himself  or
herself in learning. Individuals who become more sophisticated about learning become more sophisticated learners.

          A fourth theme   of learning  environments   of the   future involves    a reference   to another seemingly    fixed
feature of the classrooms of today, that mass education inevitably requires students to conform to the instructional
approach of one teacher per class. Whether the students' learning styles align with the teacher's teaching style is a
hit-or-miss proposition, a situation that can only be reliably avoided in one-to-one learning settings with a tutor who
can adapt to the individual needs of the learner. Ever since Bloom's classic two-sigma claim of the advantage of
tutoring over classroom instruction (1984), personalized or "tutored" instruction has been the idealized contrast to
traditional or  "many-to-one"    student   to teacher  classroom   configurations.    One-to-one     human     tutoring is an
impossible-to-attain ideal, yet in the future the metaphor may give way to more realistically attainable means to
emulate and exceed that ideal. We use the term "one-to-one-ness" as a metaphor for the cognitive and motivational
advantages that can follow from a ratio of one tutor to one student. The advantages include dynamic shifting of
strategies of teaching to match a student's learning style, more immediate feedback loops, opportunity to probe for
clarifications with no wait states or delays, and more interactions and responses that map intuitively and closely to a

                                                            247                                                    CSCL 2007
perceived affective state. Classrooms that have the greater sightlines and connectedness mentioned above will be
positioned to emulate and to exceed the vision of customized learning that a one-to-one model represents. In the
ALASKA system we are developing, for example, customization through a method that can flexibly invoke short-
term, dynamically available and technologically-mediated help from peers; furnish intelligent or affectively astute
virtual agents; furnish tailored digital knowledge resources; use open-learner-modeling techniques mentioned above
to  give the learner   more feedback    on  learning  progressions;    and   free the teacher's   cognitive   load    from   routine
instruction to devote cognitive resources to more demanding or complex pedagogical tasks such as those that can be
undertaken in one-to-one tutoring arrangements. Each of these features amplifies and diversifies individual resources
for  learning, resources   that were   not  available when    Bloom    first enunciated    the  human  tutoring    double    sigma
advantage in 1984. Virtually everything in the learning environments of today is colored and constrained by the
economic impossibility of attaining a true one-to-one learner to teacher ratio. Yet, appropriately structured, future
learning environments may "work around" or even surpass that goal.

Principles Five and Six: Fluid Contextual Mobility and Increased Interactional Bandwidth
in Learning
          As modes of collaborative learning, interactivity and new technologies abound, one of the most compelling
developments    in future  learning   environments    will be how    they  are combined       and how  learners    and   educators
transition between   them   and  customize   them.  The    flexible or seamless    adaptation   of learners  to  rapidly   shifting
channels in the environment may one of the most interesting developments of future learning environments. And this
contextual mobility is not limited to attentional shifts (such as transfer to and from virtual systems) but to shifts and
hybrids that might be more sublime, such as participating in while studying the domain space, or moving in and out
of a social network space. Several examples appear in Table 4. The construct of contextual mobility has risen to a
prominent place in our ALASKA Project. As a multifaceted scaffolding system, ALASKA requires students and
teachers to flexibly move in and out of different modes or function in multiple hybrid modes simultaneously. In some
cases, collaborative mediators (which might be a teacher or might be an artificial agent) allow students to seek help
and to give help, and to do so remotely. Artificial agents
that broker    connections   and     collaborative workspaces        ·  In and out of virtual and real contexts
lower the cost of such help giving and seeking.                      ·  Blending real and video face-to-face interactions
                                                                     ·  Participating in and being part of the content space
          Each of the preceding five principles reflects one         ·  Greater emphasis on heterogeneous competencies
of  numerous   possible  ways   to highlight important  trends          functioning at unison
that may be useful to understand and to leverage for CSCL            ·  Adaptation    to interoperable scaffolding      from peers,
research. Each has some intersection with the others. For               digital content, artificial tutors and teachers
example, customization in classrooms depends increasing              ·  Moving in and out of collaboration, individual effort
the sightlines so the instructor can calibrate activities on a          and reflective activity
more personalized basis. Increased sightlines create more            ·  Transition in and out of fully absorbing flow states
connections    with  the   teacher,   and   certainly between        ·  Interoperability   of  individual,  social  and   machine
students.  Developments     of  this nature enhance   what   we         knowledge forms
have  referred  to  as  the "interactional   bandwidth"    of a              Table 3: Types of Contextual Mobility
learning environment, or the capacity of the environment
to mediate meaningful content and affective representations shared by participants and to and compress and layer
interactions in that environment (Hamilton, DiGiano et al. 2004). A sixth principle of future learning environments is
that they will entail much greater interactional bandwidth. We are only at the beginning of understanding how much
more bandwidth is possible. In a sense, we are at 9600 bps bandwidth environment when 100Mbs is possible. In
system networking, bandwidth in measured in speed, with the effects understood in terms of how much richness
(e.g., video versus text) is carried over the connections. In learning environments, the vision is not for frenetic and
high-speed   activity, but  for depth   and  layering  of  interaction  with   others    and  with content.   It   is a  matter of
intensifying human experience, connection and meaning in learning, in ways we could not imagine earlier, and for
more of our students.

Four Grand Challenges for the CSCL Community
          These six principles are all inherently optimistic about the prospects for building more effective and humane
learning environments, and with good reason. They characterize paths that not only are possible but are already being
explored or followed. As the CSCL field continues in the development, theoretical integration and empirical studies
that will help incrementally advance such compelling possibilities for the future, it may also be useful to situate the
research   community   more    largely relative to  a global  society.  In   that  spirit, the  paper  offers candidate      "grand

                                                              248                                                        CSCL 2007
challenges" that are less intended to encode developments already under way than to provoke discussion on the
larger roles that the community might exert in the future.

Grand Challenge 1: Break-out role influencing society with innovative tools and ways of
thinking about collaboration
          Conferences on learning technologies and educational research routinely invoke the well-being of society,
yet these allusions are often illusions, in the sense that there is a poorly articulated connection between research and
society. Virtually everyone in this field has likely grappled deeply with the issues of transferring research to practice.
It is not  so   in all  sciences or  research    endeavors,  but   in ours,  where     the   research  traditions    are    young, the
"laboratories" are complex settings, and research funding is driven by the need to demonstrate impact, connecting
research to practice looms large. But perhaps not large enough. The tools and ways of thinking that the community is
pioneering are desperately needed in a world where polarization along countless dimensions of human experience is
exacerbated, ironically, by the miraculous technologies that few of us could imagine in our youth. Our world is in
deep trouble. It is survival-threatening trouble. There is no guarantee that we will not see cataclysmic destruction in
our   lifetimes in  one  form   or  another.  Averting  such    disaster   will require    a lot of  the   medicine     this  research
community is brewing. It is in our hands to find ways to instantiate new tools of collaboration in areas or ways that
are not typical for this community.

          People who understand each other and who collaborate are not eager to destroy one another. I am a civilian
researcher in a United States military academy, and believe our best hope for building peace is by building bridges of
understanding and generosity of spirit. It is not difficult to say to the CSCL choir that collaborative technologies are
a  great means     to that end. This  is  not idealism,  this is  reality. While     this  community      is not the   arbiter  of the
sometimes   small,    sometimes    large, sometimes    harrowing    conflicts   that polarize    our   cities, country,     and global
society, it can and should elevate its sense of identity, to understand that it can play an absolutely crucial role in
forging deeper understanding between people, and in finding ways to express benefits to one another and to convey
and   to receive   generosity.  Good   will   is a limitless  human    commodity      in   the right   circumstances.       The world
desperately needs that endless commodity, to create the circumstances for it to be expressed. In my estimation, it is
critical to understand      the  central  importance   of   building   understanding       between     people    and   cultures   as   a
responsibility of this research community to civilization and prosperity. The CSCL community has in hand the tools
and approaches that can play a large role in cross-cultural bridging.

          What might this look like? What are specific ways that CSCL researchers can promote bridge-building? The
most imaginative and creative approaches will emerge as the community expands its sense of identity and sees that it
has a role in promoting connections in a troubled world. We are just beginning some efforts in this direction in our
research group. We are in the process, for
example,    of     carrying     out  researchseminars that entail students from the UK·Break-outroleinfluencingsocietyinnovativetoolsandwaysofthinking about collaboration. The great research frontier: Deploying
(Hamilton, Lesh et al. 2007) and the US,                CSCL     in   ways   that    build   substantial,    authentic  bridges    of
and from the Peoples Republic of China                  collaboration in place of polarization.
(Hamilton, Tao et al. 2007) and the US               ·  Ultra-deep model collaboration: sharing human experience ­ CSCL
and between the Mideast and the US to                   research is at the center of helping individuals assimilate, share and
work     together  on   finding  solutions   to         co-create   complex  knowledge     models.   The   great research    frontier:
specific   mini-engineering      humanitarian           assimilation, sharing and co-creating models that integrate cognition
problems involving developing countries.                more  fully   with broader   dimensions   of   human   experience    such  as
This work is co-funded by the US NSF,                   affect, motivation, intuition and identity.
the British Economic and Social Research             ·  Agility  in learning    through    the life  cycle   ­  The    life cycle  is
Council, and the Chinese Natural Science                lengthening and changing; work, play and society demand continual
Foundation.     A  related   project  is  now           expansion of individual competencies and multiple start-from-scratch
starting        involving        collaborating          novice-to-expert   transitions.    The   great  research   frontier:    Agile
engineering   students   in the  Mideast   and          learning throughout the life cycle.
the   US.     Distributed       teamwork      is     ·  Unlocking group "flow" in the science of collaboration ­ Work over
increasingly prevalent in multidisciplinaryengineering design, for example, and it isthepastthirtyyearshasenabledgreaterunderstandingofindividualized and phenomenological conditions that produce optimaland immersive performance in challenging settings, often called the
an  ideal   area   for  rapid   escalation   of         zone or flow. The great research frontier: Uncovering conditions that
international            computer-supported             permit zone or flow conditions for collaborative teams.
collaborative learning. The emergence of                                   Table 4: Four Grand Challenges

                                                               249                                                           CSCL 2007
engineering education programs with a humanitarian and developing nations emphasis is a salutary development in
this overall movement (Mulrine 2006). Most such programs involve individual courses or course sequences. The
Humanitarian Engineering Minor at the Colorado School of Mines in the US, the first of its kind, will hopefully be
emulated elsewhere. These typically, however, are costly to expand or to scale, and do not yet capitalize prominently
on collaborative technologies. The projects referenced above, with Chinese, British, Mideast and US students will
actually involve no face-to-face contact, but will rely heavily on collaboration tools to simulate such contact. The
research questions will focus on the scalability of such interactions and the tradeoffs that they involve in genuine
model-solving activities. In another network project, we are attempting to link US high school students with students
in African countries through an effort originally started by the Quality Education for Minorities (QEM) organization
(McBay    2005)    and through   an  African  mathematics     and  science  education  network    organized  by   Hiroshima
University. The goal is to position students to collaboratively solve problems that can be modeled mathematically
and that  are authentic  to each   other's societies. Children in  Topeka   and  the Four Corners    and  Seattle should be
communicating with children in Kampala or Rio or Istanbul, and not at the level of pen pals, but in ways that become
routine and substantive and build permanent bridges to the future. The sophistication of the collaborative tools we
are using ­ collaborative spaces, virtual agents, voice and video over IP, dynamic web spaces -- is fairly high yet
there is limitless potential to grow. The conceptual tools center on theories of models and modeling. Our vision is to
promote   a robust  system  of  exchanges   between   students internationally, creating  a   way of  thinking  about cross-
cultural communication that is not only available, but actively pursued by educational systems in different countries.
The vision for the CSCL community is to play an expansive role in finding ways to sustain robust international
collaborative learning, and thereby alter evolving definitions and descriptions of globalization.

Grand Challenge 2: Ultra-deep model collaboration: sharing human experience
          Largely  through  representational  and   computational   tools, CSCL   facilitates sharing and  cogeneration   of
cognitive models.   What    is the next level beyond     cognitive models?  Will collaboration    exchange   go further than
cogeneration and sharing of the conceptual and extend to deeper and more complex modeling processes that engage
broader dimensions of human experience? One way to think of this is through the frames of experiential reference.
Understanding and integrating multiple frames of references is a key indicator of the research area of intellectual
maturity. William Perry (1980) and then the team of King and Kitchener (1994) have delineated stage models for
moving from egocentric and narrowly defined frames of reference to more complex reasoning forms that recognize
the legitimacy of multiple ways to approach a problem. Currently, it is difficult to find ways to move individuals
along a developmental continuum. It may be that a key to nurturing maturation in the adaptation of multiple frames
of reference  is by  understanding   more   holistically that frames   of  reference are embedded    in a  series of  human
dimensions    that extend beyond    cognitive   boundaries.   Some  of the  broader  dimensions    include  affect, identity,
socialization, motivation, and belief systems. Damasio's Descartes' Error (1994) highlights how the cogito ergo sum
of Descartes'  mind-body    dualism   has  systematically   relegated  non-cognitive  elements    of learning  to secondary
status. CSCL has reached a certain sophistication in metaphors and methods for collaboration around conceptual or
cognitive systems, but not to collaborations allowing individuals to impart a fuller range of meaning that is not only
rich with cognitive structure but also with affective valence, intuition, and personal meaning, and have those models
shared and understood by their collaborators. That deeper sharing can occur in collaboration is not a special insight,
but neither is it deeply understood nor systematically attainable. We are only at the very beginning of that journey.

Grand Challenge 3: Agility in learning through the life cycle
          The life cycle is lengthening and changing. Work, play, and society will demand continual expansion of
individual competencies and multiple start-from-scratch novice-to-expert transitions over each of our lifetimes and
those  of our  descendants.    The  "learn then    earn" paradigm   of 20th century   industrial  society is  fundamentally
inadequate for the future. Stagnation in knowledge is an increasingly untenable life strategy. Issues of cognitive
vitality throughout the life cycle are increasingly recognized by the many industrialized counties with declining birth
rates. The  severe  pressures   from  this demographic    phenomena    are  repeatedly   stressed in  policy  documents   of
multilateral organizations such as OECD as well as national policy commissions. This is especially true in countries
such as Japan and China, where the birth rate has fallen below that needed to sustain population levels. While low
birth rates mitigate overpopulation, they produce societies whose median age climbs and who rely increasingly on
the competencies of an older workforce. By most lights and conventional wisdom, an aging workforce is not as agile
or competent in evolving new ways of thinking and using technological tools as younger counterparts. Yet one of the
most important advances emerging from brain science has been research in neural plasticity through the life cycle
and documentation that knowledge construction and acquisition potentials are far greater in the aging process than
previously  thought  (della-Chiesa   2003).  It is fortuitous that science  is undermining    the myth  that  agile and rich

                                                              250                                                  CSCL 2007
learning can only occur primarily in youth. Researchers such as Gerhard Fischer (e.g., Fischer and Konomi 2005) are
investigating means by which CSCL tools can nurture creativity and continued dynamism and creativity, and reshape
what we understand to be the learning potentials through the life cycle. This era is the first in recorded history in
which it can be argued that the younger generation has greater facility with the tools and artifacts of knowledge
formation  and  knowledge     sharing  than   the preceding    generation,     it is  also  arguable   that in the  future,  a youth-
dominant society is one that has failed to exploit the vibrancy of all ages of society.

Grand Challenge 4: Attaining group "flow" in collaboration
         Both   education  research    and  learning   science   research  writ    large    involve  the quest   to optimize   human
performance in teaching and learning. In that respect, other human performance research domains should be relevant
to education and learning science research. An area of research with such emphases on high performance should be
of particular interest to the CSCL community. One example involves studies of human flow ­ optimum performance
and  creativity in challenging     circumstances,   entailing  deep   absorption      in tasks  that are  at the outer   edge  of  the
individual's abilities. There are multiple design and emergent factors associated with flow, and most of them are
related to how an individual functions in a(n) (learning) environment. Introduced as a psychological construct by
Csikszentmihalyi (1975), it has been widely researched ­ often in the context of examining intrinsic enjoyment or
satisfaction while engaged in work or play, fully concentrated absorption whereby an individual loses a sense of
time, or optimal or heroic performance in extreme (highly challenging, enjoyable or desperate) circumstances.

         The CSCL community has indirectly but very powerfully addressed a sublime question: Can the experience
of flow while learning be routinely induced, and how? There is very limited research on flow induction compared to
descriptive, measurement or correlational studies of flow experience. This paucity is even more severe in research on
flow  in learning  (see  Shernoff,    Csikszentmihalyi     et al. 2003).   On     the positive   side, research   on   areas such  as
immersive simulations and virtual environments, digital media, and engagement in electronic games has produced
mounting   evidence   that it is   possible to   structure favorable    conditions    for   high  performance    and   fully engaged
activity at the edge of one's abilities. One large challenge for that portion of the CSCL community devoted to virtual
reality research is to find and accelerate means for exploiting immersive and high performance play into a broader
swath of learning and modeling activities (Klopfer, Perry et al. 2005; Shaffer 2007). As daunting as that challenge
might be, a larger one strikes at the heart of research on flow, namely the transference of this experience from a
highly autotelic,  individual  and    private phenomenon      to  one   that is   shared    by  collaborative  teams,   especially in
learning environments.     Modern     classrooms,  for example,     are not    structured   to  induce   flow. The   basic  necessary
conditions ­  lack   of distractions,  lack   of fear  of  failure, understanding        of what  to do   next,  i.e., deep  sense of
executing a tacit model -- are alien to current learning environments. What is the analog for collaborative teams? It
would  go  from    Michael Jordan's    history-making     individual  game     to  open     the Chicago   Bulls' 1992    NBA   Finals
against Portland ("...I didn't know what was happening. I was in a zone. What can I say? I don't know how to explain
it. You know it's got to end, it has to, but when? It's like it doesn't matter what they do.") to the stunning rally and
come-from-behind team win by the Bulls against Phoenix a year later, when Horace Grant and John Paxson passed
up a guaranteed layup to tie at game's end. Without hesitation and knowing exactly where each other was on the
court, they skipped the tie and in one fluid motion bet the world championship on a three-point shot. It went in. Grant
and Paxson were in a collective flow.

         Another example is the performance of an orchestra, whose members keep a perfect sense of timing but
collectively lose  their sense   of   time. How   can  such    experiences     of  sublime      and  deep   immersion   be   routinely
approached   in  our  so-often-pedestrian    learning  settings,  and   how    can    high   performance     and optimally   creative
collaboration   be induced?   Is the  non-linear  jump    of  consciousness     to   the stratosphere    of individual  or  collective
performance   so   emergent   that it can only   be appreciated     but not  replicated?     Perhaps,  or   perhaps  we  don't  know
enough about it to make that judgment. Why not understand it well enough to find conditions that might be likely to
elicit it? Especially in the realm of collective performance, the domain of this research community? We have argued
that it is at least a researchable question (Hamilton 2007; Hamilton and Hurford in press) for computer-supported
collaboration. Research in group flow is a tremendous frontier whose building blocks involve networks furnishing
rapid feedback   loops,  calibration   of participant  task   abilities in   a collaborative     environment,    progressively  deep
levels of task immersion, shared models of task, and shared models of social structure within the collaborative space.
Our  research   group is trying  to   understand  conditions,   adding   to  these    building   blocks  the facilitating  feature of
heterogeneous agent network flow to mediate feedback loops. The sort of phenomena we envision is significantly
beyond anything we have been able to effect, but we have been able to elicit more sustained engagement in learning
settings (Hamilton    and  Hurford    in  press), for  example.     Producing      high   performance     collaboration   conditions,
including the representational and feedback tools needed for tasks whose calibrations are at the outer edges of a

                                                                251                                                         CSCL 2007
team's competencies, in circumstances of urgency, vitality, or other significant challenge, is a task worthy of the
CSCL community.

References
Anderson,   R.,  R. Anderson,    et  al. (2007). Supporting   Active  Learning and  Example   Based Instruction with
      Classroom Technology. To Appear SIGCSE 2007.
Banks, D. (2006). Audience Response Systems in Higher Education: Applications and Cases New York, Idea Group,
      Inc.
Baylor, A. L. and Y. Kim (2005). "Simulating instructional roles through pedagogical agents." International Journal
      of Artificial Intelligence in Education 15(1): 95-115.
Bell, P. and   N. Sabelli (2006).   "The   Learning  Sciences   and the Need for Close Couplings  Between  Research
      Paradigms." Educational Technology 46(3): 45-53.
Bereiter, C., T. Koschmann, et al. (2004). Plumbing the foundations of knowledge building: a special symposium.
      Proceedings of the 6th international conference on Learning sciences, Santa Monica, CA, International Society
      of the Learning Sciences.
Bloom, B. S. (1984). "The 2 sigma problem: The search for methods of group instruction as effective as one-on-one
      tutoring." Educational Researcher 13: 4-16.
Buckley, B. C., J. D. Gobert, et al. (2004). "Model-Based Teaching & Learning with BioLogica: What Do They
      Learn? How Do They Learn? How Do We Know?" Journal of Science Education & Technology 13(1): 23-41.
Bull, S., A. S. Abu-Issa, et al., Eds. (2005). Some Unusual Open Learner Models. Frontiers in Artificial Intelligence
      and Applications: Artificial Intelligence in Education. Amsterdam, IOS Press.
Cole, R., S. v. Vuuren, et al. (2003). "Perceptive Animated Interfaces: First Steps for a New Paradigm for Human
      Computer Interaction." Proceedings of the IEEE, Special Issue: Multimodal Human Computer Interfaces.
Colella, V. (2002). Participatory Simulations: Building Collaborative Understanding Through Immersive Dynamic
      Modeling. CSCL 2: Carrying Forward the Conversation. T. Koschmann, R. Hall, N. Miyake (Eds). Mahweh
      NJ, Erlbaum.
Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1975). Beyond Boredom and Anxiety. San Francisco, Jossey-Bass.
Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1996). Creativity. New Yorl, HarperPerennial.
Damasio, A. (1994). Descartes' Error: Emotion, Reason, and the Human Brain, Avon Books.
Dede, C. (2003). Studying Situated Learning and Knowledge Transfer in a Multi-user Virtual Environment, National
      Science Foundation REC - #0310188.
della-Chiesa, B. (2003). Learning Sciences and Brain Research - A Focus on Research in Literacy, Mathematical
      Thought and Lifelong Learning, Arlington, VA, National Science Foundation Award REC-0231780.
DiGiano, C., D. Tatar, et al. (2006). Learning from the Post-It: Building collective intelligence through lightweight,
      flexible technology. Submitted to the Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work.
Fischer, G. and S. Konomi (2005). Innovative Media in Support of Distributed Intelligence and Lifelong Learning.
      Proceedings of the Third IEEE International Workshop on Wireless and Mobile Technologies in Education,
      Tokushima, Japan, IEEE Computer Society.
Galas, C. and D. J. Ketelhut (2006). "River City, the MUVE." Learning and Leading with Technology 33(7): 31-32.
Hamilton, E. (2004). "Agent and Library Augmented Shared Knowledge Areas (ALASKA)." Proceedings of the
      International Conference on Multimodal Interfaces (ICMI'04).
Hamilton, E. (2006). International collaborations blending new pedagogies and new technologies in engineering
      education:  principles and    examples.  Fifth Global  Colloquium   on Engineering Education, Rio  de Janeiro,
      American Society for Engineering Education.
Hamilton,   E.  (2007). "Emerging     metaphors   and   constructs  from  pedagogical  agent networks." Educational
      Technology (Special Issue, A. Baylor editor) 47(1).
Hamilton,   E., G.  Carmona,  et  al. (2006).  HSD:   Research   Community   Development:  Distributed Learning  and
      Collaboration (DLAC) for Next Generation Educational Settings, National Science Foundation Award BCS-
      0623166
Hamilton,   E., C.  DiGiano,  et al.  (2004).  Agent  and Library   Augmented  Shared  Knowledge  Areas  (ALASKA),
      National Science Award 0420310.
Hamilton,   E.  and A. Hurford   (in  press). Combining  Collaborative   Workspaces with Tablet Computing:  Learner
      Engagement and Flow. Frontiers in Education, Milwaukee.
Hamilton, E., R. Lesh, et al. (2007). Enhancing and Assessing Complex Reasoning through Models and Modeling:
      UK-US Collaborative Research. Supplement to NSF 0433373 (Assessing and Enhancing Complex Reasoning,
      Hamilton PI), NSF.

                                                            252                                                CSCL 2007
Hamilton, E., J. Tao, et al. (2007). China-US Collaborative Research on Models, Modeling and Agents - Supplement
    to Human and Social Dynamics Agent of Change grant. NSF 0623166 (Distributed Learning and Collaboration
    (DLAC) for Next Generation Educational Settings), NSF.
Hmelo, C. E., D. L. Holton, et al. (2000). "Designing to Learn About Complex Systems." Journal of the Learning
    Sciences 9(3): 247-298.
Hoppe,  U.,  N.   Pinkwart, et  al. (2005).    Building bridges   within learning communities    through  ontologies and"
    thematic   objects".  Computer     Supported    Collaborative  Learning 2005:The   Next  10   Years!, Taipei, Taiwan
    International Society of the Learning Sciences.
Ketelhut, D. J., C. Dede, et al. ((in press)). Studying situated learning in a multi-user virtual environment. Assessment
    of problem solving using simulations J. D. E. Baker, W. Wulfeck & H. O'Neil (Eds.). Mahwah, NJ, Lawrence
    Erlbaum Associates.
King, P. M. and K. S. Kitchener (1994). Developing Reflective Judgment. San Francisco, Jossey-Bass Publishers.
Klopfer, E., J. Perry, et al. (2005). Collaborative learning through augmented reality role playing. Proceedings of
    the 2005 International Conference of Computer Supported Collaborative Learning, Taipei, Taiwan.
Koedinger,  K.  R., V.  Aleven,     et al. (2003).  Toward  a  Rapid   Development    Environment  for  Cognitive Tutors.
    Proceedings     of the  11th    International  Conference   on  Artificial Intelligence in Education,    AI-ED   2003,
    Amsterdam, IOS Press.
Kolodner, J. L., J. Camp, et al. (2003). "Problem-Based Learning Meets Case-Based Reasoning in the Middle-School
    Science   Classroom:    Putting    Learning  by  Design(tm)   Into Practice." The  Journal of the  Learning   Sciences
    12(4): 495-547.
Koschmann, T., R. Hall, et al. (2002). CSCL 2: Carrying forward the conversation. Mahwah, NJ: , Erlbaum.
Lesh, R. and H. Doerr (2003). Beyond constructivism: A models & modeling perspective on mathematics teaching,
    learning, and problems solving. Mahwah, NJ, Lawrence Erlbaum.
Lesh,  R., E. Hamilton,     et al.  (2007).  Models   and  Modeling    as Foundations   for  the Future   in Mathematics
    Curriculum. Mahweh, NJ, Erlbaum. .
Lesh, R., C. Yoon, et al. (2007). John Dewey Revisited--Making Mathematics Practical versus Making Practice
    Mathematical. Models and Modeling as Foundations for the Future in Mathematics Curriculum. R. Lesh, E.
    Hamilton and J. Kaput. Mahweh, NJ, Erlbaum.
Maldonado, H., J. E. R. Lee, et al. (2005). We learn better together: enhancing eLearning with emotional characters.
    Proceedings of the 2005 International Conference of Computer Supported Collaborative Learning, Taipei.
McBay, S. (2005). A July, 2006 Conference to Formulate a Collaborative Mathematics-focused Research Agenda for
    Education Researchers in the United States and in Africa National Science Foundation Award 0544549.
Mulrine, A. (2006). "To the rescue." ASEE Prism(March): 28-33.
Pea, R., M. Mills, et al. (2004). "The Diver Project: Interactive Digital Video Repurposing." IEEE Multimedia 11(1):
    54-61.
Perry, W.  G. J.  (1980).  Forms    of Intellectual  and Ethical  Development   in the College   Years. New   York,  Holt,
    Rinehart and Winston.
Roschelle, J. and W. R. Penuel (2003). The CATAALYST - Planning a Rigorous Study. Arlington, VA, National
    Science Foundation Award 0337793.
Shaffer, D. W. (2007). How computer games help children learn. New York, Palgrave Macmillan.
Shernoff,  D. J., M.   Csikszentmihalyi,    et al. (2003). "Student  Engagement    in High  School Classrooms   from  the
    Perspective of Flow Theory." School Psychology Quarterly           18(2): 158 -- 176.
Stroup, W., G. Carmona, et al. (2005). Improving on expectations: Preliminary results from using network-supported
    function-based algebra.     Retrieved October 31, 2005, from
    http://convention2.allacademic.com/index.php?cmd=pmena_guest.
Tront, J., V. Eligeti, et al.  (2006).  WriteOn:   A  Tool  to Support   Teaching  Software  Engineering. Conference   on
    Software Engineering Education and Training Workshops (CSEETW'06).
Wilensky, U. and B. Shapiro (2003). Networked Participatory Simulations: Classroom Collaboration in Exploring
    the Dynamics of Complex Systems. CSCL 2003 (http://www.intermedia.uib.no/cscl/interactiveevents/ia3.cscl),
    Bergen, Norway.

Acknowledgments
The author wishes to acknowledge Microsoft Research and the National Science Foundation for grants contributing
to this paper. The views expressed here are those of the author. The author expresses appreciation to Dr. Andrew
Hurford, Ms. Sharon Richardson, and Col Margaret McGregor for comments and review of the paper.

                                                              253                                                CSCL 2007
