Instructional support for individual and collaborative demands in two
                               net-based communication settings

 Miriam Hansen & Hans Spada, Department of Psychology, University of Freiburg, D- 79085 Freiburg, Germany
                  Email: hansen@psychologie.uni-freiburg.de, spada@psychologie.uni-freiburg.de

         Abstract. In this paper, we present a study conducted to evaluate instructional support measures
         for  a net-based   collaborative    picture-sorting    task. A  combination    of  a  model    collaboration
         presented   as an  on-screen  video  to  the  collaborators   prior  to collaboration  and  a  collaboration
         script was developed to support individual cognitive as well as collaborative demands. In a 2x3
         factorial design we varied the amount of support as well as the mode of communication in order to
         test the  impact   of   the support  on    the  collaboration   process    and performance     in net-based
         interactive  and   non-interactive   communication       settings.   The   results   showed    an improved
         collaboration  process   in conditions   with   support  but  no  significant  effect  on the  performance
         measures.   The   support   measures   fostered  the   collaboration    process   even in  the  particularly
         difficult conditions with non-interactive communication.

Introduction
         Two    persons  jointly solving   a task   in a net-based    setting face  various   challenges:  In addition to the
individual cognitive demands inherent to a task, cognitive processes and activities have to take place due to the need
to interact. The latter include collaborative task-related activities as well as meta-cognitive processes (Dillenbourg,
Baker, Blaye    & O'Malley,    1996).  An  important    part of  the  collaborative  meta-cognitive    processes is related to
communication:    The   collaborators  have  to establish    common    ground    in order  to  achieve  mutual understanding
(Clark & Brennan, 1991) and solve the task together.

         Furthermore,   net-based    communication      poses   additional demands    on   the collaborators  because  of the
mostly restricted possibilities for communication. These additional demands differ, for example, depending on the
channels available for communication (auditory, visual, text-based) and on the mode of collaboration (interactive or
non-interactive) (see Rummel & Spada, 2005a). For instance, in most net-based settings, communication is impeded
because the collaborators do not share the same physical environment. Thus, they cannot use visual information of
the work context or non-verbal information provided by their partner's facial expression or gestures (Kraut, Fussell
& Siegel, 2003). Moreover, some settings that allow only non-interactive communication impede immediate and
spontaneous interactions and make effective grounding impossible.

         Extensive research on collaboration has shown that successful collaboration and good results do not arise
without adequate support (e.g. Slavin, 1995) and that support is particularly important for net-based collaboration
(see Bromme, Hesse & Spada, 2005). The main approaches to fostering net-based collaboration have as a starting
point either  the `mice'  or  the `minds':   The  `mice'   approach    aims   at improving    the  technical  environment   for
collaboration for example by using shared representational tools (e.g. Suthers & Weiner, 1995) or technology for
remote  gesturing   (Kirk   &  Fraser,  2005).   Approaches      that  take   `minds'   as  a  starting point  either support
collaboration as it occurs through structuring interaction with collaboration scripts (O'Donnell & Dansereau, 1992;
Baker  & Lund,    1997)  or use   instructional measures     to promote  the  skills needed    for collaboration (Rummel    &
Spada, 2005a, 2005b).

         However, in order to develop instructional measures, we need to understand in detail what skills are needed
to solve a specific task. Studies of collaboration mostly use quite complex settings. As we aimed to examine the role
and functioning of communication, we used a remote collaborative problem-solving task that is more restricted and
enables a more detailed analysis. The task is similar to the Referential Communication Task (Krauss & Weinheimer,
1966), which    has  been  used   a  great deal  to study    communication.      However,   our task   holds  more  individual
cognitive demands, as visual search processes are required to detect small differences between the pictures. In this
paper, we present a study conducted to evaluate instructional support measures based upon a first, prior study that
revealed the task demands (Bertholet & Spada, 2005). Further details of this previous study will be reported after
the presentation of the task we used. The instructional support measures included two levels of support, one for

                                                              254                                                    CSCL 2007
individual cognitive demands  and  one for collaborative    demands,    and were  designed  to  foster  collaboration  in
interactive as well as non-interactive settings.

Research questions
          We conducted the study based on the following research questions:
(1)  To what extent do the instructional support measures have an impact on the interactive collaboration process
     and outcome?
(2)  Does non-interactive collaboration also benefit from the instructional support measures?

Method

The Task Used
          In our study, two persons had to jointly solve a picture-sorting task while located in two different rooms.
One of the participants assumed the role of speaker and the other took the role of addressee. The task was presented
on two displays, and oral communication between speaker and addressee was possible via an audio link. On the
speaker's display, sixteen pictures were presented that differed only in terms of minor details. The speaker had to
describe nine of the pictures and their order to the addressee (see Figure 1). The addressee saw the single sixteen
pictures in a random order and had to arrange nine of them according to the speaker's description. The addressee
was able to rearrange the pictures on the target area by using the mouse (drag and drop). Because the differences
between the pictures were very small, the participants had to first detect these differences and then the speaker had
to design appropriate utterances that enabled the addressee to choose the correct pictures by considering the relevant
features. This  component  of feature  detection      constitutes the  main difference   from   the classic Referential
Communication Task, in which the task demands consist only in the verbal description of clearly different objects.
This individual cognitive demand   makes   the     task more   comparable   to realistic  collaborative tasks in which
communication often has to take place in parallel to individual cognitive processes.

    Figure 1. The nine target pictures on the speaker's display for one concrete (left) and one abstract (right) task.

          Four different tasks were used, which can be categorized as `concrete' and `abstract' sets of pictures (see
Figure 1 for examples of both types). Each dyad had to solve all four tasks. The task demands can be grouped into
individual cognitive and collaborative demands (due to interaction). The first group of demands includes feature
search and identification. The collaborators have to detect the relevant features that differ between the pictures (e.g.
the position of the cat, the cat's line of sight, the direction of the cat's whiskers). These demands have to be dealt
with individually; they would also exist if the sorting of the pictures had to be carried out by an individual instead of
being part of a collaborative task. (The original children's game "Differix" by Ravensburger©, from which we took
some of the pictures, consists in arranging nine pictures on a template individually, competing against one to five
other players.) The second kind of demands contains the additional challenges of collaboration due to the need to
communicate.   The speaker has  to describe      the  relevant feature values  (e.g. "the cat's whiskers  are  pointing
upwards") of one picture in an appropriate way and the addressee has to understand the speaker's description and to
match the description to the features in the picture.

                                                           255                                                 CSCL 2007
         In a previous study (Bertholet & Spada, 2005), it was confirmed that the task does indeed hold individual
cognitive and collaborative demands. Furthermore, the results showed different difficulties arising from the two
demands for the two sets of pictures: The concrete sets hold more challenges with regard to the individual cognitive
demands, and the abstract sets are more difficult in terms of the collaborative demands (due to interaction). As the
concrete sets contain familiar objects, the detection of the relevant features is more error-prone because the details
can be overlooked quite easily. This result is in line with findings from research on visual processing as the change
blindness effect  (e.g. Rensink,  O'Regan     &  Clark, 1997).    On  the other  hand,  it is more difficult   to describe the
unfamiliar objects and their features in the abstract tasks because the speaker needs to invent terms and customize
them for interaction. Speaker and addressee have to develop a common language in order to establish referential
identity (Clark & Brennan, 1991). If they use different frames of reference, this results in specific errors in some
concrete tasks. For example, the cat's line of sight can be described from the speaker's or from the cat's perspective.
To enable a correct identification of the pictures, speaker and addressee must have a mutual frame of reference.

Interactive and Non-Interactive Communication
         Interactive communication is the main setting for language use (Pickering & Garrod, 2004; Clark, 1996).
Nevertheless, there are also settings involving non-interactive or less interactive communication such as lectures and
speeches or written communication. Non-interactive settings differ from interactive ones in important points, as the
speaker does not receive feedback and cannot be certain of having been understood by the addressee: Grounding
(e.g. Clark & Brennan, 1991) is not possible. Furthermore, speakers tend to produce longer descriptions if they
receive no feedback from their addressees (Krauss & Weinheimer, 1966), they cannot rely on terms used before
(lexical alignment; Pickering & Garrod, 2004) and are therefore more careful in designing their utterances (Schober,
1993). When solving a collaborative task together, non-interactive conditions lead to an increased number of errors
and it takes more time to complete the task (Clark & Krych, 2004). In spite of this, professional writers such as
newspaper reporters still seem to be understood by their audience without receiving feedback, and they must have
gained expertise through training and experience in terms of how to write in such a way as to be understood with
minimal problems (Traxler & Gernsbacher, 1992).

         Taking   these  results together,    it is  apparent  that  non-interactive   communication      is a very  difficult
undertaking that needs support. In order to test for possibilities for and effects of support, we included interactive as
well as non-interactive conditions in our study and provided both with instructional support measures.

Instructional Support
         Fostering `minds'   by  using    collaboration   scripts can  improve    net-based   collaboration.   The  prominent
technique of scripted cooperation (O'Donnell & Dansereau, 1992) aims at optimizing the interaction process by
sequencing it into different phases, defining roles, and assigning them to the collaborative learners. As collaboration
scripts have  shown   themselves    to be a   very   effective means   for  fostering  collaboration,  they   have  also  been
transferred to computer   settings  (e.g. Baker     & Lund,    1997).  Typically, they  are   embedded    in  computer-based
learning environments and guide the collaborators in a step-by-step fashion through different activities. Computer-
based collaboration scripts may be used not only to support learners in acquiring knowledge in a specific domain
but also to support them in learning how to collaborate (Rummel & Spada, 2005a, 2005b). A second approach
provides a model collaboration to the participants prior to the collaboration (Rummel & Spada, 2005a, 2005b).
While observing such a model of a dyad collaborating, people should reflect upon the solution steps and engage in
meta-cognitive activities that promote learning (e.g. Bandura, 1977; VanLehn, 1996). Both approaches have been
shown to improve the collaboration, but still entail certain disadvantages: The extensive use of collaboration scripts
can disturb   natural   interaction or  cognitive     processes   and  lead  to  motivational    losses   (overscripting;  see
Dillenbourg,   2002).   Depending    on   the    amount   of information    included,   the   persons watching     the model
collaboration might have difficulties in extracting and remembering all relevant points.
         To   combine   the  advantages   of     the two  approaches,     we developed      instructional support   measures
integrating both. Based on the results of a previous study (Bertholet & Spada, 2005) and following the approach of
Rummel and Spada (2005b), we developed a model collaboration for the collaborative picture-sorting task. It was
presented to  the dyads   as an  on-screen    video  with  audio  instructions   prior to  the collaboration.  In  addition, a
collaboration  script reminding  the   collaborators   of what    they had  just learned   before was   provided   during  the
collaboration. This combination should promote effective collaboration, as we expect the model collaboration video
to have positive effects on the participants' attention and motivation (Bandura, 1977) and the collaboration script to
enhance the memory for the relevant information. Both the model instruction and the script contained two levels of

                                                              256                                                    CSCL 2007
support, each corresponding to one of the two demands: level 1 supporting the individual cognitive demands and
level 2 supporting the collaborative demands. The instructions mainly concerned the meta-processes to promote
effective coping with  the two  demands.  Table    1  shows  examples                for task-related activities and meta-processes
related to the two demands.

Table 1. Task-related activities and meta-processes for individual cognitive and collaborative demands.

                                                             Demands
                              Individual cognitive                                       Collaborative (interaction)
 Task-relatedactivitiese.g. Visual search for feature differences                     e.g. Description of the pictures

   Meta-            e.g. Checking whether all necessary           e.g. Establishment of mutual understanding of
  processes                   features were found                                  features' names, frame of reference etc.

          Each support  level contained hints for  dealing  with  the              respective   demand  (e.g. "In concrete  pictures,
differences are often overlooked. Please check carefully if you have found all relevant differences.") and, moreover,
each level introduced one subtask: Marking the features in an individual picture editor (level 1) and writing the
features' names into an individual text editor (level 2). A screenshot of a speaker's on-screen video is presented in
Figure 2. It shows the individual picture and text editor on the right.

 Collaboration
 script

                                                                                                                   Picture  editor
                                                                                                                   for   subtask
                                                                                                                   "search    for
                                        "I have found the following features: ...                                  features"
                                    I am always describing from my perspective..."

                                                                                                                   Text     editor
                                                                                                                   for   subtask
                                                                                                                   "labeling   of
                                                                                                                   features"
                                      Text-box     containing
                                      utterances      of    the
                                      model speaker

     Figure 2. Screenshot of a speaker's on-screen video (condition `support level 1+2/ interactive mode of
                                                   communication')

Experiment

Design
          A 2x3 factor design was used (see Table 2) with the type of picture (concrete/ abstract) as an additional
within-subject factor. Each   dyad was  required   to solve all four              tasks  but in different sequences: To  control for
sequence effects, four different task sequences were given. As one between-subject factor, the amount of support
was varied (complete support ­ level 1+2 vs. only support of individual demands ­ level 1 vs. no support). As a
second between-subject factor, the mode of communication was varied, being either interactive or non-interactive.
Each participant was assigned randomly to one of the six conditions.

                                                           257                                                              CSCL 2007
Table 2. Design of the study.

                                                                         Mode of communication
                                                                Interactive                 Non-interactive
                     Level 1 + 2 (complete support)           concrete/ abstract           concrete/ abstract
  Amount ofsupport   Level 1 (only indiv. demands)            concrete/ abstract           concrete/ abstract
                                No support                    concrete/ abstract           concrete/ abstract

Participants
          Ninety-six students (48 dyads) from the University of Freiburg, Germany participated in the study. Thirty-
six of the participants were male and 60 female. The participants had an average age of 24.15 years (SD = 4.4, range
= 18   to  48). All  participants were   German  native-speakers.   Each  participant  received  15 Euros   for his/  her
participation. The participants were randomly grouped into dyads and assigned the role of speaker and addressee.
Participants did not know each other prior to the study.

Procedure
          Prior collaboration, the participants individually received instructions including technical advices in the
form of an on-screen video. Depending on the condition, the video included only technical advices (no support
conditions) or further contained the support of the cognitive (level 1 support) or of both demands (level 1 and 2
support).  In  both  support conditions,  the participants observed    either a  model speaker   or a   model  addressee
successfully solving a task. Level 1 support contained hints for feature search and introduced the first individual
subtask (marking the differences in the individual picture editor). Moreover, level 1 and 2 support included hints for
dealing with the collaborative demands and additionally introduced the second individual subtask (writing feature's
names   in the  individual text editor). After watching   the  on-screen video,   the dyads  performed    a training  task
(including the description and positioning of three pictures out of sixteen) in order to familiarize themselves with
the technical environment and the subtasks. During the experimental phase, each dyad was required to solve four
tasks.

          In the non-interactive conditions, the speaker and addressee performed the tasks not at the same time, but
rather one after another. The speaker had a recording device on the display and could start and stop recording the
explanations to the addressee as he/ she desired. A microphone was positioned on the table next to the monitor. The
description of each speaker was randomly assigned to one addressee, who later arranged the pictures according to
the recorded descriptions. The addressee had an audio-player device on the display and could start, stop and rewind
the recording of the speaker's descriptions as often as he/ she desired. However, speakers and addressees in both the
non-interactive and interactive conditions were told to proceed as accurately and quickly as possible.

Measures
          Two   sets of data were   collected to examine   the collaboration  process  as  well as  the outcome:  Audio
recordings of the communication and performance measures.

          The coding scheme for the communication data emphasizes different kinds of problems and errors made
during  collaboration   (Table  3). The  categories refer  to  the two demands     on  the collaborators: The   first two
categories  to  the  individual cognitive  demands,  and   categories  3 to   7 to the collaborative  demands   (due   to
interaction). The audio recordings of the communication were analyzed using these problem and error categories as
well as some additional categories. To check for inter-rater reliability, ten percent of the verbal data was coded by a
second rater. The consistency of the coding was medium to high, with ICCjust,fixed (intra-class correlation; see Shrout
& Fleiss, 1979) between .66 and 1.0, indicating that the coding scheme could easily be used.

                                                           258                                                  CSCL 2007
Table 3. Coding scheme for the problems and errors occurring during communication.

 Individual cognitive demands
 ·    Number of not identified features                   How many relevant features were NOT identified?
 ·    Number of errors `Feature not mentioned'            How   often  did the  speaker   give descriptions  in whichrelevant features were not mentioned?
 Collaborative demands (due to interaction)
 ·    Number of features not mentioned before             How many relevant features were NOT mentioned by the
      description                                         speaker before starting the description of the first picture?
 ·    Number of errors `Name of feature'                  How   often  did the  speaker   give descriptions  that  wereambiguous regarding the feature's name?
 ·    Number of errors `Frame of reference'               How   often  did the  speaker   give descriptions  that  wereambiguous regarding the frame of reference?
 ·    Number of irrelevant features                       How often did the speaker give descriptions of irrelevantfeatures?
 ·    Number of complicated descriptions                  How    often  did    the  speaker    give  complicated   andpedestrian descriptions of a feature?

         The performance measures included: The number of pictures placed in the correct position at the end of
one task and the time needed for description and positioning of the pictures.

Results and discussion
         We computed a MANOVA with repeated measures (for the factor `type of pictures') to test the influence
of the three factors on process and performance measures. Due to the limited space of this paper, we do not report
all of the dependant   variables included  in the MANOVA,       but only   the categories described  in Table   3. As   an
ANOVA revealed no effect of the task order, this factor will not be taken into account in the following analyses.

         There was an effect of the type of pictures (F[11, 32] = 16.4, p <.01, ² = .85), an effect of the amount of
support (F[22, 66] = 2.8, p <.01, ² = .48) and an effect of the mode of communication (F[11, 32] = 9.6, p <.01, ² =
.77). Additionally, there was a significant interaction between the type of pictures and the mode of communication
(F[11, 32]  = 2.7,  p  >.01, ²   = .48). ANOVAs      were calculated   for all variables. The  results  will be reported
separately for the process data and the performance measures.

Process Data: Audio Recordings
         Table 4 contains means and standard deviations for the process variables included in the MANOVA, with
each column corresponding to one factor. Overall, the standard deviations are quite high for most of the variables,
showing that there were quite large differences between the dyads. For the type of pictures, there were significant
differences in all seven problem and error categories. The results showed that more problems and errors related to
the individual cognitive demands occurred in concrete tasks with a higher number of not identified features (F[1,
42] = 49, p <.01, ² = .54) and a higher number of errors `feature not mentioned' (F[1, 42] = 80.6, p <.01, ² = .66).
There was also a higher number of errors `frame of reference' (F[1, 42] = 14.7, p <.01, ² = .26), because of the
need to find a mutual frame of reference in concrete tasks. However, the number of features not mentioned before
description (F[1, 42] = 80.5, p <.01, ² = .66), as well as a the number of irrelevant features (F[1, 42] = 28.4, p
<.05,  ² =  .40), both of which    are problems related  to the collaborative   demands,  also  occurred  more  often   in
concrete tasks. This  may  be  due  to  an illusion of simplicity (Nickerson,   1999) arising  for  the concrete   sets of
pictures: When beginning to solve a concrete task, dyads underestimated the difficulties, did not find all relevant
features and failed to install a mutual frame of reference. Later on in the collaboration, when the problems became
obvious, a high number of irrelevant features were described because the relevant ones had still not been identified.
As expected, two problems or errors related to the collaborative demands, the number of errors `name of feature'
(F[1, 42] = 22.2, p <.01, ² = .35) as well as the number of complicated descriptions (F[1, 42] = 21.8, p <.01, ² =

                                                           259                                                  CSCL 2007
.34)  arose more  often in abstract tasks. As     can be  seen  in Table 4, the   means    of problems  and    errors during
communication differed mostly in the expected way between the conditions with complete support, only support of
individual demands and without support: In general, fewer problems and errors occurred in conditions with support.
Nevertheless, there were significant differences only in the number of errors `feature not mentioned' (F[2, 42] =
5.2, p <.05, ² = .20) and in the number of features not mentioned before description (F[2, 42] = 14.1, p <.01, ² =
.40). As  expected, both   errors were  mostly    made   by   dyads  in conditions   without   support. For    the mode    of
communication, the means of problems and errors during communication also differed mostly in the expected way:
Fewer problems and errors occurred in interactive conditions. However, there were only significant differences in
the  number  of not identified features (F[1, 42]     = 52.1, p <.01, ²  =  .55),   in the number  of errors     `feature not
mentioned' (F[1, 42] = 17.9, p <.01, ² = .30), and in the number of features not mentioned before description (F[1,
42] = 8.4, p <.01, ² = .17). As expected, all three errors were made more often in dyads with the non-interactive
mode of communication.

Table 4. Means and standard deviations (in parentheses) of the process data.

  Dependent variable            Type of pictures              Amount of support          Mode of communication
Number of not identified        concr.: 2.1 (1.8)featuresabstr.: 0.7 (1.3) **lev.1+2: 1.4 (1.3)lev.1: 1.2 (1.3)no train.: 1.8 (1.9) nsinter.: 0.5 (0.7)non-inter.: 2.4 (1.5)**
     Number of errors          concr.: 27.1 (14.3)`Feature not mentioned'abstr.: 9.2 (12.6)**lev.1+2: 14.4 (11.5)lev.1: 15.9 (10.3)no train.: 24.5 (14.6)*inter.: 12.6 (10.5)non-inter.: 23.7 (13.7)**
Number of features notmentioned beforedescriptionconcr.: 6.9 (3.2)abstr.: 4.4 (3.7)**lev.1+2: 3 (2.7)lev.1: 6.2 (1.3)no train.: 7.7 (2.8)**inter.: 4.6 (3.5)non-inter.: 6.7 (3.1)**
Number of errors `Name            concr.: 0 (0)of feature'abstr.: 1.2 (1.8)**lev.1+2: 0.5 (0.8)lev.1: 0.7 (1.2)no train.:0.7 (0.8) nsinter.: 0.4 (0.7)non-inter.: 0.8 (1.0) ns
     Number of errors           concr.: 2.7 (4.8)`Frame of reference'abstr.: 0 (0)**lev.1+2: 0.5 (0.8)lev.1: 1.4 (3.2)no train.: 2.1 (2.4) nsinter.: 1.4 (2.3)non-inter.: 1.3 (2.2) ns
 Number of irrelevantfeatures   concr.: 13.7 (13)abstr.: 3.1 (7)**lev.1+2: 6.9 (9.4)lev.1: 8.3 (9.4)no train.: 9.9 (6.1) nsinter.: 8 (9.9)non-inter.: 8.7 (10.2) ns
Number of complicateddescriptionsconcr.: 0.4 (1.4)abstr.: 2 (3.2)**lev.1+2: 0.6 (1.3)lev.1: 1.2 (1.6)no train.: 1.8 (2.5) nsinter.: 0.8 (1.8)non-inter.: 1.6 (2.8) ns
                                    ** p <.01; * p < .05; ns no significant effect

         There were significant interactions between the type of pictures and the mode of communication for the
number of not identified features (F[1, 42] = 8.3, p <.01, ² = .17), the number of features not mentioned before
description (F[1, 42] = 8.1, p <.01, ² = .16), and the number of complicated descriptions (F[1, 42] = 4.5, p <.05, ²
= .10). In concrete tasks, the number of problems and errors related to the individual demands and in abstract tasks
those related to the collaborative demands were higher for non-interactive conditions.

         To  summarize:   The  analysis of the    audio  recordings  revealed,   as expected,  more problems      and  errors
related to the individual cognitive demands as well as more errors `frame of reference' in concrete sets of pictures.
In abstract sets of pictures, there were more problems and errors related to collaborative demands. The developed
instructional support measures had a positive effect on the collaboration process, with fewer problems and errors
occurring   in conditions  with support.  Indeed,     non-interactive communication      was   more difficult,    with more
problems and errors occurring in non-interactive conditions.

                                                            260                                                    CSCL 2007
Performance Measures
        Table 5 shows means and standard deviations for the performance measures. The means of correctly placed
pictures have to be related to a maximum number of 18 correctly placed pictures. For concrete and abstract types of
pictures, the maximum number of correctly placed pictures is 18 respectively (2 tasks x 9 pictures). To keep the
mean values comparable, the means of the other two factors were divided by 2. Again, each column corresponds to
one factor.

Table 5. Means and standard deviations (in parentheses) of the performance measures.

   Dependent variable           Type of pictures            Amount of support         Mode of communication
   Number of picturesplaced in correctposition (max. 18)concr.: 5.9 (7.5)abstr.: 13 (7.2)**lev.1+2: 9.3 (7.2)lev.1: 10.3 (6.5)no train.: 8.9 (8.5) nsinter.: 14.4 (3.9)non-inter.: 4.6 (5.2)**
    Time needed fordescription andpositioning of thepictures (in sec.)concr.: 1063.5 (499.4)lev.1+2: 896.2 (371.2)inter.: 1135.5 (483.1)abstr.: 1057.6 (471.7)lev.1: 1103.2 (509.2)non-inter.: 985.7 (438.4)nsno train.: 1182.3 (538.4)*ns
                                          ** p <.01; * p < .05; ns no significant effect

        More abstract pictures were placed in the correct position than concrete pictures (F[1, 42] = 39.1, p <.01,
² = .48). However, there was no significant difference in the time needed for description and positioning of the
pictures. This also points toward an illusion of simplicity (Nickerson, 1999) occurring for concrete tasks. Dyads
without support  took  more   time for description   and positioning  of the pictures  than dyads   with  support of   the
individual demands as well as dyads with the complete support. Dyads with the complete support were faster than
dyads of the other conditions (F[2, 42] = 2.5, p <.05, ² = .11). There was no significant difference in the number of
correctly placed pictures between the conditions with different amounts of support. Dyads with the interactive mode
of communication   placed     more pictures in  the  correct position  than  dyads  with  the  non-interactive   mode  of
communication (F[1, 42] = 72.6, p <.01, ² = .64). However, there was no significant difference in the time needed
for description and positioning of the pictures between the interactive and non-interactive conditions. This is due to
the significant interaction between the type of pictures and the mode of communication that occurred for the time
needed  for description  and   positioning of  the pictures  (F[1, 42]  =  17.4,  p <.01, ²   =  .29). In the  interactive
conditions, dyads took more time for concrete tasks. If necessary, dyads in the interactive conditions could search
for the feature differences together or take additional time for establishing a mutual frame of reference. In the non-
interactive conditions, the dyads took more time for abstract tasks; speakers took more time to describe unfamiliar
objects if they did not receive any feedback from their addressee.

Discussion and Outlook
        The   aim of   the study   was to  evaluate  instructional support  measures   designed   to   support individual
cognitive as well as   collaborative demands    (due to interaction) in  a net-based  picture-sorting  task. The support
should foster collaboration in interactive as well as in non-interactive communication settings. The instructional
support measures included specific help for both kinds of demands realized in two levels. To evaluate the impact of
these two levels on the collaboration process and outcome, the amount of support was varied. As it is impossible to
give hints for the labeling of the features without emphasizing the need to carefully search for features, the two
levels could not be realized independently. To investigate the impact of the two levels, the conditions with level 1
support were only compared with the conditions that received the complete support (level 1 + 2). The analysis of the
verbal data indeed showed differences in the problems and errors depending on the amount of support: In line with
expectations, the problems and errors related to the individual cognitive demands were higher for the conditions
without support and relatively similar in the two support conditions that both received hints for feature search and a
subtask with  an  individual  picture  editor. The  numbers    of problems   and  errors related to  the  communicative
demands were also highest for the conditions without support, but these were relatively close to the numbers of
errors in the level 1 support conditions. The differences across the support conditions were significant only for the
number of errors `feature not mentioned' and the number of features not mentioned before description, but for the
other problems   and   errors the  means  showed   the  expected   tendencies,  namely   fewer  problems   and  errors in
conditions with support. So far, the instructional support measures seem to have improved the collaboration process

                                                           261                                                  CSCL 2007
in the  intended  way.  Unfortunately,    the impact   of the  measures    did not    reflect  on  the performance    measures
unanimously: The complete support conditions did indeed take less time for the description and positioning of the
pictures, but there were no significant differences between the numbers of correctly placed pictures for the three
support conditions.

         A further goal of the study was to illuminate the processes in non-interactive collaboration and to test
whether the process and performance of non-interactive dyads could also be enhanced by the designed instructional
measures. As reported by different authors (e.g. Clark & Krych, 2004), the non-interactive conditions had more
difficulties in solving the tasks in an appropriate way. As expected, the numbers of all seven problems and errors
were higher in non-interactive conditions (significant differences only for the number of not identified features, the
number   of errors  `feature  not mentioned',    and  the number    of features    not  mentioned    before  description).   The
illusion of simplicity seems to have been higher in non-interactive conditions, since the number of features that the
speaker did not identify at all was particularly high for concrete tasks. In non-interactive conditions, the `need for
security' was also higher in abstract tasks, which again gives rise to the supposition of an illusion of simplicity. One
main difficulty  of  abstract tasks is to  find appropriate   expressions   to describe   the  features.  This  was  especially
pronounced in non-interactive conditions, where a high number of complicated descriptions occurred in abstract
tasks. The number of pictures not mentioned before starting the description was equally high in both types of tasks,
in contrast  to  interactive  conditions,  where it  was   quite low   for  abstract    tasks. The   advantage   of  interactive
communication was also evident from the performance measures: The interactive conditions outperformed the non-
interactive conditions with a higher number of correctly placed pictures. There was no significant difference in the
time needed for description and positioning of the pictures, but as expected, the mean time was slightly longer in
interactive conditions. An    interesting  interaction  effect occurred    for   this  second   performance    measure:  Non-
interactive dyads took more time to complete abstract tasks, while interactive dyads took more time to complete
concrete tasks. This result points in the same direction as the interaction effects for the errors and problems coded
from the collaboration process. The illusion of simplicity seems to be more prevalent in non-interactive conditions
and  at the same  time  the  speaker   has more  difficulties in  finding  short   and  comprehensible      expressions for  the
features in abstract tasks. In line with the assumptions of Clark and colleagues (e.g. Clark, 1996), unidirectional
communication or the production and reception of monologues in non-interactive communication is not as efficient
as the interactive and bidirectional communication process. The higher amount of time needed for concrete tasks in
interactive conditions  is presumably     due to problems   in   establishing  a mutual   frame    of  reference (Bertholet   &
Spada, 2005).

         To summarize: The dyads without support faced various problems: Speaker and addressee were confused
about how to deal with the different demands at the same time, and therefore made many errors. By contrast, the
dyads with support seemed to have learned how to collaborate: The collaboration process contained fewer problems
or communication     errors.  For future  research, it would   be  interesting   to identify   the   reason why  the improved
collaboration process had no impact on the dyads' performance. We took a first step in this direction by relating the
number of correctly placed pictures with the time needed for description and positioning of the pictures. We did not
include this analysis due to the limited space of this paper. In the support conditions, less time was needed to place a
greater number   of  pictures in  a correct  position  than in conditions   without     support.  It can be  assumed    that the
support  might   have shown    effects on  the  performance    measures   in   the  future; i.e.  if more   pictures had to  be
described and positioned. However, further research is needed in order to gain better insights into the possible long-
term effects  of the  instructional support   measures.   Fostering `minds'    with   a combination    of   an on-screen video
containing  a model   collaboration  and   a collaboration  script to  help  structure  the   collaboration  process  therefore
seems, so far, to be a promising approach to fostering collaboration for interactive and also for the particularly
difficult non-interactive communication setting. Furthermore, the results suggest the need for both support levels.
Particularly for concrete tasks, the support of both demands is crucial and should contain instructions to assure a
mutual frame of reference.

References
Baker,  M., &   Lund, K.   (1997).  Promoting   reflective  interactions in  a CSCL     environment.     Journal  of Computer
         Assisted Learning, 13(3), 175-193.
Bandura, A. (1977). Social learning theory. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.

                                                             262                                                      CSCL 2007
Bertholet,  M., &  Spada,     H. (2005).   Cognitive  analysis   of a  remote   collaborative  problem-solving   task and
         experimental validation of the resulting demand model. In K. Opwis & I.-K. Penner (Eds.), Proceedings of
         the German Cognitive Science Conference 2005 (pp. 15-20) Basel: Schwabe.
Bromme,    R., Hesse,   F.W.,  &    Spada, H. (Eds.)  (2005).    Barriers  and  biases  in computer-mediated    knowledge
         communication and how they may be overcome. New York : Springer.
Clark, H.H. (1996). Using language. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Clark, H.H., & Brennan, S.E. (1991). Grounding in communication. In L.B. Resnick, J.M. Levine, & S.D. Teasley
         (Eds.), Perspectives on socially shared cognition (pp. 127-149). Washington, DC: American Psychological
         Association.
Clark, H.H., & Krych, M.A. (2004). Speaking while monitoring addressees for understanding. Journal of Memory
         and Language, 50, 62-81.
Dillenbourg, P. (2002). Over-scripting CSCL: The risks of blending collaborative learning with instructional design.
         In P.A.  Kirschner    (Ed.),  Three  worlds  of CSCL.     Can we    support CSCL     (pp. 61-91).  Heerlen: Open
         Universiteit Nederland.
Dillenbourg, P., Baker, M., Blaye, A., & O'Malley, C. (1996). The evolution of research on collaborative learning.
         In H.  Spada,   & P.  Reimann     (Eds.), Learning in   Humans    and  Machines:   Towards   an interdisciplinary
         learning science (pp. 189-211). Oxford: Elsevier.
Kirk, D.S. & Fraser, D.S. (2005). The effects of remote gesturing on distance instruction. In T. Koschmann, D.
         Suthers, & T.W. Chan (Eds.), Computer Supported Collaborative Learning 2005: The next 10 Years (pp.
         301-310). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Krauss, R.M., & Weinheimer, S. (1966). Concurrent feedback, confirmation, and the encoding of referents in verbal
         communication. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 14, 343-346.
Kraut,  R.E.,  Fussell, S.R., &  Siegel, J. (2003).  Visual information    as a conversational  resource   in collaborative
         physical tasks. Human-Computer Interaction, 18, 13-49.
Nickerson,  R.S.  (1999).  How      we know   ­ and  sometimes     misjudge   ­ what   others know:   Imputing  one's one
         knowledge to others. Psychological Bulletin, 125(6), 737-759.
O'Donnell, A.M., & Dansereau, D.F. (1992). Scripted cooperation in student dyads: A method for analyzing and
         enhancing academic learning and performance. In R. Hertz-Lazarowitz & N. Miller (Eds.), Interaction in
         cooperative    groups:  The   theoretical anatomy  of   group learning  (pp.   120-141).  New  York:  Cambridge
         University Press.
Pickering,  M.J., &  Garrod,     S. (2004).  Toward   a  mechanistic   psychology    of dialogue.   Behavioral  and  Brain
         Sciences, 27(2), 169-226.
Rensink, R.A., O'Regan, J.K., & Clark, J.J. (1997). To see or not to see: The need for attention to perceive changes
         in scenes. Psychological Science, 8(5), 368-373.
Rummel, N., & Spada, H. (2005a). Instructional support for collaboration in desktop videoconference settings: How
         it can be achieved and assessed. In R. Bromme, F. W. Hesse, & H. Spada (Eds.), Barriers and biases in
         computer-mediated knowledge communication and how they may be overcome (pp. 59-88). New York:
         Springer.
Rummel, N., & Spada, H. (2005b). Learning to collaborate: An instructional approach to promoting collaborative
         problem-solving in a desktop-videoconferencing setting. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 14(2), 201-
         241.
Schober, M. (1993). Spatial perspective-taking in conversation. Cognition, 47, 1-24.
Shrout,  P.E., &  Fleiss, J.L.   (1979). Intraclass  correlations:  Uses  in Assessing  Rater  Reliability. Psychological
         Bulletin, 86(2), 420-428.
Slavin, L.E. (1995). Cooperative learning: Theory, research, and practices (2nd edition). Boston: MA: Allyn &
         Bacon.
Suthers, D., & Weiner, A. (1995). Groupware for developing critical discussion skills. Proceedings of CSCL '95:
         The first International Conference on Computer Supported Collaborative Learning. Bloomington: Indiana.
Traxler, M.J.,  &  Gernsbacher,      M.A.   (1992).  Improving     written communication      through minimal    feedback.
         Language & Cognitive Processes, 7(1), 1-22.
VanLehn, K. (1996). Cognitive skill acquisition. Annual Review of Psychology, 47, 513-539.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the German Research Foundation (Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft, DFG) as part of
the Virtual PhD Program (VGK) "Knowledge Acquisition and Knowledge Exchange with New Media".

                                                             263                                                  CSCL 2007
