    Computational Literacy and Mathematics Learning in a Virtual World:
            Identity, Embodiment, and Empowered Media Engagement
                                        Sneha Veeragoudar Harrell, Dor Abrahamson
                                 U.C. Berkeley, 4538 Tolman Hall, Berkeley, CA 94720
                                   Email: om_sneha@berkeley.edu, dor@berkeley.edu

         Abstract:   We   are engaged      in  the on-going    development    of   a computer-supported      collaborative
         learning   environment    within     a  virtual  world     and use   it as  a  setting   for  studies  exploring
         relationships  between   student     mathematical    cognition,   computational     literacy, and   identity. Our
         design research   is informed     by  the work   of  Gee   (video games),   diSessa  (computational     literacy),
         Cole (mediated collaboration), Abrahamson (embodied design for mathematics learning), and Lee
         (cultural  modeling).    Within   the  constructed    virtual  ecology,   we are conducting      an ethnographic
         study  of   a  technologically    enabled    learning   environment     with   real  students    bearing  virtual
         identities. The   participants    are  physically remote     but  embody    characters  with  personae   of   their
         own   making    in   playful activities   that   foster intrinsic  motivation    and    bear  mathematical    and
         computational   integrity    that transcends     the medium.     Collecting   both  real and   virtual  data  of a
         group of at-risk urban high-school students working in Teen Second Life, we examine for changes
         in participants' cognitive­affective dispositions toward mathematical practice and identity.

         Our objective   is   to  build  an   online, computer-supported        constructionist   learning   environment     wherein
students  engage    collaboratively   in   mathematics     problem      solving  activities  and  develop    programming      skills.
Learning  programming     skills, a   key  aspect  of  developing     computational    literacy,  empowers      students  to become
computational producers and not just consumers (diSessa, 2000; Gee, 2003). This paper reports on our first steps
toward creating the online environment: We describe the rationale of our project and its initial implementation. In
this study, we focus on the concept of `recursion' that is key to computer science. Participants ground this concept
through computationally constructing the 3D Fractal Village, which they inhabit. Fractals are inherently rich visual-
spatial representations that, moreover, offer a wide range of cultural entry points (Eglash, 1999). Thus, participants
are to appropriate STEM content by constructing immersive aesthetical public-domain artifacts (Papert, 1991).
         After  researching   various    possibilities,   we   chose    a  digital environment     called    Teen Second     Life, a
proprietary virtual 3D world owned by Linden Laboratories (LindenLabs, 2007), as a platform for implementing our
project. It is a sister virtual world to the adult world of Second Life. Teen Second Life, a cutting edge multi-user
domain (MUD), provides:
    (1)  a rapidly growing environment with currently millions of unique users (Reuters, accessed 03-19-2007).
    (2)  a safe environment for minors in a virtual world (adult facilitators must undergo security checks and have
         no access to the teens' mainland, but only to delimited islands).
    (3)  infrastructural  scripting   support    that  utilizes   the   Linden   Scripting   Language.     The   Linden    Scripting
         Language    is designed   to be   inviting   for beginner   programmers.     For   example,   many     open  source  library
         facilities are available,  and    the  virtual-world    graphical user    interface allows    an individual   to instantiate
         objects and directly connect scripts to them.

Theoretical Framework
         Socio-cultural accounts of learning (e.g., Cole, 2006; Lave & Wenger, 1991) highlight the roles of artifacts
in the mediation    of  practice-based   knowledge.      We   view   the  development    of  fluent,   generative participation    in
mathematics  practice   as  necessitating     an   agency  that  goes   beyond     consuming     ready-made     tools  (Veeragoudar
Harrell, 2007).  Thus,   whereas    we     intend  for   users   to initially participate    peripherally    by using    ready-made
computational  objects,  as   the users  gain   comfort   with   the  environment    they   will learn  to program     custom-made
objects.
         Intrinsic to the experience of avatar-based participation in virtual environments is the projection of self. Gee
(2003) describes this experience as that of coming

         to project one's values and desires onto the virtual character....seeing the virtual character as one's
         own project in the making, a creature whom I imbue with a certain trajectory through time defined
         by my aspirations for what I want that character to be and become (Gee, 2003, p. 55).

                                                                 264                                                       CSCL 2007
Thus,  relatively unshackled    by real-world  personal and    social constraints,  the  avatar-based  participant  can
experiment with   new practices and dispositions. Specifically, we hope   to foster opportunities for participants who
harbor negative dispositions toward  mathematics   in the real  world  to experiment   with an  alternative view using
constructed identities in a playful, immersive virtual world (see also Powell, 2004).

Design
        Visitors to Fractal Village meet a facilitator­avatar who welcomes them with a variety of "fractal seeds"
(see Figure 1, below, top-left image)--computational objects for personalizing and nurturing fractals (e.g. trees, art).
Completed fractals can be set to change color, size, texture, etc. every time they are touched or at set time intervals.
Moreover, a sample object reveals for inspection its underlying implementation (including the recursive procedures).

Figure 1. A facilitator welcomes visitors with fractal seeds (top left). Users customize seed parameters such as size,
orientation, texture, color, and movement in space (top right). Fractal seeds are grown into large structures, such as a
   cylinder tree (bottom left and center). A strong woman avatar flexes her muscles after building her fractal tree
(middle right). Having contributed to the flora of the virtual environment, she then turns to improve the aesthetics of
                        the village by building a giant fractal-foot sculpture (bottom right).

        When a critical mass of participants is present, activities begin with participants discussing the future of
their village and then assigning individual roles and objectives so as to orchestrate prospective construction. During
the activities, participants interact, e.g., by sharing code, opining on the aesthetics, and negotiating space. At the end
of the process, participants present  their constructions and   critique  their peers' work.   Essentially, participants
evaluate whether or not the objects created by their peers are in fact fractals. This involves a joint discussion of the
components of fractals (recursion and scaling in particular). Thus, with the support of the facilitator, mathematical
properties embedded in the fractal objects become articulated through normative vocabulary and constructs.

        We foresee a major design challenge is participant heterogeneity in skill, accumulated experience in the

                                                         265                                                  CSCL 2007
village, familiarity with emergent practices, and hours of operation. Moreover, participation should be engaging and
rewarding for a visitor who operates in the environment for either 5 minutes or 5 hours. We are hoping to establish
international round-the-clock rotating core leadership, such that experienced users are always available to welcome
beginners, mentor them, and offer feedback on their initial construction.

Research Question
          The  Fractal  Village   project  is situated in  a larger on-going    research program    that examines    relations
between mathematical artifacts and student agency. In a previous study (Veeragoudar Harrell, 2007) we examined
cognitive, affective, social, and technological factors contributing to students' mathematical agency. In particular,
we suggested that by decoupling mathematical representations from the media in which they are embedded, we can
pursue empirically a more nuanced understanding of students' dispositions toward mathematical practice and thus
possibly inform the design of computer-based learning environments that support mathematical agency. Findings
suggested that students operate differently with representations depending on the media in which they are embedded
and  that some  media     are more  conducive   to mathematical    agency.  The  current study   further pushes   our   line of
research by focusing on a more complex medium in which participants' affective as well as cognitive experience
may  differ radically   from   traditional school  settings. How  might  students' experiences    in a   virtual mathematics
laboratory  affect  their dispositions toward    mathematical   practice?  In   particular, how  might   working     in Fractal
Village impact students' mathematical agency?

Data Collection and Analysis
          We have negotiated access to a group of high-school mathematics students and have procured virtual real
estate (an "island") where we are creating the technological infrastructure of Fractal Village. We will collect data of
student   activity, both  off-  and on-line,   including  student   interviews, video data    of real-student    participation,
streaming screen captures of virtual participation, and classroom-, student-, and teacher interviews. In addition, we
will  save    students'   virtual   constructions.    Data   analysis  will   follow  social-science     qualitative-analysis
methodologies--the project is innovative, and we expect that appropriate analytic approaches will emerge (Glaser &
Strauss,  1967) as   we  conduct  the study   and  begin  to understand better  how  issues   of agency  play    out in virtual
collaborative practice.

Demonstration
          A demonstration     of  Fractal  Village is  planned  for CSCL    2007.  Attendees   will  be  able to  connect    as
characters within the space, manipulate seed fractals and construct their own recursive artifacts. Also, we will show
live activity online and display participant artifacts, sample feedback, and analyses of the learning trajectories.

References
Cole, M. (2006). Designing, implementing, sustaining and evaluating idiocultures for learning and development:
          The case study of the 5th dimension. Laboratory of Comparative Human Cognition University of
          California, San Diego.
diSessa, A. A. (2000). Changing minds: Computers, learning and literacy. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Eglash, R. (1999). African fractals: Modern computing and indigenous design. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers
          University Press.
Gee, J. P. (2003). What video games have to teach us about learning and literacy. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Glaser, B. G., & Strauss, A. L. (1967). The discovery of grounded theory. Chicago: Aldine Publishing Company.
Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning:      Legitimate peripheral participation (No. IRL-89-0013). Palo
          Alto, CA: Institute for Research on Learning.
LindenLabs. (2007). Makers of second life. www.lindenlab.com.
Papert, S. (1991). Teaching children to be mathematicians vs. teaching about mathematics. MIT AI Memo, 249, 1 ­
          25.
Powell, A. B. (2004). The diversity backlash and the mathematical agency of students of color. In M. J. Hoines & A.
          B. Fuglestad (Eds.), Proceedings of the 28th Annual Meeting of the International Group for the Psychology
          of Mathematics Education (Vol. 1, pp. 37 ­ 54). Bergen University College.
Veeragoudar Harrell, S. (2007, April). Representation, medium, and agency in mathematics practice: Toward the
          development of a model of mathematical agency. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American
          Educational Research Association, Chicago, IL.

                                                              266                                                    CSCL 2007
