        Combining Social Network Analysis with Semantic Relations
                 to Support the Evolution of a Scientific Community
            Andreas Harrer, Nils Malzahn, Sam Zeini, H. Ulrich Hoppe, University of Duisburg-Essen
                 harrer@collide.info, malzahn@collide.info, zeini@collide.info, hoppe@collide.info

        Abstract: This paper presents an analytical approach to support organisational learning in terms
        of the evolution of a scientific community based on a combination of social network analysis and
        semantic relations. The primary and direct target of the method is to infer hidden or desirable links
        between subgroups in a networked community. The data source for these inferences comprises
        memberships in teams and thematic subgroups. The approach has been applied in a case study to a
        large scientific network on technology enhanced learning.

Introduction
        One perspective of research on technology enhanced learning and scientific knowledge production deals
with communities     of practice (Wenger,   1999), and   especially with  the role of information    and  communication
technologies in defining, maintaining and evolving these communities. In this view, networking infrastructures and
communication mechanisms are enabling factors for community development. In a more recent article, Wenger,
McDermott and Snyder (2002) make a transition from observing and analysing communities of practice towards
"cultivating" such communities. The first of seven principles for cultivating communities of practice is the "design
for evolution" (as a postulate). In the sequel, we will explore how a combination of analytic and semantic modelling
techniques can be used to support the evolution of networked communities. This support relies, in first place, on
enabling more informed decisions based on the identification of social patterns and particularly on the combination
of information about topical (or thematic) and personal dynamics in the network.

        Social   network   analysis is an   established  method   to derive   person-person    relations in the    form of
sociograms from "traces" of communication in a networked community (cf. Wassermann & Faust 1994). Given the
typical types of communication in community portals or forums, it is possible to relate the communication events
also to specific topics  which,  in turn, can  be  associated  with  each other   through   an ontology   (i.e. an  explicit
description of relevant concepts and their relations within a specific domain). Here, the ontology is an intellectual
construct given a priori, whereas the sociogram results from an empirical analysis. Semantic background knowledge
can be used to suggest additional interactions (e.g., of type "person A should talk to B") based on an ontology link
(cf. Malzahn et al. 2005b). On the other hand, personal proximities which are not accounted for by the ontology may
indicate an update of the semantic structure.

        Our approach is exemplified with a community of practice in the field of technology enhanced learning
(TEL),  namely   the Kaleidoscope   Network    of Excellence.  The   methodology   has been    originally developed   and
implemented in an interdisciplinary research project on "Virtual Work and Learning in Project Based Networks"
(VIP-NET project no. 01HU0128, cf. Malzahn et al., 2005a). The FreeStyler application, a mind tool focusing on
collaborative modelling   and  simulation,  which  has   a direct interface   to the CoNaVi     application (Community
Navigation Visualizer;   see Malzahn   et al., 2005b) provides  an   easy-to-use  interface to these methods.    It can be
applied to various   networked   communities,   such  as learning   communities   and/or  communities    of practice, and
makes use of different types of input data.

Use Cases and Methods of SNA for Community Support
        In the following subsections we will define the basic issues of classic Social Network Analysis and then
introduce our ideas for enhancing the community support by means of enriched SNA techniques. We will present
the stimulation of new partnerships between network actors by the augmentation of social networks with semantic
networks. The evolvement of a community goes hand in hand with the development of the conceptual framework of
it. Therefore we propose an SNA based approach for the detection of conceptual changes (Slotta, Chi, & Joram,
1995) on community level. The liveliness of a community is influenced to a large extent by the trends that define the
major strands of interest. We present several techniques how to spot trends to support communities in their evolution
and self-reflection.

                                                           267                                                    CSCL 2007
Bi-partite social networks of actors and topics
          The   data that networks   can be  built upon  and  the analyses  that can   be conducted  are manifold.     Social
Network Analysis (or SNA, see Wassermann & Faust, 1994) relies usually on homogenous networks with one type
of actors, namely persons, that are also called one-mode-networks. In these networks specific properties, such as
centrality or prestige of a person or the overall centralization and density of a network can be computed by well-
defined formulae.

          Yet computer-supported interaction and cooperation typically involves mediating artefacts, such as written
documents like emails or postings as well as diagrams or models being co-constructed by a group of learners. These
"tangible" products can be seen as another type of entity to be included in the network. Exchange on the level of the
original artefacts can also be provided by similarity-based search in a shared collection of objects (cf. Hoppe et al.,
2005). If we restrict our analysis, in this sense, to "communication through artefacts" (Dix et al., 2004) this will
result in networks    only  with  relations spanning  between    elements  of  the  two  different  categories  (i.e. person-
artefact). This network structure corresponds to the one of a bi-partite graph. Typical examples of these kinds of
relations are, e.g., a person creating, deleting or modifying an artefact (cf. Ogata & Yano, 1998) such as a forum
posting,  or a  person expressing  interest  in an artefact, such as   subscribing  to a  thread or discussion  board.   In a
generalization step, an artefact can be classified by its semantic content or theme. E.g., all forum postings classified
under "SNA in CSCL" would be seen as related to one topic or theme. This would potentially reduce the number of
non-person nodes from artefacts (postings) to topics and increase the number of persons gathered around one topic
(as compared to the original postings). Similar bi-partite networks have been discussed in SNA under the notion of
"affiliation networks" (Wassermann & Faust, 1994).

          These networks provide the potential for a variety of analytical approaches and applications: Persons might
be interested in other persons related to an object of their interest, to contact them for discussion and exchange; a
researcher might be interested in relations between topics that have been created indirectly by people related to these
topics indicating possible connectedness of the topics. These kind of mathematically inferred topic-topic-networks
are called event overlap networks (Breiger, 1974) in the SNA literature.

          In the following subsections we will discuss different use cases for SNA-based community support and
explain the methods that facilitate this kind of support.

Team recommendation - Enriching bi-partite networks with expert knowledge
          The   example   mentioned  above   of people  being  interested  in other persons  related to an object     of their
interest can be considered the computation of the path length 2 in the simplest case, i.e. the multiplication of the
network matrix with itself. In bi-partite networks this will result in either person-person or topic-topic networks, i.e.
one-mode     networks  that can   be analysed   further in the   usual way.   These strict networks   structures  might    be
interesting for analytical purposes, but have the danger of producing either already known or rather trivial insights:
Imagine   a  member   of  a University's discussion  network     who participates  in  one specific  discussion  board;   the
computation of the person-person network will show him the people that he already saw in the discussion thread,
thus not giving him information about further discussion partners.

          A more interesting information could be the persons participating in a discussion thread that is related in
some   way   to the  thread he is interested in. This   could be  inferred by  the  creation of  a  topic-topic network,    as
discussed above, or by the explicit additional information about topics represented as a knowledge map, which tends
to be available often through an expert (e.g. the moderator of the forum) or a shared conceptualisation, also known
as an ontology (Gruber, 1993). Using this explicit additional information together with the bi-partite network results
in a network structure that is no longer a bi-partite network, since nodes of the same type might have relations with
each other. A schema for this combination of bi-partite networks with a knowledge map into a multi-mode network
can be seen in figure 1.

                                                             268                                                  CSCL 2007
                 Figure 1: Schema for the augmentation of bi-partite networks with knowledge maps

         This affords a different kind of computational method than the standard ones for affiliation networks that
we call ontology-facilitated navigation and that is described in detail in (Malzahn et al., 2005b). Using weighted and
typed relations in the additional ontology, the multi-mode network is transformed into a one-mode network (see
figure 1 top right), which contains relations that was mediated only by the information expressed in the ontology. In
our example of the discussion board, the student would get information about the persons involved in a separate
thread she might not have been aware of, but that is relevant to her area of interest, instead of getting information
about the persons she already knows. Since experiences with expert and diagnosis systems showed that users want
to have  explanations   (Clancey,  1983)  of  computed  results  we  decided to  enable  the  user to color   the relations
between the topics in the ontology. The colors used in the ontology are then transferred to the resulting person-
person network so that the user can identify the relations and therefore the artefacts that have led to the computed
relation. Along the way the user gets the information how many different ways facilitate the relations because every
color represents another path from one person to the other. This kind of information produced by our method of
combining    bi-partite networks   with  networks based  on  expert   knowledge   is mainly   interesting    for the future
behavior of the user e.g. by contacting the newly identified persons for discussion about their joint interest. Thus the
inferred network information might be used to recommend options and consequently evolve communities towards
new kinds of relations.

Reconciling, evolving and validating community terms using SNA
         In the previous section we have shown that ontologies are valuable tools to foster relations that might not
be obvious to the majority of participants in a community. In this section we want to show how social network
analysis can    be used   to validate   presumed  relations  between   artefacts in  the observed     community.     When
communities come into existence they usually develop their own vocabulary and standards (cf. Wenger, 1999; Zeini,
2005). This is done either implicitly by using the same terms for the same concept or explicitly by developing an
external representation   of their common     understanding. Sometimes   even    the vocabulary    itself is the  object of
common interest. This is e.g. the case with the notion of collaboration script in CSCL. A lively community will
adapt itself to new     developments  in their field of interest. So  should the ontology    enable all   members    of  the
community    to profit  from new   insights. The adaption will   most likely manifest  itself by the  integration  of   new
members into the community or by the re-orientation of - in the beginning some members of the community towards
new topics (or artefacts) of interest. Sometimes this process is made very explicit by those people by announcing the
next big issues and grand challenges (such as in Hoare & Milner, 2004) for a community, but most of the time the
change is made silently and unnoticed by the community: there are persons who work on topics of two seemingly
not connected topics - at least in terms of the agreed on knowledge map. If more and more people work on two
topics not connected in the map the community should investigate these two topics concerning the nature of the link.
This provides deeper insight in the topic and might strengthen a new research field.

         Social network analysis can support the community by highlighting missing links, confirm existing links or
even questioning presumably existing links in the community's ontology. We use a weighted and standardized co-

                                                            269                                                   CSCL 2007
occurrence algorithm based on actors' relationships results in a network of artefacts that can be compared to the
existing knowledge map. The resulting network distinguishes three types of relations in the reconciled map:
        ·    green relations indicating that these relations were confirmed by the affiliation network, i.e. they are
             part of the given map and various persons are working on both topics.
        ·    red relations indicating that these relations could not be confirmed by the affiliation network, i.e. they
             are part of the map but no one is working on both topics.
        ·    grey relations indicating that these relations are emerging from the network, but they are currently not
             included in the map.

        All three types of relations are valuable for the community. Although the green ones may seem to be trivial
because they are already known, they confirm the validity of the given ontology. The red ones are important because
the observer might    want to investigate   if either the ontology   has to  be corrected  because the  currently existing
relation is not valid (anymore) the e.g. in research networks the combination of topics is so well-established and
researched that further work is not spent. The most promising consequences might be drawn from the grey relations.
These relations may indicate missing links in the ontology. If there are strong ties between two topics because of the
amount or the reputation of the persons working on both topics the observer should carefully consider the inclusion
of this link into the common knowledge of the community. So the analysis of relations between actors and topics
can be used to evolve the common grounding of a community.

Trendspotting - identifying topics of interest in a network
        Innovation and also research in and for the information society are to some extent driven by the emergence
of new topics and trends. To identify these trends early is an important success factor. In science and research this
corresponds to the identification of big issues and grand challenges (Hoare & Milner, 2004). In the commercial
world, the dynamics of life-long-learning is driven by such trends. Personal and public communication can be a
source of knowledge about trends. Similarly it is valuable to identify persons that are known to be trendsetters or
early adopters  of  technology     (Rogers, 1995).    We   propose   to  apply   SNA-based   techniques  to  support  the
identification of trends ("trend-spotting") and suggest two related approaches:

Trend analysis via temporal dimension
        A    trend is usually associated    with  a   new  term  or  label coming    up in the communication      within a
community. Thus, investigating changes in terminology over time can give an indication of the trends in a given
field. For our approach of conceptualizing scientific and learning communities as multi-mode networks interacting
around specific topics and artefacts, the changes in the network over time are the indicator for trends: on the one
hand the differences within the network at specific points in time are important, on the other hand the relations that
span  across a time   period  give additional   insights. This   means  that for our  network  analyses we   consider the
comparison   between   different "snapshots"    of  the   network,  preferrably  at well-defined moments,    such  as the
beginning of a new period (e.g. a new year at university, a new period of funding for projects). Basically, entities
and relations in the network could have persevered unchanged, emerged newly, or vanished. This information can be
combined  with  relations  over  time that  express   the change  or influence   of a network  element. This information
enriches the plain information of differences, since it reflects also the potential change and evolution of persons,
artefacts, or relations in a network. These phenomena in the network can be indicators for trends. They can be
further operationalized with SNA methods by considering network properties, such as density of the network or
centrality of a topic, in the perspective of their temporal change. An example for our approach of identifying trends
in a network according to the temporal perspective will be given in the example section of this paper.

Trend analysis via trusted authorities
        Another approach to identifying trends is to look at suspected trend setters or early adopters (cf. Rogers,
1995). These persons are usually considered as trusted authorities because of their expertise or influence on the
community. It is not important that all members agree on a fixed set of authorities because this type of trend spotting
relies on trust and beliefs. It is therefore bound to the personal judgement rather than a general agreement, although
agreement may help to build up trust.
        Accordingly, trends can be detected by examining the surrounding of such a trusted authority, i.e. the topics
or persons the authority has recently established links with. This can be supported using visual navigation through
the community networks by providing means to find authorities and focus on their neighborhood in a flexible way,
e.g. by varying the degree of shown details.

                                                             270                                                 CSCL 2007
Example - the Scientific Network Kaleidoscope in Technology-Enhanced Learning
         As a proof of concept of our methods for fostering communities we chose the Kaleidoscope Network of
Excellence (IST 507838). Kaleidoscope is a scientific network with institutions from academia and industry in the
area of Technology Enhanced Learning (TEL). It brings together persons and teams from multiple fields of expertise
and aims at the integration of concepts, institutions, and technology to strengthen the ties in the European research
area. All in all Kaleidoscope consists currently of approximately 80 partner institutions and 1000 personal members
of all old member states and several new member states of the European Union. Because of its size the Kaleidoscope
network  has  a more   complex    structure   than the  usual two-mode      networks   discussed  in   the previous  section.
Kaleidoscope  has  a   strong  sub-community     (Special  Interest  Group     = SIG)  interested   in Computer-Supported
Collaborative Learning,   that has approximately    380    participants. For   our analyses  we  will  focus mainly  on  this
community to identify major strands of work and recent trends of this European CSCL interest group. As formally
captured data for  the bi-partite networks    we   use the authorship    of reports / deliverables  within  Kaleidoscope:  a
partner institution is connected to a Kaleidoscope activity if it is one of the contributors of a report. The resulting
network  of figure 2  is thus  similar to a co-citation   network.  The   labels   "Dxx"  in the boxes   represent  the work
package  numbers   of  the different activities.   The small  ellipsoids    represent some   of the teams   that are part of
Kaleidoscope.

                                   Figure 2: Bi-partite Team Deliverable Network

Team recommendation and network mapping
         When   applying   the standard   operations   of transforming   the   bi-partite network   to a one-mode    network
(Wassermann & Faust, 1994), the collaboration between teams can be identified easily. While this is interesting for
analytical purposes, it is not enough for creating substantial recommendations for the future, i.e. for community
building activities, because these connections should be obvious for all the actors involved directly.

         For  the  recommendation      of non-trivial   links in  order     to promote    community    building  we  extend
conventional  social   network    analysis    with  the    following  approach:     Using    either  a   personally  created
conceptualisation  (personal   view) of   the field or  by  applying  the    shared   conceptualisation  of  the community

                                                             271                                                   CSCL 2007
(ontology, cf. Gruber,  1993) in combination with the  bi-partite    network, a weighted  network  can  be created for
recommendation of links. The algorithmic details of this approach have been presented in Malzahn et al. (2005b). In
our example case we applied the knowledge map of our team's personal view on Kaleidoscope's activities to the bi-
partite authoring network to search for partners with similar interest. Because of the nature of the selected data set
not all of the links that our team established during the past are part of the data. This is because some teams did not
formally submit a deliverable (viz. not being a main author) for every activity they were participating in. So some of
the links are missing and we can evaluate our link recommendation method by evaluating if these missing links are
found. We   created   a  knowledge map   representing our     team's view (cf.  figure 3)  of Kaleidoscope's  activity
interrelations with the help of the FreeStyler application in combination with CoNaVi.

        The team's perspective (knowledge map) on the Kaleidoscope network was then applied to the bi-partite
network shown in figure 2. Our extended SNA approach indicates that there are links of interest between our team
and other  partners  in Kaleidoscope as shown in the  resulting  one-mode     network  in figure 4 that have not been
present in figure 2.

               Figure 3: Manually created knowledge map of our team's perspective on the activities

        Looking at the set of proposed new partners we clearly realized that the algorithm was working plausibly
because with some of the partners we were already in touch. Since the given data was not representing all of our
activities in Kaleidoscope the algorithm could not take into account those links from the beginning. This kind of
validation of the learned links is quite similar to the commonly used "leave one out" cross-validation approach in
machine learning. The really new links motivated us to have a closer look at these Kaleidoscope partners' work, the
type of usage we designed this approach for. Admittedly we discarded some of the links again, but in the end we
were stimulated by the algorithm's results to communicate through the artefact by reading their papers - which is in
turn valuable for a community like Kaleidoscope because it generates a deeper understanding of the whole field of
TEL.

                                                          272                                                CSCL 2007
             Figure 4: One-mode network with teams linked to our team after ontology facilitation

Trend-spotting via trusted authorities
       To demonstrate the method of trend-spotting via trusted authorities described generally in section Trend-
spotting we assume that the user regards our team as a trusted authority for promising research topics. If this person
analyses Kaleidoscope network with CoNaVi he or she would notice that UDuisburg is currently involved in five
activities (see figure 5). These activities are marked with numbers indicating the amount of other teams involved in
the corresponding activity. Considering his or her own interests and links towards certain topics the user is now able
to investigate one of the topics further. Given that the user is currently not involved in mobile learning activities and
discovers that UDuisburg is involved in such activities he might take participation in mobile learning activities into
consideration, if he thinks it is a promising direction based on his trust in the supposed authority.

                       Figure 5: Looking at the scope of interest of a trusted authority

Trend-spotting in Kaleidoscope - a temporal perspective
       Since the Kaleidoscope network renews its activity       plan each year, a temporal shift      of activities which
might reflect trends and evolution within the network is an interesting issue for analysis and also for the strategic
orientation towards the future. Kaleidoscope is currently in its third year period, thus we can refer to the data from 2
finished work programs and its extrapolation to the third year.

                                                         273                                                    CSCL 2007
         To highlight the evolution of the research network according to new research lines and changes of focus,
we show the changes in the activities from one period to its succeeding period. Figure 6 shows the changes from
Year 2 to Year 3.

                             Figure 6: Evolution of Kaleidoscope from Year 2 to Year 3

         Activities  that have been   continued in  the  same   format from one   year to the other  are represented as
middle-sized cubes; the dynamic evolution of the network can be seen in activities, that have been discontinued at
the transition from one period to the next (represented as small cones), and activities that started in the new period,
which are represented as large spheres. Especially interesting are the transformations from short-term activities, such
as Joint Projects with duration of one year, into activities with a longer-term perspective, mainly Research Teams
that are planned  to be   sustainable for a longer  period. These  direct transformations are  shown  as links between
activities from one year to another, i.e. from a cone to a sphere. The figure shows that one of Kaleidoscope's major
concerns is the evolution into a reliable and sustainable structure reflecting major research areas as well as current
trends of Technology Enhanced Learning.. This is especially visible in the number of Research Teams that grows
from four in year 1 to eight in year 3.

         In a complimentary analysis we extracted current trends in the Kaleidoscope CSCL community. First we
identified the Kaleidoscope teams with a strong participation ratio with respect to CSCL: We only considered teams
with at least 50% of their team members being also members in the CSCL Special Interest Group. This threshold
was validated with the computation of the median of teams, which resulted also exactly at a ratio of 50%. Then we
identified the new Kaleidoscope activities that the "CSCL" teams have participated in since the year 2006 as an
indicator for recent projects that might have emerged with CSCL aspects in mind. The activities that resulted from
the combination of statistical analysis and the new bi-partite network are:
         ·   Learning     Patterns for  the design   and deployment    of Mathematical    Games,  which   supports   the
             collaborative design of educational games by collecting re-usable patterns for mathematical games.
         ·   Integrating   Collaborative,   Inquiry and  Experiential  Learning which   brings together  the strands of
             experiential  and  inquiry   learning  with collaborative  learning, thus  creating for the  students rich
             learning experiences with scientific methods in a social context.

                                                            274                                               CSCL 2007
         ·   Computer-based Analysis and Visualization of Collaborative Learning Activities which that aims at the
             integration of computer-based methods into the analysis process of collaborative activities by means of
             capturing, processing, and visualization the collaboration.
Indeed  all these  activities  have   a CSCL   tint,  which    can be    interpreted twofold:  on  the   one hand    the CSCL
community can be considered an important driving force for the Kaleidoscope network, on the other hand these
topics may be potential trends for CSCL research also on a broader scope. Some of these analysis results might have
been   obvious  to or at  least  assumed  by  people     involved  in the  Kaleidoscope     network, yet  the social   network
approach can be used to assure these assumptions by using the SNA inspired measures that can be easily derived
from the given data by our tools. In addition non-evident links from activities can be identified and be used for new
collaboration opportunities between the projects.

Discussion - Privacy Issues and Implications on Visualization
         Experiences from the research project 'VIP-NET - Virtual Work and Learning in Project Based Networks'
led us  to  the conclusion   that  personal  networks    can   sometimes  be   critical for analysis purposes.    Some   people
disagree with the idea of opening their personal networks for scientific analysis, since these networks represent their
social capital. On the other hand these people are often interested to explore their personal networks to exploit them
more thoroughly. Another example where information may be affected by privacy issues is in the case of teaching.
In (Harrer et al., 2005) for example we had to anonymize the results for the publication. For teachers it could also be
problematic when external people (e.g. social network researchers) see the structural data of classroom activities,
since there may be some students who are not as well integrated in the class as others.

         These privacy aspects related to personal networks led us to the question how to support users to explore
their own   networks  using   social  network analysis    techniques. Our   approach    addressing   the operationalization  of
social network   analysis    for  non   scientific users  is to  embed    advanced    measurements    into   the  visualization.
According to (Krempel, 2005) techniques exist to integrate structural properties of networks in the display. For this
purpose we created the Weaver application, a 3D visualizer for social networks, which arranges and draws the nodes
according to properties such as degree, centrality, or externally defined properties within a simple solution space.
From the user view this means, that he or she is able to perceive the properties of a node immediately (e.g. what is
the most   central topic  in the   network). The    figures  5 and 6  show   nodes   arranged  by their  type and    shaped  by
additional information on their life-span.

Conclusions
         This paper presented three approaches (team recommendation, knowledge map evolution, trend spotting),
on how to gain information with SNA-related techniques in multi-mode networks. We showed how our tools can
support different  use   cases  of community   support:     CoNaVi    in combination    with  FreeStyler  enables  its users to
visualize and navigate through (enriched) multi-mode networks as well as evolve given knowledge maps with the
help of empirical data. Weaver's hierarchical views and filters allow for emphasizing temporal developments for
trend spotting.

         The proposed methods for fostering new personal links rely on the mathematical properties characterizing
the structure of the network data. The approach dealing with trend-spotting uses a sociometrically inspired technique
to  enable  the user  to reflect  on the current   state  and  temporal  evolution   of  the examined    network   providing  a
foundation to develop a strategy for self-development and/or re-positioning in the community. A typical use-case of
trend-analysis is the support of freelancers. They have a constant need to discover potential trends in technology to
be up-to-date for the next contract. Albeit we focused on a scientific community for our analyses because its rich
structure provides a good demonstrator and testbed for our approaches, we think that the support is not limited to
this kind of community, but can be applied as well for learning communities, especially the ones with computer-
based learning support. Almost all universities provide forums accompanying the courses to exchange ideas and
provide help for the students having either a problem within the current topics or with organizational issues.New
users tend to cross-post their questions in several forums to be sure to find someone who answers to the problem.
The   proposed  method   about   new  personal     links can be applied   here to direct  the novices    directly to competent
helpers. In Harrer et al. (2005) we combined SNA methods on a student community in a blended learning scenario
with qualitative and statistical methods. In this earlier work we restricted our approach to the analytical perspective
without giving feedback to the students on their network position. In upcoming courses we plan to combine the use

                                                               275                                                    CSCL 2007
of analysis feedback as sketched in Daradoumis et al. (2004) with our techniques of community support by directly
giving feedback and recommendation.

References
Breiger. R.(1991). Explorations in Structural Analysis: Dual and Multiple Networks of Social Structure. Garland
          Press, New York.
Clancey,.W.   (1983).  The epistomology   of  a rule-based  expert system  - a  framework   for explanation.   Artificial
          Intelligence, 20: 215-251
Dix, A., Finlay, J., Abowd, G. & Beale, R. (2004). Human-Computer Interaction. 3rd Edition. Harlow (England):
          Prentice Hall.
Daradoumis, A. & Martinez Mones, A. & Xhafa, F. (2004).. An integrated approach for analysing and assessing the
          performance of virtual learning groups. In Procs. of the the Conference on Groupware (CRIWG 2004),
          LCNS 3198, pp. 289-304, Springer.
Gruber, T. (1993). A translation approach to portable ontology specifications. Knowledge Acquisition, Vol. 5(No. 2):
          pp. 199-220
Harrer, A. & Zeini, S. & Pinkwart, N. (2005). The effects of electronic communication support on presence learning
          scenarios. In Timothy Koschmann, Daniel Suthers, and Tak-Wai Chan, (Eds.), Computer-Supported Col
          laborative Learning 2005, pp. 190-194, Mahwah, NJ.. Lawrence Earlbaum Associates.
Hoare, T. & Milner, R. (2004). Grand Challenges in Computing - Research. The British Computer Society
Hoppe, H.U., Pinkwart, N., Oelinger, M., Zeini, S., Verdejo, F., Barros, B. & J. I Mayorga, J.I. (2005). Building
          bridges within  learning  communities  through   ontologies  and "thematic  objects". In Proceedings   of the
          International Conference on Computer Supported Collaborative Learning (CSCL2005). Taipei (Taiwan),
          June 2005.
Krempel,   L.  (2005).   Visualisierung komplexer    Strukturen  -  Grundlagen   der  Darstellung  mehrdimensionaler
          Netzwerke.   Schriften   des  Max-Planck-Instituts   für     Gesellschaftsforschung,  Sonderband.    Campus,
          Frankfurt a.M., 2005.
Malzahn,   N.,  Urspruch,   T.,  Tünte,   M.,   &  Hoppe,    H.U.   (2005a).  Teams    in  virtuellen  Unternehmen    -
          Zusammenstellung,     Kompetenzen,    Technik.    In  M.     Engelien  and  K.   Meiner,    (Eds.),  Virtuelle
          Organisationen und Neue Medien,
Malzahn, N. & Zeini, S. & Harrer, A. (2005b). Ontology facilitated community navigation - who is interesting for
          what i am interested in? In A. Dey et al., (Eds.), Proc. of Context 2005, volume LNAI 3554 of Lecture
          Notes of Artificial Intelligence, pp. 292-303.
Ogata, H. & Yano, Y. (1998). Knowledge awareness: bridging learners in a collaborative learning environment,
          International Journal of Educational Telecommunications, AACE, Vol. 4, No. 2/3, 219-236.
Rogers, E. (1995). Diffusion of Innovation. Free Press, New York, 4th edition.
Slotta, J., Chi, M., & Joram, E. (1995). Assessing students' misclassifications of physics concepts: An ontological
          basis for conceptual change. Cognition and Instruction, 13 (3), pp. 373-400.
Wassermann, S. & Faust, K. (1994). Social Network Analysis: Methods and Application. Cambridge University
          Press, Cambridge.
Wenger E. (1999). Communities of Practice - Learning, Meaning, and Identity. Cambridge University Press, New
          York.
Wenger, E., McDermott,R., & Snyder, W. M.(2002). Cultivating Communities of Practice: A Guide to Managing
          Knowledge. Harvard Business School Press.
Zeini, S.   (2005)   Pragmatisch-interaktionistische Konzepte      als Heuristik  für  die  Untersuchung      komplexer
          Arbeitsorganisationen - Eine Fallstudie, chapter 4, pp. 61-91. ISF München.

Acknowledgements
This research project was inspired by our participation in the Kaleidoscope Network of Excellence.
Thanks to Sabrina Ziebarth for her great job in implementing the Weaver application, which enabled us to visualize
figure 6.

                                                           276                                                CSCL 2007
