      Conceptual and Computational Issues in the Formalization of
                                             Collaboration Scripts
                           Andreas Harrer, University of Duisburg-Essen, harrer@collide.info
                         Lars Kobbe, Knowledge Media Research Center, l.kobbe@iwm-kmrc.de
                           Nils Malzahn, University of Duisburg-Essen, malzahn@collide.info

          Abstract: Collaboration scripts aim at facilitating social and cognitive processes of collaborative
          learning by shaping the way learners interact with each other. Computer-supported collaboration
          scripts generally suffer from the problem of being restrained to a specific learning platform and
          learning context. Researchers are therefore aiming for a formalization of collaboration scripts on
          both a conceptual and a computational level. A recently developed framework allows to describe
          collaboration scripts using a small number of components (participants, activities, roles, resources
          and groups) and mechanisms (task distribution, group formation and sequencing). Based on these,
          a formal, graphical modelling tool has been developed and      tested with several example scripts.

Introduction
          Collaboration scripts are based upon the scripted cooperation approach, originally developed by O'Donnell,
Dansereau, Hall and Rocklin (1987), which differs from other collaborative learning approaches in that it aims at
facilitating social and cognitive processes of the learners by means of providing a carefully designed structure for
small group interaction. Collaboration scripts have become fairly popular within educational science, especially in
the domain of computer-supported collaborative learning (CSCL), where they have been used in various settings,
including face-to-face, web-based as well as mobile contexts. So far, collaboration scripts are hardwired to a specific
learning environment and context, limiting their portability, scalability and adaptability as well as making it difficult
to research  the  specific  effects of  scripts on learning processes   and  outcomes.    In order to resolve  these issues,
researchers aim for a formalization of scripts both on a conceptual and a computational level.

          The current de facto standard for the specification of executable learning processes is IMS Learning Design
(IMS/LD) (Koper and Tattersall, 2005). The editing level of IMS/LD is mainly a textual that is close to the technical
specification: there are some (mostly) tree based editors, which try to abstract from the XML-based language, but
there is  no "native"    graphical representation. The suitability for  formalization  of  complex   collaborative learning
scenarios has been critically discussed in the CSCL area (Hernandez et al., 2004; Miao et al., 2005), which might
imply that for the CSCL researcher an adapted and specialized conceptual model with explicit concepts like groups
and dynamic assignment of resources is needed.

          As a conceptual and computational formalization goes hand in hand, this task was recently approached by
an interdisciplinary   research team     of computer scientists, psychologists  and    educational scientists, leading  to a
common framework for the specification of scripts (Kobbe et al., subm.). Consolidating the conceptual analyses of
Dillenbourg (2002), Dillenbourg and Jermann (in press) and Kollar, Fischer and Hesse (in press) with new insights
into  the composition      of scripts,   the specification  proposes   a comprehensive       yet economic   description    of
collaboration   scripts, featuring  five basic  components  and  three  basic mechanisms.     The  components   include  the
individuals that participate in a script (participants), the activities that they engage in, the roles they assume, the
resources that they make use of and the groups they form. Script mechanisms help to describe the distributed nature
of scripts,  that is, how  activities, roles and  resources are  distributed  across participants  (task distribution), how
participants are distributed across groups (group formation) and how both components and groups are distributed
over time (sequencing).

          Based on these components and mechanisms, we have started to develop a tool for the formal, graphical
modelling    of scripts.  A   formal,  graphical model   combines  the   advantages    of computer-readable,   formal   data
structures for issues of portability, scalability and adaptability with those of graphical representations: A graphical
model  usually    is  much  easier  to read  and analyze (Shu,   1998),  in particular by    non-computer-scientists whose
judgement and input is indispensible for the conceptual validation of the computational model. Furthermore, some
features of collaboration scripts are best conveyed graphically, such as parallel activities, repetitions, and conditional
branches. And last but not least, a graphical modelling tool serves as a prototypical authoring environment for the

                                                             277                                                  CSCL 2007
design of new collaboration scripts. To a target user group of educational researchers and practitioners with little
programming knowledge, a graphical authoring tool will be much more user-friendly than a programming editor.

Modelling Scripts
        Today, a large variety of highly sophisticated graphical notation systems especially in computer science
exist. Yet none of these have found to be fully appropriate for the modelling of collaboration scripts (Harrer &
Malzahn, 2006). Inspired by the semantics of statecharts diagrams, we have developed a graphical notation which
allows a formal modelling of collaboration scripts based on the conceptual framework mentioned above. Since the
framework concepts are familiar to the CSCL researcher, we decided to provide a graphical construct for each of the
theory based  concepts.  The  components  are  represented   by iconic objects while   the  dynamic  aspects (i. e. the
mechanisms)   are represented as links  between these  objects.  The   inscription of  the links is used to define  the
mechanim more specifically, such as different group formation strategies (e. g. by group size, by number of groups,
or by  values attributed to  the participants, like gender   or  skills). This direct   mapping   from   conceptual  to
computational level is further supported by syntactical constraints imposed by the editing tool.

        Figure 1. Jigsaw script modelled with the proposed graphical modelling language in the editing tool.

        The first prototype we developed was tested with several scripts from the literature to show the soundness
of our integrated approach. As an example and to introduce the constructs of the modelling language, figure 1 shows
a graphical model of a Jigsaw classroom scenario (Aronson et al., 1978). The participants, symbolized by a group of
people, are split into groups of six to study together a text which is characteristic for one the disciplines with respect
to CSCL (technology, cognition, society) that they are supposed to become an expert of. The assignment of the text
to the particular groups is represented by the  iconic document   associated   to  the graphical learning flow (green
arrows) with red circles. Since all of the students are on equal footing, they are all learners in this phase of the script.
So they are assigned the role Learner for this part of the script. The reddish boxes with rounded edges on the end of

                                                         278                                                  CSCL 2007
the sequencing (i.e. the learning flow) arrows represent the activity to be conducted by the groups. After reading the
text, all participants are reorganized (red arrow) to form groups of mixed expertise. Each of the groups consists of
three members with one from each of the expert groups before. This is stated by the inscription by value Mice Mind
Society on the red arrow and refers to attributes gained by the resource assignment in the previous assignment. A
similar attribution with roles would have also been possible if we had distinguished more than one role before.
Finally, the mixed expert groups exchange their discipline specific knowledge within their groups and solve the task
that could not be solved otherwise. Thus, the script comes to an end which is symbolized by the black circle.

Conclusions
         The presented graphical modelling language based on a theoretical framework addresses CSCL's particular
needs for dynamic group formation and role assignment. Thereby it allows the non-computer scientists to model the
scripts using  an iconic     expression   level without losing    conceptual soundness   of the   approach.  This enables
researchers and practitioners to use the model in several ways (Miao et al., 2005): planning, refinement, discussion
and exchange of models with peers and students to improve the overall performance of learning. The soundness of
the modelling language was tested by several researchers of CSCL, asking them to model their favourite scripts as
well as observing a teacher modelling her lesson design with the tool.

         In our current work, we are extending our tool so that the models can be simulated in the editing tool and
an export to IMS/LD is possible. This will improve the quality of CSCL scripts and learning process further because
potential (static) problems with the script can be more easily detected and even dynamic problems can be analyzed
by "what-if" analyses. An example for this is the detection of group formations that are not fully compliant to the
specified formation strategy, such as distributing 17 students to groups of size 6. This will be detected automatically
by the simulation and will be highlighted to the designer of the learning activity. The IMS/LD export will enable
novices  in IMS/LD    to  create   and configure   computer-supported   learning scenarios  using  de-facto standard   tools
available in the LD developer community, yet modelling in a high-level graphical modelling language using the
more convenient conceptual model of CSCL scripts.

References
Aronson, E., Blaney, N., Stephan, C., Sikes, J., & Snapp, M. (1978). The jigsaw classroom. Sage Publications.
Dillenbourg, P. (2002). Over-scripting CSCL: The risks of blending collaborative learning with instructional design.
         In P. A. Kirschner (Ed.), Three worlds of CSCL. Can we support CSCL? (pp. 61-91). Heerlen, NL: Open
         Universiteit Nederland.
Dillenbourg, P., & Jermann, P. (in press). Designing integrative scripts. In F. Fischer, H. Mandl, J. Haake, & I.
         Kollar   (Eds.), Scripting     computer-supported    collaborative   learning:   Cognitive,  computational    and
         educational perspectives. New York: Springer.
Harrer, A. & Malzahn, N (2006). Bridging the gap - towards a graphical modelling language for learning designs
         and  collaboration   scripts  of  various granularities. Proc. ICALT    2006, edited by   Kinshuk,  R. Koper,  P.
         Kommers, P. Kirschner, D. Sampson & W. Didderen. IEEE Press, Los Alamitos, CA, pages 296-300.
Hernandez,   D., Asensio,    J.I., & Dimitriadis,  Y., (2004) IMS   Learning    Design Support   for the Formalisation  of
         Collaborative Learning Flow Patterns. Proc. ICALT 2004, IEEE Press, Los Alamitos, CA,,           pp. 350-354.
Kobbe, L., Weinberger, A., Dillenbourg, P., Harrer, A., Hämäläinen, R., & Häkkinen, P. (submitted). Specifying
         Computer-Supported Collaboration Scripts.
Kollar, I., Fischer, F.,  &  Hesse,   F. (in press). Computer-supported    cooperation   scripts ­ A conceptual   analysis.
         Educational Psychology Review.
Koper,  R.,  &   Tattersall, C.    (2005): Learning   Design: A   Handbook    on Modelling    and  Delivering   Networked
         Education and Training Springer Verlag.
Miao, Y., Hoeksema, K., Hoppe, H. U., & Harrer, A., (2005) CSCL scripts: Modelling features and potential use.
         Proc. of CSCL 2005, Lawrence Earlbaum Associates, Mahwah, NJ, pp. 423-432.
O'Donnell,   A.  M., Dansereau,      D.  F., Hall, R.  H., &  Rocklin,  T.   R.  (1987). Cognitive,  social/affective, and
         metacognitive outcomes of scripted cooperative learning. Journal of Educational Psychology, 79(4), 431-
         437.
Shu, N. C. (1998): Visual Programming. Van Nostrand Reinhold.

Acknowledgements
This research project was partially funded by the Kaleidoscope Network of Excellence.

                                                             279                                                 CSCL 2007
