         Towards a Flexible Model for Computer-based Analysis and
                  Visualization of Collaborative Learning Activities

               Andreas Harrer, Sam Zeini, University of Duisburg-Essen, {harrer;zeini}@collide.info
         Georgios Kahrimanis, Nikolaos Avouris, University of Patras, {kahrimanis;avouris}@ece.upatras.gr
  José Antonio Marcos, Alejandra Martínez-Mones, University of Valladolid {jamarcos;amartine}@infor.uva.es
   Anne Meier, Nikol Rummel, Hans Spada, University of Freiburg {ameier;rummel;spada}@psychologie.uni-
                                                       freiburg.de

         Abstract: The definition of appropriate interaction analysis methods is a major research topic in
         Computer   Supported   Collaborative   Learning.     Analysis  methods   can  be   totally or  partially
         supported by computer-based tools that provide for better and more efficient analysis processes.
         The current research in this field shows that most interaction analysis tools have been based on
         unstable prototypes, and are highly dependant on the learning environments and research goals for
         which they  were   defined. As a  consequence,    it is not possible to use  them   in authentic CSCL
         settings with real users. The  goal   of this  European   Research   Team   therefore  is to  utilize the
         synergies of experience in manual interaction analysis with computer-based analytical methods. In
         this article we present an approach that embeds standardized computer-supported techniques into a
         semi-formal analysis process model which can be utilized and adapted in a flexible way according
         to the cases and environments to be analysed.

Introduction
         The definition of appropriate interaction analysis methods is a major research topic in Computer Supported
Collaborative  Learning  (CSCL).   These   analysis  methods     support the  understanding     of collaborative   learning
activities. Such an understanding is the basis for those functionalities that might be offered by an enhanced CSCL
environment, including, for example support for students' and teachers' self-regulation, teachers' supervision tasks,
the generation of feedback and the design of instructional support measures for enhancing collaboration skills, as
well as the assessment of learning experiences and further data gathering. All these functionalities are important for
the design of enhanced learning environments that go beyond the communication and information sharing support
that current CSCL tools provide.

         Analysis methods can be totally or partially supported by computer-based tools that provide for better and
more efficient analysis processes. The definition of these computer-supported analysis tools is attracting more and
more researchers,  but current  research  in the  field is mainly    based on  unstable    prototypes  applied  to isolated
experiences (Soller, Martínez, Jermann, & Muehlenbrock, 2005). As these prototypes are usually not designed for
general  use beyond  the scope  of a  given  research  project,  their usability is normally  very  low.  Therefore,  it is
necessary to  work  on   analysis tools that can   be   applied  easily by different  real   users  in different   authentic
collaborative learning settings. This entails also the cooperation between researchers in collaborative learning and
computer scientists in reifying the expertise of human analysts as computational representations.

         The overall aim for elaborating an analysis process model common to researchers in the field of CSCL is to
reach a higher degree of generalization and comparability. Such a common framework would support the integrated
analysis and  the  standardized   exchange  of data  across   analysis  methods,    tools, research teams,     and learning
environments. In addition, such a standard analysis process model would enable us to systematically compare the
outcomes of individual studies as well as the research models themselves in order to improve the research design.
Still, the proposed framework is intended to be flexible enough as to consider qualitative and contextual differences
of individual research groups.

The CAViCoLA Process Model
         The common analysis process model has been derived from four empirical research designs which have
been conducted by four different research groups in Germany, Greece and Spain (Martinez, Dimitriadis, Gómez-
Sánchez, Rubia-Avi, Jorrín-Abellán & Marcos, 2006; Meier, Spada & Rummel, accepted; Harrer, Zeini & Pinkwart,
2006b), one of them conjointly between two research teams (Harrer, Kahrimanis, Zeini, Bollen & Avouris, 2006a).

                                                           280                                                    CSCL 2007
These teams collaborated on the conceptual and technical integration of their research approaches in the European
Research Team    "Computer-based      Analysis  and  Visualization   of Collaborative  Learning  Activities"(CAViCoLA)
within the Kaleidoscope research network. A graphical overview of the combination of different analysis methods
and their facilitation by a unified data format (CAViCoLA Common Format) can be seen in Figure 1.

                           Figure 1: Graphical Representation of the CAViCoLA Process Model
        The left side of figure 1 shows the generic process sequence used within the European Research Team. On
the right side the CAViCoLA process model combines several quantitative approaches, such as interaction analysis
of the participants' actions in time, analysis of group structures in learning communities (Social Network Analysis
and statistics; Harrer  et al., 2006b;   Martinez et al., 2006),  and   a rating scheme for  assessing the  quality of   the
collaboration   process (Meier   et al., accepted).  This  is complemented    by   qualitative methods,    such as  content
analysis, observations, questionnaires, focus groups and category building (Harrer et al., 2006a; Martinez, 2006). All
these analysis  methods    follow the classical procedure    of  data capturing,  data segmentation, preprocessing    (e.g.
annotation and   measuring),    qualitative, statistical and  social  network analysis, and    potentially visualization to
support interpretation(see   left). The  overall  approach    follows the  classical idea of the triangulation   of results

                                                             281                                                  CSCL 2007
(Denzin, 1980) that is visible in the different analysis paths in the right side of fig. 1. Since the interpretation of the
research findings is important in the refinement of the process model, the feedback loops facilitate the incremental
aspect of   the model,  such  as  the iterative  cycle  process  within  Grounded    Theory   (Strauss   &   Corbin,1990)   for
qualitative approaches   or  the  building  of  indices (Inglehardt,  1977)   for  quantitative  designs.  For    example,  the
annotation process described in Harrer et al. (2006a) is based on iterations from open coding to annotating data,
which was focused on related studies (e.g. Gunawardena, Lowe & Anderson 1997) and internal discussions between
the research teams in Germany and Greece.

         To  facilitate the  flexible  combination     of  different analysis   tools  during    the  process, we    defined a
standardized data format that captures the relevant information of collaborative learning activities. This allows the
analysis of several types of captured data, such as the different learning environments used by the partners, e.g.
Synergo  (http://www.synergo.gr),     FreeStyler  (http://www.collide.info),    Discussion    Forums   (e.g. phpBB),    BSCL-
Synergeia   shared workspaces     (http://bscl.fit.fraunhofer.de/),  with the   same   interoperable   set of  analysis   tools.
Among these analysis tools are applications for the qualitative coding of observation data captured by video, for the
generation of logfiles capturing user interactions in CSCL systems, and for gathering sociometric data. The logfiles
captured are also used for replaying, interpreting, and annotating collaborative workspace activities: this has been
done in previous research of the partners and is currently used in the European research project ARGUNAUT that
uses the standardized data format to support the moderator of electronic discussions in analysis and annotation.

Perspectives
         In future work we plan to conduct multilateral and cross-national studies between the partner sites that will
use the  proposed  analysis   model   for  CSCL   activities and    take  advantage   of  the standardized    data   format for
interoperable and flexible usage of diverse analysis tools. This will also facilitate further evaluation of the model
that can lead to its further refinement. Some phases of the model, like the analysis and visualization phases which
depend   on the  interoperability of  tools that provide   automated  analyses,    can also   be further formalized    in more
detail. For instance we are working on approaches for the visualization of the dynamics of social networks and the
graphical representation of dimensions of collaborative processes using semantic differentials.

References
Denzin,  N.  (1989):    The  Research   Act.   A  Theoretical    Introduction   to  Sociological    Methods,   Prentice   Hall,
         Englewood Cliffs, NJ.
Gunawardena, C N.., Lowe, C. A. & Anderson, T. (1997). Analysis of global online debate and the development of
         an interaction analysis model for examining social construction of knowledge in computer conferencing. J.
         of Educational Computer Research, 17(4), 397-431.
Harrer, A., Kahrimanis, G., Zeini, S., Bollen, L. & Avouris, N. (2006a) Is there a way to e-Bologna? Cross-National
         Collaborative Activities in University Courses, Proc. 1st European Conference on Technology Enhanced
         Learning EC-TEL, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 4227, pp. 140-154, Springer Berlin
Harrer, A. Zeini, S. & Pinkwart, N. (2006b). Evaluation of communication in web-supported learning communities -
         an  analysis   with triangulation   research  design,  to   appear  in the  International   Journal   of Web     Based
         Communities.
Inglehart,  R.  (1977): The   Silent  Revolution:  Changing      Values   and   Political Styles    Among    Western   Publics.
         Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Martínez,   A., Dimitriadis,  Y., Gómez-Sánchez,       E., Rubia-Avi,    B., Jorrín-Abellán,     I. &  Marcos,    J. A. (2006)
         Studying participation networks in collaboration using mixed methods in three case studies. International
         Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 1(3). 383-408.
Meier, A., Spada, H., & Rummel, N. (accepted). A rating scheme for assessing the quality of computer-supported
         collaboration processes. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning.
Strauss, A. &   Corbin,  J.  (1990).  Basics of  Qualitative Research:    Grounded    Theory   Procedures    and  Techniques.
         Newbury Park, CA: Sage Publications.
Soller, A., Martínez, A., Jerman, P., & Muehlenbrock, M.(2005): From Mirroring to Guiding: A Review of State of
         the Art Technology for Supporting Collaborative Learning. International Journal on Artificial Intelligence
         in Education. 15(4), 261-290

Acknowledgements
This research project was partly funded by the Kaleidoscope Network of Excellence (IST Contract No. 507838).

                                                             282                                                      CSCL 2007
