Collaborative Lesson Analysis in Virtual Groups: The Impact of Video
           on Student Teachers` Analysis and Reflection Processes

                      Jan Henning, University of Education, Freiburg, henning@ph-freiburg.de
                   Ute Massler, University of Education, Weingarten, massler@ph-weingarten.de
                  Rolf Ploetzner, University of Education, Freiburg, rolf.ploetzner@ph-freiburg.de
                 Peter Huppertz, University of Education, Freiburg, peter.huppertz@ph-freiburg.de

         Abstract: Reflection on teaching experiences is considered to be an important element of teacher
         training. Given the increase of virtual or partly virtual seminars and related constraints, video is
         gaining relevance because it facilitates an analysis and reflection on teaching experiences, which is
         independent   of time  and   place.  Research   indicates that the  use  of  video-recorded    lessons for
         collaborative analysis    in virtual groups   has a   positive  effect on   student teachers'  reflection
         processes  regarding  teaching   situations. Following    a field  study by  Ploetzner  et al. (2005)  on
         different applications of the learning environment "v-share", we conducted an experimental study
         to investigate the impact of video on student teachers` analysis and reflection processes in a more
         controlled way.    At the  conference  the   learning environment   and  our   research findings will  be
         presented.

Introduction
         The major goal of teacher training is to impart to student teachers the knowledge and abilities necessary to
plan, carry out and evaluate teaching. Central to this is the ability to reflect on teaching experiences: student teachers
are to relate theoretical concepts to real teaching situations and the underlying pedagogical content knowledge. By
distancing themselves  from    their  actions (cf. "reflection-on-action",  Schön,   1987)  they are able to   analyse   their
teaching and  to question   their  subjective theories.  The   analysis and  reflection  of experiences  helps  students  to
evaluate their teaching and to develop alternative - and theoretically sustained - instructional strategies for future
teaching. With the growing number of online university courses and virtual or partly virtual seminars, the question
arises as to how the need for reflection can be met in pre- and in-service teacher education, independent of time and
place. On account of the distance between individual student teachers and the lack of time for reflection during face-
to-face meetings, this cannot be done by the same means as in traditional face-to-face teacher training. Particularly,
virtual groups lack the possibility to reflect cooperatively on shared teaching experiences by getting involved in a
focused discussion with lecturers and fellow students.

         In recent years several researchers (e.g., Van Es & Sherin, 2002; Petko et al., 2003) have investigated how
video-recorded lessons can be used in teacher education to improve teaching skills. Among many other benefits,
video is gaining importance because it facilitates analysis and reflection on teaching experiences, independent of
time and place. Virtual learning environments like "LessonLab" (www.lessonlab.com) or "v-share" (Ploetzner et al.,
2005) have been developed to support the video-based analysis and reflection in virtual groups. Research indicates
that the use of video-recorded lessons for collaborative analysis in virtual groups has a positive effect on student
teachers' reflection processes regarding teaching situations (e.g., Derry et al., 2002; Santagata et al., in press).

Benefits of Using Video in Teacher Education
         Compared to direct lesson observations, the video-based analysis and reflection on teaching experiences
has various  significant  advantages:  as a   lasting external  representation,   video recordings   enable  a  flexible and
detailed lesson analysis. Video can be played repeatedly, it can be stopped and continued at any time, and moreover,
jumping to a certain point in the video makes it possible to view specific scenes. With these options, video serves as
an  external memory    (cf. Keil-Slawik,  2000)    and  helps  to  identify aspects,  which  might   otherwise   have    been
unnoticed  during direct  observation.  Furthermore,    video  allows   student teachers to  observe and  to   analyze   their
teaching without  the  need    for immediate   reaction. The   temporal    separation of teaching   and  its analysis  helps
students to distance themselves from their actions and thereby facilitates reflection instead of action.

         A special benefit results from the feature of marking certain sequences of a video. This allows student
teachers to easily refer to a special part of the recorded lesson, which they otherwise would have to circumscribe

                                                            283                                                    CSCL 2007
verbally. According to Clark' s (1996) theory on achieving common ground in communication, video thus serves as
a shared external reference point and makes the process of grounding much easier and less susceptible to faults. In
addition, the permanence of video permits one to observe the same lesson several times, focusing each time on a
different aspect. This allows the adoption of multiple perspectives on a lesson (Van Es & Sherin, 2002), which is of
great importance   for the   problem-based    analysis and reflection on   teaching. The  theory  of  cognitive  flexibility
(Spiro & Jehng, 1990) states that the repetitive study of a subject matter under different perspectives and approaches
promotes   the acquisition   of flexible and  deep   knowledge.  Considering  the  diversity and complexity     of teaching
situations, such knowledge plays an important role for prospective teachers. Furthermore, if student teachers reflect
cooperatively on shared teaching practices, they have to acknowledge and come to terms with their fellow students`
perspectives. According to the socio-constructivist theory of learning (e.g., Doise & Mugny, 1984), student teachers
learn from diverse stances by comparing, questioning and explaining them.

Empirical Study
          The study investigated the impact of video on student teachers` analysis and reflection processes using "v-
share", a program for the cooperative analysis and reflection of video in distributed groups (cf. Ploetzner et al.,
2005). The following research questions were addressed: (1) How does the availability of a video-recorded lesson in
v-share affect student teachers` analysis and reflection processes? (2) In which aspects does a collaborative video-
based analysis differ from a collaborative analysis without video?

Design and Data Analysis
          Overall, 30 first-year student teachers with little teaching experience participated in three video analysis
sessions.  During  the first session  students were   introduced to  v-share  including how   to use  the video,   to select
subsequences   of  the video,   to write contributions and to link  them   to subsequences   of  the  video. In the second
session student teachers watched a short videotaped lesson excerpt on a big screen while focusing their observation
on the issue of giving instructions; afterwards they discussed the lesson in distributed groups of three by making use
of v-share. All subjects could use the previously seen video in v-share for their analysis. This session served to
distribute the subjects into two parallel test groups. For the third session the procedure stayed the same, but the
analysis of another lesson now took place under two different conditions: subjects of the test group (video) could
make   use of  the lesson video    in v-share as before,  while subjects of   the control group  (non-video)    now   had to
discuss the lesson without the video, relying exclusively on written notes and their memories.

          Data consisted of student teachers` written analysis and reflection contributions available in the bulletin
board of v-share. Applying a coding-and-counting method for quantitative content analysis, the contributions were
initially assigned to the following four coding categories, adopted from the field study by Ploetzner et al. (2005):
1. Describing, 2. Explaining, 3. Critiquing, 4. Proposing Alternatives. In addition, in order to measure qualitative
differences within each category, they were further differentiated by partially adapting Ohlsson`s (1996) taxonomy
of epistemic activities. Descriptions and explanations were rated within the dimensions Particularity, Interaction
and Sequence of Events. Descriptions were subsequently rated within the dimension Neutrality, and explanations
within the  dimension   Theoretical   Concepts.   In both categories  each contribution   was rated   as either positive  or
negative in each of the four dimensions. Thus the ratings of descriptions and explanations could range from 0-4 and
contributions were assigned to one of five levels ranging from low=1 to high=5. Critiques were rated within the
dimensions  Number     of Arguments    (0, 1, >1) and  Elaboration   (low, high).  The  combination   of  both  dimensions
resulted in a rating matrix whereby critiques were assigned to one of four levels ranging from low=1 to high=4.
Similarly, alternatives were rated within the dimensions Elaboration (low, high) and Justification (none, low, high).
The combination of both dimensions resulted in a rating matrix in which alternatives were assigned to one of four
levels ranging from low=1 to high=4. Contributions that seemed to be unrelated to the lesson analysis were coded as
off-task and were excluded from further interpretation. All data was coded by two independent raters. On a subset of
n=116 contributions inter-rater reliability for the coding categories was = .79. On the basis of the corresponding
ratings in the coding categories (n=102) inter-rater reliability for the different levels was r= .76.

Results and Conclusions
          Findings show that student teachers` analysis and reflection were more focused if they could use the video
in v-share: on  average,  video-based    analyses were  more  concise than    analyses in the control  group  (Video:  254
words; Non-Video: 322 words) and contained significantly fewer off-task contributions (Video: 173; Non-Video:
784; 2(1)= 212,44; p< .001). On the assumption that a focused and detailed analysis results in less extensive but

                                                            284                                                    CSCL 2007
Table 1: Distribution of relative frequencies (%) of student teachers` contributions by category and level

                      Describing                      Explaining                      Critiquing             Proposing Alternatives
  Level      1    2     3     4    5         1    2     3   4    5            1     2      3     4           1     2    3    4   
Non-Video  0,5   2,25 3,75   2,25  0  8,75  1,5  3,25 2,75   0   0    7,5  39,5   22,75   2,75   0,5  65,5  7,5   9,25  1,5  0  18,25 100

  Video   1,25   5,5    3,5  1,25  0  11,5   2   6,75  3,5   0   0   12,25 26,25  25,75    2     0     54   13,5  8,75  0    0  22,25 100

more meaningful contributions, this indicates that the video served both as external memory and reference point,
which facilitated the process of grounding and thus shortened the contributions. Subjects of the test group (video)
seemed    to use  more      time  for analyzing   and  reflecting    on   the lesson    than for   writing  numerous    and    extensive
contributions. Differences concerning the four categories were not significant, but it could be seen that using the
video led to a more balanced lesson analysis and reduced student teachers` tendency to mainly critique the lessons.
Results  show    that subjects    of  the test  group  tended    to more   often  describe   events   of   the lesson,  explain  certain
teaching situations and propose alternative strategies, than to critique the recorded lesson (see Table 1). This might
be due to the fact that the video allowed multiple perspectives on the lesson to be adopted and thereby promoted an
analyzing rather than judging stance. Concerning the different levels of contributions, findings partly support the
assumed benefits of video-based analyses: on average, descriptions in the test group reached lower levels, i.e. they
were less elaborated. Video relieved students of the need to verbally describe a part of the lesson and thus led to
shorter  descriptions.    The   average   level of  explanations    did   not   vary  between    test conditions.  The     most marked
difference was found for critiques: subjects of the control group critiqued the lesson significantly more often without
stating any argument (t(27)= -2,59; p < .05), whereas in the test group critiques more often contained an argument.
Video thus seemed to promote students` deep analysis of the lesson and the process of reasoning. Unexpectedly the
average   level   of  alternatives    was  significantly    higher   for   the  control   group     (Video:    AM=1,39;     Non-Video:
AM=1,68; t(65)=2,02; p < .05). One explanation might be that the details of the video impeded student teachers`
process   of   generating   alternative   strategies. Though     the students    had    very little  experience   in   teaching and   its
analysis and despite the short testing period, nonetheless results show a number of desirable outcomes due to the
availability of video. This encourages a further pursuit of this approach.

References
Clark, H. H. (1996). Using language. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Derry,  S.   J. & STEP      Team     (2002). The    STEP   system    for   collaborative  case-based      teacher education:    Design,
          evaluation & future directions. Proceedings of computer support for collaborative learning (CSCL 2002)
          (pp. 209-218). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Doise, W. & Mugny, G. (1984). The social development of the intellect. Oxford: Pergamon Press.
Keil-Slawik, R. W. (2000). Gestaltung und Nutzung alltagstauglicher Infrastrukturen. In U. Beck (Ed..), Learntec
          2000 (pp. 411-418). Tagungsband Bd. 1, Karlsruhe: Koller Druck.
Ohlsson, S. (1996). Learning to do and learning to understand: A lesson and a challenge for cognitive modeling. In
          P. Reimann & H. Spada (Eds.), Learning in humans and machines: Towards an interdisciplinary learning
          science (pp. 37-62). Oxford: Pergamon.
Petko, D., Reusser, K., Noetzli, C., Krammer, K., Hugener, I. (2003). Collaborative video based teacher training in a
          virtual learning environment. Proceedings of the 10th conference of the european association for research
          on learning and instruction (p. 465). Padova: Cleup.
Ploetzner, R., Massler, U. & Huppertz, P. (2005). Learning by collaborative analysis of digital video in distributed
          groups.    In T.   Okamoto,     D. Albert,   T.  Honda     &  F.W.    Hesse   (Eds.),  Proceedings      of   the  second  joint
          workshop on cognition and learning through media-communication for advanced e-learning (pp. 140-145).
          Tokyo: Japanese Society for Information and Systems in Education.
Santagata, R., Zannoni, C. & Stigler, J. W. (in press). The role of lesson analysis in pre-service teacher education:
          An    empirical   investigation    of teacher   learning   from  a    virtual video-based    field   experience.   Journal  of
          Mathematics Teacher Education, Vol. 10.
Schön, D. (1987). Educating the reflective practitioner. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Spiro, R. J. & Jehng, J. C. (1990). Cognitive flexibility and hypertext: Theory and technology for the nonlinear and
          multidimensional traversal of complex subject matter. In D. Nix & R. J. Spiro (Eds.), Cognition, education
          and multimedia: Explorations in high technology (pp. 163-205). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Van Es, E. A. & Sherin, M. G. (2002). Learning to notice: Scaffolding new teachers' interpretations of classroom
          interactions. Journal of Technology and Teacher Education, 10, 571-596.

                                                                    285                                                        CSCL 2007
