     Combining Structural, Process-oriented and Textual Elements to
       Generate Awareness Indicators for Graphical E-discussions
            Rakheli (Rachel) Hever, Reuma De Groot, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel,
                                   Email: mt.scopus@gmail.com, msruma@mscc.huji.ac.il
                     Maarten De Laat, The University of Exeter, Exeter, UK, M.F.DeLaat@exeter.ac.uk
                     Andreas Harrer, Ulrich Hoppe, University of Duisburg-Essen, Duisburg, Germany,
                                       Email: harrer@collide.info, hoppe@collide.info
                Bruce M. McLaren, Oliver Scheuer, Deutsches Forschungszentrum für Künstliche Intelligenz,
                                              Saarbrucken, Germany,
                                          Email: bmclaren@dfki.de, olsch@dfki.de

        Moderation   of  e-discussions  can  be   facilitated by online feedback  promoting     awareness    and
        understanding   of the   ongoing  discussion. Such    feedback  may  be  based on     indicators, which
        combine structural and process-oriented elements (e.g., types of connectors, user actions) with
        textual  elements  (discussion  content). In  the ARGUNAUT       project (IST-2005027728,       partially
        funded by the EC, started 12/2005) we explore two main directions for generating such indicators,
        in the context of a synchronous tool for graphical e-discussion. One direction is the training of
        machine-learning   classifiers to classify discussion    units (shapes  and paired-shapes)      into pre-
        defined theoretical categories, using structural and process-oriented attributes. The classifiers are
        trained with examples categorized by humans, based on content and some contextual cues. A
        second direction is the use of a pattern matching tool in conjunction with e-discussion XML log
        files to generate "rules" that find "patterns" combining user actions (e.g., create shape, delete link)
        and structural elements with content keywords.

Introduction
        The term awareness is defined as "an understanding of the activities of the others which provides context
for your own activity" (Dourish & Belloti, 1992). A great variety of tools for e-discussion and e-collaboration are
available today, many of which offer awareness features for participants or moderators of discussions (for a review,
see Soller, Martinez, Jermann, & Muehlenbrock, 2005). Awareness feedback in the different awareness tools has
been based on various properties of the discussion, such as social interaction patterns, participation information,
temporal stages and text analysis.   An interesting example of feedback on structural issues in e-discussions is the
DREW system (Baker, Quignard, Lund & Sejourne, 2003), which highlights opposing opinions in discussion graphs
Yet, a systematic integration and combination of structural, process-oriented, and textual aspects has only recently
been  discussed  in initiatives such as  the  Interaction Analysis   project in the European     Kaleidoscope     network
(http://www.noe-kaleidoscope.org).

        One of the goals of the ARGUNAUT project (IST-2005027728, http://www.argunaut.org) is to obtain more
meaningful indicators upon which to base online feedback to the moderators of synchronous graphical e-discussions.
The methods described here were applied to the discussion products of a graphical e-discussion tool called Digalo
(http://dunes.gr), but are relevant to other synchronous discussion tools, particularly graphical e-discussion tools.

        Digalo discussions are held within an object space called a "map". Within this space, users contribute to the
discussion by adding shapes representing argumentative ontology (e.g., rectangle for claims) and typing their text
into them. Users    may also  link shapes  to other   shapes,  using arrows  of  different   types (support,   opposition.
reference). The shape and arrow objects may be modified or deleted. All user actions are logged, and XML log files
are generated detailing all the actions taken by the users (e.g., user_1 created a claim shape at time_x). For each such
discussion map, we can investigate structural, process-oriented and textual elements. The structural elements are the
direct or computable attributes of each shape or arrow object (such as type, creator, number of characters) and any
combination using these attributes as building blocks. The process-oriented elements are comprised of user actions
on the discussion objects, and sequences thereof (stressing the dimension of time and the process of discussion
rather than the end product). The textual elements are the    free text contributions typed within each shape.

                                                          286                                                    CSCL 2007
          Within the context of the ARGUNAUT project, we are confronted with the challenge of combining some
of the above-mentioned elements to generate awareness indicators. These awareness indicators will help us discover
meaningful patterns in e-discussions. This approach is facilitated by the collaboration of specialized teams with
expertise in various fields (pedagogy, argumentation, linguistics, software development, and machine learning). We
believe our ongoing progress in this endeavor will have theoretical, pedagogical and technological implications for
the evaluation of graphical e-discussions and for supporting the moderation of collaborative work and discussions.

Analyzing Graphical E-discussions: Methods and Initial Results
          We have focused on two approaches to the analysis of e-discussions, combining structural, procedural and
textual elements: machine-learning classifications and a rule-based approach for the definition and discovery of
action patterns. These approaches are expected to yield complementary analysis results for e-discussions. We have
applied these two approaches to Digalo log files of classroom e-discussions with some promising initial results. The
following sections present both approaches and a brief summary of our progress so far.

          During  the  conference, we   plan   on demonstrating    both methods   described below:     the application  of
machine learning to our pre-annotated examples and the definition of action sequence patterns and pattern-matching
log-file search for these patterns, using a specialized tool (also described below).

Machine-learning classifications
          Taking a cue from previous work on automated analysis of collaborative argumentation (e.g., Domnez,
Rosé, Stegmann, Weinberger, & Fischer, 2005), we applied machine-learning algorithms to the task of classifying
the content of e-discussion contributions.

          Graphical e-discussions (and specifically Digalo maps), may be coded or annotated at different levels of
granularity. We began by focusing on individual contributions (shapes) as the classified units. We also classified
contributions at a more complex unit of analysis, paired shapes, comprised of two contributions (shapes) and the
link between them (arrow). This unit goes beyond a single utterance: it includes two distinct but related pieces of
texts, and can   only  be interpreted  or categorized  using  both contributions. Additionally,    its definition  includes
structural relationships (a connector), and the interpretation of the intent behind the text must also consider the order
of their appearance, a process-oriented element.

          The attributes selected for single-shape classification included: the type of shape, the length of text within
it, and the presence or absence of several classes of links (e.g., presence of outgoing links to a shape by the same
user). We selected three sets of attributes at the paired-shape level for analysis: a basic set that did not consider the
order  of shapes  (e.g.,  whether the  shapes  were   created by the same  user,  their combined    text   length, type of
connector), a set that assumed the shapes appeared in a particular order (e.g., whether the link created by the same
user as the first shape), and a set that relied on our previous annotations for the shape level.

          For each level of analysis, we created coding schemes based on theoretical, pedagogical and empirical
considerations related to fostering productive collective argumentation. The coding schemes included, for example,
labels   such as 'task management'     (shape level), and 'contribution followed  by  counter-argument'    (paired-shapes
level). The coding schemes are content-oriented, but take into account other elements (e.g., type of link), in some
cases where the text's intention is unclear. The initial coding schemes were fine-tuned via a process of 2 or 3 coders
annotating a small number of maps and subsequent discussion between them. The resulting schemes were used to
code 42 Digalo discussion maps at the shape level, and 21 of those maps at the paired shapes level. Inter-rater
reliability was assessed and coding differences were resolved by discussion or decision rules.

          The coded sheets were then analyzed by a variety of machine-learning schemes, implemented within the
WEKA framework (Witten and Frank, 2005, e.g., C4.5 Decision Tree, OneR, AdaBoost with OneR, PART), to try
and generate  accurate classifiers for new contributions. The initial results have been promising, in   particular for the
shape-level label of `critical reasoning' (the C4.5 Decision Tree had 86% of overall accuracy) and the paired-shapes
label of `question followed by answer' (the PART algorithm had 94% overall accuracy).       Some of the other
classifiers also resulted in high accuracy, but relied too much on biased data (e.g., 89% of the shapes were 'on
topic').

                                                            287                                                  CSCL 2007
The Pattern Discovery Tool: Creating Rules to Detect Meaningful Action Sequences
         The Pattern  Discovery  Tool, developed    by  the  COLLIDE       research group (Harrer,  Vetter,  Thür,  &
Brauckmann, 2005), was applied to the task of searching for patterns of user actions in e-discussion logs.

         Sequences of actions, units comprised  of  sequential  user actions  logged  by the discussion   tool, can be
considered process-oriented elements. Each action can be defined using the type of action (e.g., create, delete), the
type of object(s) involved, the user(s) involved, and keywords to search for in the text parts of the objects. The
generated PROLOG rule defining a sequence of such actions also includes a temporal element of order (first action,
second action, etc.), and referencing information (for users and objects). For example, you can define a sequence in
which a 'claim' shape is created by a user, modified by the same user, and later deleted by another user.

         Our approach in the ARGUNAUT project is to pre-define possible action sequences which we think may
be meaningful, i.e. representing specific theoretical or pedagogical phenomena, and to look for such sequences in
XML logs of discussions.  For example, consider a sequence in which one user creates a shape, another user creates
a question shape (or a shape containing a question keyword)    and then links it to the first user's shape, followed by
the first user creating a shape with keywords such as 'because', 'reason', 'therefore' and linking it to the question
shape. This could represent a request for clarification or reason (perhaps the initial contribution was an unsupported
claim), which prompted the first user to give reasons for his or her opinion. This is exactly the type of pedagogical
phenomenon within e-discussions that interests us.

         However, the 'hits' for a particular rule in the discussion logs may not always reflect the phenomenon we
wish to capture. We may therefore attempt to annotate the hits received according to whether they truly represent the
semantic interpretation assigned to  them ('good   hits'), and then  to use  machine  learning  on these   annotations
(pending a sufficient number of coded examples to serve as a training set for classification learning).

Future Directions in the Support of e-discussion Moderation
         Our vision is to utilize the products of the approaches described above to support the ARGUNAUT system,
a tool currently in development. This tool is aimed at supporting online moderation of graphical e-discussions (e.g.,
Digalo discussions), providing meaningful feedback and advice to the moderators. The first prototype of the system,
to be completed in January 2007, is expected to integrate an AI classifier for 'critical reasoning' as well as a few
PROLOG rules that can identify action patterns.

   It will take further theoretical and empirical work to reach a close-to-optimal set of indicators. To reach this
goal, we plan to use an iterative process of experimentation and refinement, in which we will receive feedback from
end users (moderators) about the effectiveness of the produced indicators. We also plan to observe and analyze the
effect of the use of our awareness tools on the quality of e-moderation and e-discussion. However, we can already
say that these innovative approaches to combining structural, process-oriented and textual elements have displayed
great potential for analyzing graphical e-discussions and providing support to moderators of such discussions.

References
Baker, M., Quignard, M, Lund, K., & Séjourné, A. (2003). Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning in the
         Space of Debate. In Proc. of Computer Supported Collaborative     Learning  2003, pp. 11-20.
Donmez, P., Rosé, C. P., Stegmann, K., Weinberger, A., & Fischer, F. (2005). Supporting CSCL with Automatic
         Corpus Analysis Technology. In Proc.   of Computer Supported Collaborative Learning     2005, pp.   1-10.
Dourish, P., &  Belotti, V. (1992).  Awareness     and Coordination     in Shared   Workspaces. Proceedings     of  the
         Conference on Computer-Supported Cooperative Work, pp. 107-114.
Harrer, A., Vetter, M., Thür, S., & Brauckmann, J. (2005) Discovery of Patterns in Learner Actions. In Proc. of
         Artificial Intelligence in Education (AIED), IOS Press, Amsterdam, pp. 816-818.
Soller, A., Martinez, A., Jermann, P. & Muehlenbrock, M. (2005). From Mirroring to Guiding: A Review of State of
         the Art Technology for Supporting Collaborative Learning. International Journal of Artificial Intelligence
         in Education, 15, 261-290.
Witten, I. H. & Frank, E. (2005). Data Mining: Practical Machine Learning Tools and Techniques, Second Edition,
         Morgan Kaufmann.

                                                         288                                                  CSCL 2007
