The Relation between Schoolteachers' Perceptions about Collaborative Learning
                              and Their Employment of Online Instruction

              Tamar Inbal-Shamir and Yael Kali, Technion - Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel
                                          tmrsh@012.net.il, yaelk@technion.ac.il

         Abstract.     The   gap  between     known      benefits  of   socio-constructivist    pedagogies    to   online
         instruction, and schoolteacher practices has been widely documented. To better understand the gap
         this research characterizes the range of schoolteachers' online practices and the relation between
         their   pedagogical  perceptions    and    these    practices.  Two    groups    of teachers   were    studied:
          Novices    and   leaders  in  online     instruction.    Data-sources    included    interviews,   researcher's
         journal   and online    activities developed     by   teachers.    Findings   indicate  that   leading teachers
         develop   activities that  better  utilize   the  technology,    require  higher    levels of  thinking,  better
         connect contents to student lives, and scaffold for rich artifacts. However, both groups scarcely
         utilize collaborative learning in their activities. We claim that this teacher-centered approach plays
         a critical role in preventing "ordinary" teachers from regular employment of online instruction.
         Only teachers who considered themselves "online freaks" were able to withstand the demands of
         this approach to online instruction.

Introduction
         Good implementation of online instruction can support meaningful learning and assist teachers in coping
with didactic, content-related and organizational issues (Salomon, 2000; Dori, Tal & Peled; 2002, Linn, Davis &
Bell, 2004).     Such implementation can increase students' interactivity and improve their thinking and social skills
(Rochelle et al., 2000; Koszalka, 2001; Kali & Linn, in press; Linn et al., 2004).              In light of the awareness of the
affordances  that  technology    offers instruction,  Salomon     (2000)    presents a  vision  whereby    technology    will serve
pedagogy (rather than vice versa, which he claims is the common case), and will assist in its realization:                     The
technology will enable access to information and provide the interactive and collaborative tools, while the teacher
will create learning situations that utilize these tools. Such situations will require learners to develop higher-order
thinking  skills and   promote   their  competence    to  work    collaboratively.   Recent  research   supports   this  vision, by
illustrating how   socio-constructivist     pedagogies    translate  into   design   principles that    can  guide  planning     and
developing of online instruction, which utilize the added value of technology (Kali, 2006, Kali & Linn, in press).
However,     the realization  of this  vision   is still far from   reality.    Most  online   instruction   requires information
gathering and    low level   processing  (Rochelle    et  al., 2000;    Fishman  et  al., 2001; Mioduser     &  Nachmias,     2002;
Herrington, Reeves & Oliver, 2005). This is especially true for k-12 settings. Research shows that online instruction
is gradually integrated into schools, but that most educational websites designed by teachers represent conservative
pedagogical perceptions (e.g., Lehtinen et al.,1998).

         Fishman    et al. (2001)   claim   that   teachers' implementation     of  technology   is  greatly influenced   by  their
personalities,   professional knowledge,    experience     and  pedagogical     perceptions.   The  more   a teacher  experiences
success using educational technology, the more positive will be her perception regarding technology's capacity to
advance  teaching    and  learning, and     the more     she will perceive   it as  an    opportunity  for  personal  professional
development      (Rogers,  1995;  Kumari,     1996;      Koszalka,  2001).   Activities    designed   by   teachers   reflect their
perceptions,  educational  goals,   professional    knowledge     and   the constraints   they face.    Additionally, personality
traits affect the method and the extent to which online instruction is used.            Fuller et al. (2000) claim that teachers
who assimilate and develop online learning environments are characterized by flexibility and willingness to take
risks.

         This    research characterizes  the    range of  the   online  practice  of teachers   in  the formal  Israeli  education
system and examines the relation between their pedagogical perceptions and these practices.                  The range of online
practice was defined by means of its two extremities:           At one extreme, teachers who are making their first steps in
implementing online instruction, and at the other extreme, teachers who are considered to be online leaders. The
characterization focused on examining the extent to which socio-constructivist learning approaches are implemented
in online activities developed by the teachers.

                                                                292                                                      CSCL 2007
Methods

Sample
Novice Teachers
          The group of novice teachers included 25 teachers from two schools (one elementary and one junior high)
who were on their first year of a teacher professional development (TPD) program for online instruction.         The TPD
program,  instructed by   the authors  of  this paper,  focused  on    construction of  an  interactive  website for class
activities, using an online learning content management system (LCMS).           We chose to work with teachers who
were motivated and who were willing to learn and to assimilate online instruction. Teachers in this group varied in
their age and teaching experience. Teacher guidance was performed: a) individually or in pairs in one-hour weekly
meetings throughout one year, and b) in several longer staff meetings. The school principals also participated in
some of the staff meetings.
Leading Teachers
          The group of leading teachers included four high school and junior high school teachers, who were defined,
on a national level, as "online leaders". Three of these teachers received national awards for their online practices.
These teachers, who had participated in the past in various TPD programs for online instruction, define themselves
as "online freaks". In their current practice they develop and maintain websites for their students in a variety of
science topics, and participate as instructors in TPD programs.
Tools and Data Sources
Interviews (Leading Teachers)
          Two  semi-structured  two-hour     interviews were    conducted   with each   of  the four  teachers.  The  first
interview documented the process each of the teachers went through until attaining the status of "leading teacher". In
this interview, we also wanted to understand the teachers' positions regarding the added value of integrating online
instruction.   In the second interview, the teachers presented selected activities from their websites, explained the
pedagogical   thinking that  guided  them   in  the development     of the activities, and  explained   how the  activities
contributed to the teaching and learning in their classes.
Researcher's Journal (Novice Teachers)
          The relationship with the group of novice teachers was ongoing and lasted throughout the entire year.       We
therefore used a researcher's journal as the primary tool for collecting information from this group of teachers.     The
journal documented the meetings and insights that emerged during the meetings and conversations held with these
teachers.
Activities Developed by Teachers
          The  activities developed  by    both novice  and  leading    teachers were    a  main  information    source to
characterize the range of online practice. Teachers from each of the groups constructed class-sites which included all
the online activities they developed. The four leading teachers had rich websites with dozens of activities each,
while novice teachers had class-sites with fewer activities. For the purpose of the research, we decided to randomly
 select from these websites a total of 20 activities per group (a total of 40 activities). The activities represent a broad
range of  contents, covering  both  humanities   and  scientific topics  and designed   for a wide   range  of ages, from
elementary level to high school level.

Rubric for Characterizing and Analyzing of Online Activities
          Several theoretical frameworks exist that describe the characteristics of online instruction (see for instance,
Mioduser & Nachmias, 2002; Tubin et al., 2003; Herrington, Reeves & Oliver, 2005).            However, since we wanted
to evaluate, both quantitatively and comparatively, online activities developed by teachers from both groups, we had
to develop a rubric that would enable us to do so (Table 1). The rubric we developed comprises six dimensions that
constitute a measure of "good" teaching according to a socio-constructivist perspective.        For each dimension, three
performance levels were defined:    low, intermediate and high.

          Data analysis   focused, first, on using  the rubric   to characterize the   online activities designed  by   the
teachers, and second, on analyzing the interviews and researcher's journal in order to characterize the pedagogical
perceptions held by novice and leading teachers regarding the integration of online instruction in their practice.
 This analysis enabled us to find a relationship between the perceptions of the teachers from both groups and the
pedagogical design of the activities they developed.

                                                            293                                                  CSCL 2007
Table 1: Rubric for Characterizing and Analyzing Online Activities
 Dimension                      High Level (3)                                 Intermediate Level (2)                                   Low Level (1)

 Use of theTechnology'sAdded ValueTechnologyisessentialfortheactivity.Studentsarereferredtoavarietyofrich,currentwebsitesthatcanassistinunderstanding the contents.Thetechnologicalcomponentmightcreateinterestandinnovation,butwithnofundamentalchangeintheessenceofthelearning.Use of technology is technical and does notaffecttheessenceoflearning.Studentsdownloadtraditionalworksheets,fillthemout and return them to the forum or directlyto the teacher.

 RequiredLevel ofThinkingTheactivityencourages   higher     orderthinking:(posingquestions,takingastand,makingconclusions)andencouragescreativity,responsibilityandknowledgeintegration. (Levels 3-6 - Bloom, 1956)Theactivityrequiresthelearnertogiveexamples,descriptions,summariesorgeneral explanations of information gatheredfrom the internet.(Level 2 - Bloom, 1956)Memorizationofknowledge.Focusonstandardquestionsandanswers.Orientedtowardssimpleinformation-gatheringassignments. (Level 1 - Bloom, 1956)

    PeerLearningOnline   components       used     to    supportcollaborative learning as an essential part ofthe activity.Learners serve as informationsources for their peers.Scaffolds explicitly require students to workinpairsorgroups,butthereisnotechnologicalsupportforinteractionbetweenfellowstudentsorbetweenthegroups.Thereisnoreferencetocollaborativelearning.Learnersaresometimespreventedfromcooperatingwithoneanother.Projects are occasionally uploadedtotheforum,butonlyforreviewbytheteacher.

  MakingContentsAccessibleTheactivityisconnectedtothe    learner'scultural world and previous knowledge andexperience, by choice of contents, nature ofproblems; social context.An attempt is made to relate the activity tothelearner'sworld,buttheconnectionisartificial or not meaningful.There is no attempt to relate and make thecontents accessible.Emphasis is on contentthat the learner must know or remember.

 Scaffoldingfor RichArtifactsStructuredandscaffoldedassignments,thathelplearnersconstructanartifact,andenabletheteachertoserveasafacilitator.Artifact is diverse, creative andpromotespersonal capabilities and self-expression.Scaffoldsenableaproductwithacertaindegree of openness and personal expression,butaretoogeneraltosupportacomplextask.Forinstance,"Writeastoryabout...","WhatIwoulddoif...","Myopinion on..."Scaffoldsguidetowardsauniform,closedartifactdefinedbytheteacher.Nocreativity is required to produce the artifact.Such activities include: standard questionsand answers, sorting of data in a table, etc.

 EmbeddedAssessmentAssessmentis performed    by  the  teacher orbyfellowstudentsaccordingtoclearandknowncriteria.Formativeassessmentisembeddedinthelearningprocessandenhances it.There is reference to the assessment ofartifacts, but no clear criteria are presented.Artifactsaresometimespresentedonthewebsite or in class, but without prompts forfurther learning from these artifacts.There is no reference to the way in whichthelearnerisassessed.Assessmentissummative. Products are sent to the teacherto be checked and graded.

                                                                                   294                                                                              CSCL 2007
Findings

Online Activities Developed by Teachers from the Two Groups
       Figure 1 shows the frequency distribution of the levels of the activities developed by the two groups of
teachers and illustrates the difference between the two groups.  The distribution of the activities developed by the
novice teachers tend more toward the lower levels:    8 activities at the 1-1.5 level (40%); 9 activities at the 1.6-2
level (45%); 3 activities at the 2-2.5 level (15%) and no activities at the 2.6-3 level. The distribution of activities
developed by the leading teachers is more symmetric: 3 activities at the 1-1.5 level (15%); 7 activities at the 1.6-2
level (35%); 6 activities at the 2-2.5 level (30%); and 4 activities at the 2.6-3 level (20%).  T-test reveals that the
difference between the mean value obtained for all the novice teachers' activities (1.6) and that obtained for all the
leading teachers' activities (2.1) is statistically significant (P<0.001).

   Figure 1 - Distribution of Activities Developed by the Two Groups of Teachers, by Level (N=40)

In order to better understand the differences between the activities developed by teachers from the two groups, we
present the values obtained using the rubric for each of the pedagogical dimensions investigated (Figure 2).
(* designates significant difference, P<0.001)

Figure 2:  Online Activities Developed by leading teachers (N=20 activities) and Novice teachers (N=20
                                                   activities)

                                                         295                                                     CSCL 2007
           As seen in Figure 2, the leading teachers rate significantly higher on all of the dimensions examined.               A
statistically significant  difference   was    found   for  all of the dimensions     except for Required   level of thinking  and
Making contents accessible.        The greatest difference between the two groups of teachers was in the dimension that
examined the Use of the technology's added value (1.8 for novice teachers vs. 2.9 for leading teachers).                  In other
words, in activities developed by leading teachers, technology is an essential support; it enriches the contents with
visualizations   and  with    a variety of links   that  are    both updated  and  relevant  to  the learning; it supports  active
learning and encourages online dialogue.           On the other hand, the novice teachers tended to guide the learner in a
more    conservative     teacher-centered  approach;     they    typically  constructed  worksheets   with    traditional teaching
characterizations and uploaded them to the site so that students would be able to complete and submit with answers.

           The dimension Required level of thinking shows that teachers from both groups are aware of the need to
encourage learners to function at high levels of thinking. Values obtained for this dimension, were relatively high
(2.2 for   novices   vs. 2.6  for leaders) and     the difference    between  the two  groups    was not statistically significant.
Nevertheless, the activities constructed by the leading teachers were found to better guide learners towards the use
of  high-order   thinking    skills, in which    learners   were     required to  perform   assignments  that  involved   drawing
conclusions, posing questions and synthesizing information.

           Analysis of the dimension Scaffolding for rich artifacts revealed that activities developed by the leading
teachers included structured and detailed scaffolds that encourage autonomous learning and guide learners to create
rich, varied and creative artifacts (2.5).      Despite the statistically significant difference between the two groups, the
activities of the novice teachers also achieved relatively high values on this dimension (2.1) compared with other
dimensions.      The relatively high values obtained stem from an emphasis in these activities on the need to encourage
the learner's creativity (for example, "Write an essay about...").              Nevertheless, these activities, unlike activities
developed     by the  leading   teachers,  did  not    provide   sufficient scaffolding  to  assist  students in  constructing the
artifacts.

           Analysis  of   the dimension    Making      contents  accessible   revealed that  the two  groups   of teachers  do not
sufficiently use knowledge from the students' daily lives to make the teaching contents more accessible.                  Although
the values obtained for the activities developed by the leading teachers were slightly higher than those obtained for
the novice teachers (2.1 vs. 1.7, respectively), it seems that the emphasis in the activities of both groups was placed
primarily  on    the hierarchical    structure  of the  contents   and  not   enough  on finding  ways   to make   these  contents
accessible.

           The   two  dimensions     that rated  lowest     for both   groups were    Embedded   assessment    and  Collaborative
learning (1 vs. 1.3 and 1 vs. 1.4 for novice vs. leading teachers, respectively).             In other words, both leading and
novice teachers do not regard the computer as a tool that can assist in providing alternative assessment and both
groups of teachers fail to sufficiently encourage online collaborative learning.              Although for both of the teacher
groups these two dimensions rated low compared with the other dimensions, there was still a statistically significant
difference between the two groups.          For instance, analysis of the dimension Embedded assessment showed that
leading    teachers  frequently   present   the    criteria for  assessment   of  the  required  artifacts  within the    activity.
 However, technology is not used to perform any ongoing embedded assessment, but rather only to send the artifact
to  the teacher  and  to  receive    summative     assessment.     Artifacts  are occasionally   displayed  on-site, but  they are
assessed by the teacher only.         Only  two    of  the  twenty   activities  developed   by  leading teachers  contained   any
reference to peer assessment.         Among novice teachers, on the other hand, no reference at all was made to this
dimension in all of the twenty activities examined.

           A statistically significant difference which we pay special attention to, was found between the two groups
with respect to the second low-rating dimension, Collaborative learning. Among the novice teachers, no reference at
all was  made    to  this dimension,    whereas    among     the   leading  teachers, we found   only  slight  implementation   of
collaborative components in their online teaching.            Only five out of the twenty activities developed by the leading
teachers contained any reference at all to this dimension.           In these activities, students were required to express their
opinion  about   artifacts created   by   their fellow  classmates.    Alternately,   scaffolds  were such  that  they guided  the
students towards working collaboratively in class on the construction of artifacts.              No scaffolds were found for the
use of technology as a tool that promotes collaborative organization of knowledge or interaction between student
groups.

                                                                   296                                                    CSCL 2007
        In order to enable the reader to gain some idea about the characteristics of the activities and the way in
which we analyzed each one of them using the rubric, we now present sample analyses of two activities developed
by the teachers. The first, which we rated high, was developed by a leading teacher, and the second, rated low, was
developed by a novice teacher.

Example of an Activity Rated High Using the Rubric
        Genes     for Breakfast is an    activity designated   for 9th  grade  science   students.  The   activity  starts by
presenting for discussion, the problem of genetically engineered food as it exists today in various countries, and its
possible affect on our health.    Students are asked to write their personal opinion on the subject and to refer to the
opinions of others in a forum.     Later on, the activity guides the students to work in teams to explore the subject
from different   aspects using  links provided    in the site. Finally, the students  are required  to   present in class  the
advantages and disadvantages of consuming genetically engineered food, according to the approach they choose to
represent. This activity constitutes an example of the meaningful use of technology, which integrates exposure to
varied information and active discussions on the forum (Use of the technology's added value = 3).                The issue is
presented from    a perspective that  is accessible   to the students   and it refers to  their personal  opinions  (Making
contents accessible = 3).  The activity encourages synthesis and presentation skills (Required level of thinking = 3)
and active scientific inquiry as well as the creation of varied artifacts (Scaffolding for rich artifacts = 3).     Students
are required to work collaboratively in groups, to present the artifacts to the entire class and to address the opinions
of their peers in an online discussion (Collaborative learning = 3).     However, there was no reference in this activity
to the assessment dimension (Embedded assessment = 1).

Example of an Activity Rated Low Using the Rubric
        Idioms is an activity intended for 5th graders and includes a crossword puzzle and a list of words to be used
in its solution.  Students are required to download the file and fit the words from the list into the crossword puzzle
according to definitions that appear in the file.    If they fit the words in correctly, they should obtain a sequence in
the middle of the crossword puzzle that contains an idiom that was previously learned in class.          The activity offers a
link to an online idiom glossary (a website containing idioms and their meanings).          The idiom glossary can help the
learners if needed, but there is no explicit instruction as to the way it can be used.    This activity is an example of an
assignment  in   which the use  of technology     is technical and  has  no effect   on the essence   of the learning.    The
students download the file, follow the instructions and submit their work to the teacher (Use of the technology's
added value = 1).     The link to the online idiom glossary does not change the activity's essence, since it is unrelated
to the instructions the students receive and does not serve as a tool to raise the learner's level of thinking (Required
level of thinking = 1).   The artifact is uniform and defined by the teacher (Scaffolding for rich artifacts = 1) and
there is no attempt to relate the contents to the learner's world;   The activity deals with an idiom that was learned in
class and it makes no current or relevant use of it, which might stir up some interest among the learners and require
them to use   their   personal knowledge   (Making     contents  accessible    = 1). Again,  there  is no  reference   to  the
collaboration dimension (Collaborative learning = 1) or to the assessment dimension (Embedded assessment = 1).

Pedagogical Perceptions of Novice and Leading Teachers
        The analysis of the researcher's journal and the interviews held with the two groups of teachers helped us
identify their perceptions regarding the role of online instruction in their practice and the way in which they perceive
the added value of its use.    Table 2 presents the main perceptions of the two groups of teachers as they emerged
from the typical statements collected from the researcher's journal and from the interviews (white cells in the table
represent similar perceptions, and gray cells represent different perceptions between teachers in the two groups).

        The table reveals that teachers from both groups had similar perceptions regarding three aspects of online
instruction (Online   instruction assists in personal    and   professional development;    Role   of  online instruction  in
teaching practice; and Value of peer learning). Their perceptions with respect to two other aspects (Role of online
instruction in daily life and Online instruction as a means for creating dialogue) were, however, different.

                                                             297                                                    CSCL 2007
Table 2:   Perceptions of teachers regarding the integration of online instruction in teaching
 Perception Categories                      Novice Teachers                               Leading Teachers
1) Online instruction           - Enhances the personal professional development process
assists in personal and         - Empowers the teacher's place within the school community and outside of it
professional development        - Enables the teacher to autonomously construct professional activities
2) Role of online               -  Diversifies, improves and enriches teaching and learning
instruction in teaching         -  Enhances student motivation
practice                        - Exposes students to current information that is attractive and relevant to their
                                learning
3) Value of peer learning           - Teachers do not support peer learning. They range from total objection (novices)
                                to acceptance due to system constraints (leaders), but not due to an understanding of
                                the pedagogical benefits of collaborative learning.
4) Role of online               - Imposes an additional burden on the          -Is an aid to teacher, an integral part of
instruction in daily life       teacher                                        daily teaching
                                - Perceived as a random and non-
                                permanent project activity
5) Online instruction as a      Online instruction is not considered as a      Online instruction is considered as a
means for creating              means for dialogue with students.              means for creating an ongoing
dialogue                        Dialogue is limited to classroom               educational dialogue between teacher
                                boundaries of time and place.                  and student, also after school hours.
White    represents perceptions that are similar;  Grey    represents perceptions that are different.

Discussion and Conclusions
         The  findings    indicate that there are  significant differences  in the characteristics of  online practices    of
teachers from the  two     groups,  despite the  fact that they  are similar   in most of  their pedagogical   perceptions
regarding online instruction.     With regards to practices ­ the leading teachers were, in most cases, rated on the high
range of the scale. The activities they developed were higher in all dimensions examined. The novice teachers, on
the other hand, use technology to implement conservative pedagogical approaches and, as a result, the activities they
developed rated lower in all of the dimensions examined. These teachers tended to construct traditional activities,
which focus on information gathering and rote learning. The digital communication with students in this group was
mainly for purposes of administration and organization rather than for pedagogical objectives.

         With regards     to  perceptions ­  the findings  indicate  that teachers   from both groups  exhibited   positive
perceptions regarding the need to integrate online instruction.      For them, this is an important means for improving
and diversifying teaching, which enables to expand the world of information available to the students and increase
their motivation. Teachers from both groups also feel that the school website reflects the activities and events in the
school and believe that their meaningful use of online instruction will grant them professional appreciation by the
school   management,      the parents   and the  students.   For  them,   this is  an  opportunity  to gain   professional
development and to accept professional recognition within the school and outside of it.

         We believe that the differences between the two groups' online instruction practices, as depicted from the
activities they developed, are related to two aspects in which the two groups differed in their perceptions. The first
difference is in the teachers' perception of the role of online instruction in their daily life.    The leading teachers
made online instruction an inseparable part of their practice. They use     online instruction to expand learning beyond
the school boundaries of time and place, which, according to the leading teachers, improves their work, enriches the
learning and even enables them to get more work done.          Perceiving online instruction as a tool that makes teaching
more efficient is a significant factor in their desire to continue using it on an ongoing basis. As apposed to this view,
the novice teachers regard online instruction as a burden that makes them work harder, while receiving no additional
compensation. As   far    as  they are  concerned, online  teaching  constitutes   a noncommittal   activity, a refreshing
addition to the regular learning, but one that is not an ongoing daily part of their practice.

         The second difference was found in the high availability of the leading teachers for communication with
their students. Leading teachers regarded online instruction as a means for creating an ongoing learning dialogue

                                                            298                                                  CSCL 2007
with the students and for providing individual assistance if necessary. The possibility of holding such a dialogue
enables the teachers to support students and to form personal relationships with them, but also requires that the
teachers commit to being available for the students and to assist them at all times. It is no wonder, therefore, that not
all teachers are willing to make that commitment after school hours. Such a commitment serves, for many teachers,
as a deterrent, and they prefer the face-to-face dialogue limited to the time and space boundaries of the classroom.

         It is reasonable to assume that most of the differences in the activities developed by the two groups can be
explained by the vast experience that the leader teachers acquired. Their perseverance brought them to develop a
culture, in which online instruction is inseparable from their teaching practices. It is clear that this kind of culture
cannot  develop   among   teachers  who  see  online instruction as  burden.  The  latter  teachers, who   will probably
continue to use technology sporadically, if it all, will not have the opportunity to develop the expertise in designing
online activities, which the leading teachers have developed. If that is the case, the question is raised as to how to
support  the development   of   sustainable online  practices  among  novice  teachers,   which would   enable   them to
gradually develop expertise in developing meaningful activities?

         Part of the answer might be found in the low values obtained for the Collaborative learning dimension for
activities developed by teachers from both groups.      We regard this as one of the most important findings in the
study.   These low values reflect the pedagogical perceptions of both groups regarding peer learning, which were
found as negative and even antagonistic for both groups.       Although the leading teachers occasionally implement
online discussion, they do not encourage peer learning of the kind that enables learners to share knowledge, consult
with each other and construct common knowledge together.         The novice teachers exhibited greater objection to the
implementation of collaborative learning;     They saw it as a complete waste of time.      In fact, teachers from both
groups  did  not consider  peer learning to  be  a resource that can  contribute to classroom   teaching    and learning.
Collison et  al. (2000) present an  approach  to online  instruction in which  the capability  of technology    to enable
dialogue between students, might free the teacher from the need to be an exclusive source of guidance for each and
every student.   They call this the "Moving out of the middle" approach, or MOOM.           In this study, teachers from
both groups did not realize the support they can gain from peer learning of their students, and thus only those few
that were    "online freaks"  were  able carry   out the   tremendously  demanding   task   of  teacher-centered   online
instruction. We    claim  that  the student-centered   approach  to  online   instruction, which     takes advantage  of
collaborative learning strategies, is the key to adoption of online instruction also by "ordinary" teachers, who will be
willing to integrate it into their practices if they will not need to become enslaved to it. We recommend that future
TPD programs place emphasis on making online instruction more sustainable for "ordinary" teachers, by fostering a
student-centered approach, and specifically, by realizing the added value of collaborative learning to support online
instruction.

Bibliography

Bloom B. S. (1956). Taxonomy of Educational Objectives, Handbook: The Cognitive Domain. New York: David
         McKay Co Inc.
Collison, G., Elbaum, B., Haavind, S. and Tinker R., (2000). Facilitating online learning: Effective strategies for
         moderators. Atwood Publishing.
Dori, J., Tal, T. and Peled, Y. (2002) Characteristics of Science Teachers Who Incorporate Web-Based Teaching.
         Research in Science Education 32, 511­547.
Fishman,  B.,    Soloway, E.,  Krajcik, J., Marx,  R., &   Blumenfeld,   P. (2001). Creating    Scalable   and  Systemic
         Technology Innovations for Urban Education. Paper presented at AERA 2001, Seattle WA.
Fuller, D., Norby, R.F., Pearce, K. & Strand, S. (2000). Internet Teaching by Style: Profiling the On-line Professor.
         Educational      Technology        &      Society     3(2)     ISSN.     3(2).     Available       online    at:
         http://ifets.ieee.org/periodical/vol_2_2000/pearce.html
Herrington, J., Reeves, T.C., & Oliver, R., (2005). Online learning and information delivery: Digital myopia. Journal
         of Interactive Learning Research, 16 (4), p. 353-367.
Kali, Y., (2006). Collaborative knowledge-building using the Design Principles Database. International Journal of
         Computer Support for Collaborative Learning, 1(2), 187-201.
Kali, Y. and Linn, M.C. (in press). Technology-enhanced support strategies for inquiry learning, in Spector, J. M.,
         Merrill, M. D., van Merriënboer J. J. G., & Driscoll, M. P. (Eds.) (in progress). Handbook of Research on
         Educational Communications and Technology (3rd ed.). Lawrence Erlbaum Associates

                                                           299                                                  CSCL 2007
Koszalka, A.T. (2001). Effect of Computer-Mediated Communications on Teachers' Attitudes Toward Using Web
        Resources   in the Classroom.   Journal of   Instructional Psychology.   Available online at:  http://articles.
        findarticles.com/p/articles/mi_m0FCG/is_2_28/ai_76696356/pg_1
Kumari, S. (1996) Teaching with the internet, Center for Technology in Teaching and Learning. Rice University.
        Available online at: http://www.uvm.edu/~hag/naweb96/zkumari.html
Lehtinen,  E., Hakkaainen, K.,  Muukkonen,   H. (1998). Computer     Supported   Collaborative Learning:  A Review.
           (1998)   University  of  Turku,  University  of    Helsinki.  Available  at:  http://etu.utu.fi/papers/clnet/
        clnetreport.html
Linn, M.C., Davis, E.A. and Bell, P. (2004). Internet Environments for Science Education. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
        Erlbaum Associates.
Mioduser, D., Nachmias, R. (2002). WWW in Education: An Overview. Published in H. Adelsberger, B.Collis, &
        M.Pawlowsky      (Eds).    Handbook    on    Information    Technologies    for   Education    &    Training.
        Berlin/Heidelberg/New York: Springer, 23-43.
Rogers, E.M. (1995). Diffusion of innovation. NY: free press.
Roschelle, J.M.,  Pea, R.D.,   Hoadley, C.M.,  Gordin, D.N.,   &   Means,  B.M.,  (2000)  Changing    How and What
        Children Learn in School with Computer-Based Technologies. Children and Computer Technology. Vol.
        10. no. 2. Available online at: http://www.futureofchildren.org/usr_doc/vol10no2Art4%2Epdf
Salomon. G. (2000) It's Not Just the Tool, But the Educational Rationale That Counts. Invited keynote address at
        the    2000 Ed-Media    Meeting,   Montreal. Available     online at:   http://www.aace.org/conf/edmedia/00/
        salomonkeynote.htm
Tubin, D.,  Mioduser,  D., Nachmias,    R. and  Forkosh-Baruch,    A.   (2003). Domains  and   levels of pedagogical
        innovation in schools using ICT: Ten innovative schools in Israel. Education and Information Technologies
        8(2), 127­145.

                                                          300                                                CSCL 2007
