                Online visualization of agreement and discussion during
                        computer-supported collaborative learning

    Jeroen Janssen, Gijsbert Erkens, Paul Kirschner, and Gellof Kanselaar, Research Centre Learning Interaction,
                                              Utrecht University, The Netherlands.
          J.J.H.M.Janssen@fss.uu.nl, G.Erkens@fss.uu.nl, P.A.Kirschner@fss.uu.nl, G.Kanselaar@fss.uu.nl

          Abstract:  This  paper     describes  the   Shared  Space    (SS),   a  tool that  visualizes discussion   and
          agreement   during  online   discussions    by  analyzing    students'  chat   messages.   The   SS therefore
          provides   group  members       with  feedback     about  the    way    they   are conducting    their online
          discussions. It is hypothesized the SS will increase the media richness of the CSCL-environment,
          stimulates critical and    exploratory   group     norms, leads   to more    positive  perceptions  of online
          collaboration, and will have an impact on students' collaborative activities.

Introduction
          To connect to the developments in our society, teachers and students are increasingly using ICT to facilitate
learning of various subjects. Computer-supported collaborative learning (CSCL) is one application of ICT that has
received considerable attention by educational researchers. When students work together in a CSCL-environment,
they usually use text-based CMC to communicate with their group members. Because CSCL often involves working
on complex, even "wicked" problems, students need to engage in complex interactions. Thus, the problems group
members   may   experience    during  online    collaboration,  may    pose  a   serious threat  to the effectiveness  of  CSCL.
Furthermore, several researchers have noted that it is difficult for students to engage in argumentation: often their
discussions are not critical (e.g., counterarguments are not given, c.f. Munneke, Andriessen, Kanselaar, & Kirschner,
2007) and/or not constructive (e.g., conflicts arise, c.f. Hobman, Bordia, Irmer, & Chang, 2002). Again, this may
hamper online learning.

Communication difficulties and absence of critical but constructive discussion
          The communication problems found during CSCL may be due to the medium itself. Traditional text-based
CMC systems, such as chat, are seen as media that are low in media richness (Daft & Lengel, 1986). Media richness
is defined as a medium's ability to facilitate communication and the establishment of shared meaning. Factors such
as  the ability of  the medium     to transmit   multiple    cues   (e.g., facial expressions,   intonation  of  voice),  and the
immediacy    of  feedback  influence      its media   richness.  As  media     richness  decreases,    students  will have  more
difficulties conveying their opinions and will have more difficulties determining the meaning of group members'
messages.   Furthermore,   when      working    on  group    tasks  students   usually   work   on  complex   problems     without
demonstrably    correct answers,     which    require them   to resolve    differing viewpoints.    The type  of communication
usually used during CSCL, may not be suited to the types of tasks group members work on (Mennecke, Valacich, &
Wheeler, 2000). The low media richness of CSCL-environments may constrain collaboration in such a way that it
does not transmit the type of communication that group members need to solve their task successfully. This may
lead to communication problems and decreased task performance.

          During online collaboration, group members should ideally engage in discussions that are critical, but also
constructive. This means that group members are critical of their own and the other group members' ideas, that
criticism is accepted,    and  explanations     are   given.  These    types   of discussions    have   been  called  exploratory
discussions  and   have  been  found   to  enhance    learning   during    group  work   (Wegerif,   Mercer,  &  Dawes,    1999).
However,   research   has shown      that students    rarely give  arguments     and   counter  arguments   during  collaboration
(Hightower & Sayeed, 1995).

          This absence of critical but constructive discussion may be explained in several ways. First, students may
not know   how   to  conduct  such    discussions     and may   not posses    the necessary    skills. Second,   as stated above,
students  may   find it difficult to conduct    constructive    debates in  a  CSCL-environment        and may   have difficulties
interpreting discussions,  due    to the  lower  media    richness  of the  environment.     For example,   they may   not  know
whether group members agree or disagree with them. This possibly hampers argumentation and discussion. Finally,
groups may possess group norms that stimulate consensus among group members, instead of critical or exploratory

                                                                311                                                     CSCL 2007
discussion. In conclusion, the relative absence of critical discussion during CSCL may have different causes. These
causes need to be addressed in order to facilitate critical but constructive discussions during CSCL.

Adressing communication and discussion problems using visualizations
         This section describes how visualizations of online dialogue may help address the previously described
communication problems and the relative lack of critical but constructive discussion. Several researchers noted the
lack of social cues of CSCL-environments. For users of chat rooms or discussion boards, it is often very difficult to
quickly determine who the participants of online discussions are, or what the social norms of the online group are.
This lack  of  awareness  may   constrain  social  interaction.  To address  this problem,    researchers have  turned   to
visualization  techniques that  visualize important    social features  of the environment    (e.g., Donath,   2002). It is
expected  that by using   such  visualizations, social awareness  can   be increased, which   may    in turn lead to  more
productive interaction. Therefore, a visualization called Shared Space (SS) was developped. It visualizes whether
group members    are   agreeing or disagreeing   about a  topic  during online  discussion. This visualization    has been
implemented in an existing CSCL-environment, called Virtual Collaborative Research Institute (Janssen, Erkens, &
Kanselaar, 2007). The SS is an extension of the Chat tool of the VCRI-program. The SS analyzes all messages
entered in the Chat tool. Figure 1 shows a screenshot of VCRI's Chat tool with SS visualization.

                       Figure 1. Screenshot of a chat window with Shared Space visualization.

         First, the SS tries to determine whether a new topic or discussion has started. A new topic starts when no
chat messages have been entered for more than 60 seconds. If that is the case, the current topic is ended. When a
new message is entered, this marks the start of a new topic. Figure 1 shows how this is visualized in the SS. Second,
the SS analyzes the content of each chat message in order to determine whether it indicates discussion or agreement.
For this purpose, the SS determines the communicative function of the message. This is done using the Dialogue Act
Coding (DAC)    filter (Erkens  &  Janssen, 2006).   This filter uses  over 1300  rules based  on    discourse markers   to
determine the communicative function of a chat message. Discourse markers are characteristic words or phrases
signaling the   communicative     function  of   a message     (Schiffrin, 1987).  In  total, five   main    categories  of
communicative functions are distinguished. Each category consists of several subcategories, 29 in total. Of these,
confirmations, acknowledgements, and positive evaluations are considered indications of agreement, while denials,
verification  questions, negative  evaluations,  and   counterarguments    are considered   indications  of  discussion  or
debate. The reliability of the DAC filter was tested and found to be acceptable (Erkens & Janssen). Finally, after
establishing whether the message indicates discussion or agreement, the SS moves the current topic to the left or to
the right in small steps (see Figure 1). When a message indicates discussion, the SS moves the topic to the left; when
it indicates agreement, the SS moves the topic to the right. This is alo reflected by the lines above the topic, which
visualize the development of the current topic. These lines show that at the beginning of the depicted discussion,
group members seemed to be in agreement (c.f., the first two messages by Anne R. and Brend), later on students

                                                           312                                                   CSCL 2007
started challenging and questioning each others' ideas and the topic moved to the left (c.f., the three messages at
9:09 by Sven and Anne R.).

         It is hypothesized that the SS visualization will help group members overcome the communication and
discussion problems   described     above  for several  reasons.   First, the SS may   increase  the media  richness  of the
CSCL-environment. Because the SS visualizes discussion and agreement, it may be easier for students to determine
the meaning of messages. Additionally, it may be easier to identify the different views and positions held by group
members. Moreover, the SS may help group members to determine whether there is shared understanding about a
topic. Second, the SS provides group members with feedback about the manner in which they are conducting their
discussions. For example, when the SS keeps moving to the right, this tells group members they may be engaged in
an uncritical discussion. Thus,     the feedback provided     by  the SS   visualization may increase  students' awareness
about their conversational strategies and their group norms. Finally, by providing them with feedback and raising
their awareness, the SS may help students perform group processing activities. This occurs when group members
discuss how well their group is functioning and how group processes may be improved. During these discussions
group members may be stimulated to adopt more critical or exploratory group norms. In conclusion, it is expected
that SS visualization may address some of the communication problems that occur during CSCL, and may help
group members to collaborate and discuss more productively.

Conclusion
This paper described the Shared Space (SS), a tool that visualizes whether group members seem to agree or disagree
during their  online chat sessions.     The SS  provides   students   with  feedback  about  whether   they are  conducting
valuable discussions   (e.g., not   overly  critical and  not too  uncritical). It is hoped  that by   giving students such
feedback,  they will adapt    their online  behavior   if necessary.   The  SS  has been  tested  in a research  experiment
(Janssen et al., 2007), and the results indicate that the SS seems to make it easier for students to know whether their
group members are agreeing or disagree with them. Furthermore, it seems to stimulate students to adopt critical
group  norms,  instead of consensus      group  norms.    Finally, the SS   has been  found  to  influence  students' online
collaboration, by reducing the amount of effort group members had to devote to reaching and maintaining mutual
understanding.

References
Daft, R. L., & Lengel, R. H. (1986). Organizational information requirements, media richness and structural design.
         Management Science, 32, 554-571.
Donath, J. (2002). Visualizing online conversations. Communications of the ACM, 45(4), 45-49.
Erkens, G., & Janssen, J. (2006). Automatic coding of communication in collaboration protocols. In S. A. Barab, K.
         E. Hay & D. T. Hickey (Eds.), Proceedings of the 7th International Conference of the Learning Sciences
         (ICLS) (Vol. 2, pp. 1063-1064). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Hightower, R., & Sayeed, L. (1995). The impact of computer-mediated communication systems on biased group
         discussion. Computers in Human Behavior, 11, 33-44.
Hobman, E. V., Bordia, P., Irmer, B., & Chang, A. (2002). The expression of conflict in computer-mediated and
         face-to-face groups. Small Group Research, 33, 439-465.
Janssen, J., Erkens, G., & Kanselaar, G. (2007). Visualization of agreement and discussion processes during
         computer-supported collaborative learning. Computers in Human Behavior, 23, 1105-1125.
Mennecke, B. E., Valacich, J. S., & Wheeler, B. C. (2000). The effects of media and task on user performance: A
         test of the task-media fit hypothesis. Group Decision and Negotiation, 9, 507-529.
Munneke, L., Andriessen, J., Kanselaar, G., & Kirschner, P. (2007). Supporting interactive argumentation: Influence
         of representational tools on discussing a wicked problem. Computers in Human Behavior, 23, 1072-1088.
Schiffrin, D. (1987). Discourse markers. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Wegerif, R., Mercer, N., & Dawes, L. (1999). From social interaction to individual reasoning: An empirical
         investigation of a possible socio-cultural model of cognitive development. Learning and Instruction, 9,
         493-516.

Acknowledgements
This study is part of the Computerized Representation of Coordination in Collaborative Learning (CRoCiCL)
project. This project is funded by NWO, the Netherlands Organisation for Scientific Research under project number
411-02-121.

                                                              313                                                  CSCL 2007
