    The Socio-Technical Process of Newcomer Participation: Lessons
                                           from a Field Study

                                                        Aditya Johri
             School of Education, Stanford University, 485 Lasuen Mall, Stanford, CA 94305-3096.
                                                  ajohri@stanford.edu

       Abstract.    Newcomer     participation is fundamental     to   most  organizations   yet we   have  limited
       understanding    of  how  this process  unfolds   in  real world  organizations.   In this   paper I present
       preliminary findings from a field study of five newcomers in a research and development laboratory.
       The findings show that to move from peripheral to full participation newcomers make use of both
       interpersonal  and   technological  resources   available  within the  organization.  In  addition   to these
       resources,   newcomers'   participation trajectories  depend   on experiences that  they   bring  with  when
       they enter the organization. These experiences provide templates that influence and shape consequent
       participation. The findings also suggest that as newcomers participate in a community they influence
       oldtimers as well as established practices in that community, suggesting that a community of practice
       undergoes changes as a result of newcomer participation.

Introduction
        Although work in situated learning and community of practices paradigm has been extremely influential
and well-cited, we know very little about how newcomers actually participate in a community of practice and what
situated learning in a real world organization entails. In their work Lave and Wenger (1991) provide secondary
analysis of several studies to show that learning is situated within a community and can actually be called "learning
to participate." We  are   told that newcomers    learn by  "experience"  but  not what   learning  by  experience  entails.
Several questions   remain  unanswered:    What   role  does the  experience  newcomers    bring  with  them   play in their
participation? Do newcomers influence practices within the community? Moreover, given the technology pervasive
nature of today's workplaces, what role does technology play in participation?
        Newcomers       are essential  for any    organization    and  their successful   participation   determines   their
performance, turnover, motivation, and overall productivity and innovation in an organization. Empirical literature
on how newcomers become part of an organization comes from literature in the `management' and `organizational
studies' field and usually focuses on two aspects related to newcomers: socialization (Ostroff & Kozlowski, 1992;
Van Maanen & Schein, 1977) and assimilation (Miller & Jablin, 1991). Studies in these streams focus primarily on
how  newcomers      proactively  seek  information  and   how    information  acquisition  leads  to formation   of  social
relationships and assimilating in the work environment. Newcomers essentially use information to make sense of
the new world they are in and they generally look for what, how and whom kinds of information which they acquire
by observing, monitoring, or asking others (Louis, 1980; Morrison, 1993).
        My   conception     of   newcomers     departs  from  an   information  acquisition     and  use  perspective   and
encompasses participation as the core of what newcomers do. This conception is derived from the literature on
communities of practice which emphasizes that becoming a part of the community is what newcomers primarily do.
Newcomer participation and movement from peripheral to full participation is a fundamental process within any
community of practice (Brown & Duguid, 1992; Lave & Wenger, 1991; Wenger, 1998). Accordingly, newcomers
not only need to socialize and be assimilated but have to become a participating member of a community. Despite
the popularity   of the communities    of  practice concept,     few studies have  looked    at  how newcomers      actually
participate and what role, if any, does technology play in this process. In this paper I present preliminary findings
based on a 5-month ethnographic study of 5 newcomers on how they become members of a community of practice
and their engagement with technology during this process.

Field Study: Setting and Methods
        The data reported in this paper are part of a larger study that involved an in-depth investigation over a
period of five   months  of an  R&D    laboratory which   I  will call TechLab.  TechLab     does research  in  the area of

                                                             314                                                  CSCL 2007
software and hardware technology and has offices in the U.S. and Asia. The researchers in TechLab constitute a
community of practice as they have common concerns and passions and draw on a shared repertoire of artifacts and
events for participation (Wenger, 1998). Data were collected using interviews, observations, surveys, and diaries.
For this particular paper a sample of 5 newcomers, who were all hired as fulltime researchers, was chosen and
examined in-depth. Interviews were conducted with the newcomers at the time of joining and follow-up interviews
were  conducted     three months    later. Newcomers      were  observed    as  they  participated   in different  practices and    I
conducted informal conversations with them about their participation between the two formal interviews. I also took
observation notes in meetings and other activities of the lab in which they participated. In my first interview with
the newcomers I asked them about their background including previous work experience and education; their day-
to-day work at their current job; interaction with their mentors; future plans; their experiences so far at this job; their
expectations in the coming weeks/months; their interactions with their colleagues; and their job interview process.
Subsequently, I asked each newcomer to keep a diary for a week. In this diary I asked them to note their interactions
with a coworker, which was decided in advance, including the medium of interaction as well as the content. I also
asked them to record if this interaction was significant for them in some way. In the follow-up interview, in addition
to asking them about their experiences at the job I also asked them questions about particular interactions they had
listed in their diaries. I was also able to observe their interaction in meetings and their contributions to websites and
other technologies in the workplace.

Findings
         In this short paper I present an overview of newcomers' participation (Figure 1) focusing primarily on their
engagement      with technology.  When     talking about   technology     newcomers    reported   using   the  Intranet  initially to
look for information      about their coworkers    and    for downloading       documents   related   to travel,   payroll and   HR
functions. In the first few weeks they reported looking at the photos on the Intranet to put faces and names together.

 Entry                           Peripheral Participation                               Towards Full Participation

  Prior Related Work orEducational Experiences                   InterpersonalInteraction

  Prior InsiderRelationshipsTemplates      Sensemaking of          Events              Learning      Sensemaking of

                                     Frame                                                     Frame
  Prior Knowledge of
  the Organization                                                Technology

 When    newcomers      enter   the         These  templates  frame  newcomer's             As    newcomers      move      from
 organization    they   bring   with        sensemaking     processes       shaping         peripheral to full participation in
 them   prior    experiences    that        how    they    participate     in   the         the community     they re-calibrate
 serve  as templates    that  guide         organization.   Based        on    their        their  sensemaking      templates
 their participation. This happens          subsequent    experiences    (feedback)         continuously.   Each    calibration
 before  learning    by   doing  or         ­ positive  or negative     ­ they   re-        can   be seen   as an  instance of
 learning by experience.                    calibrate these templates.                      learning.

 Technology

 Before    joining,    newcomers      use      While      participating,    they     use    As    they   move    towards    full
 technology     to   learn    about    the     technology   for filling  forms,  making     participation they   realize ways
 organization and to apply for the job.        presentations,      interacting       with   in  which   use of  technology   is
 When they join they have a template           coworkers,  finding  information   about     important and the technological
 of  technology    use  based   on   prior     processes and people, and displaying         skills that are important to learn
 experiences.                                  information about themselves.                and display in the organization.

                          Figure 1: Newcomer sensemaking from entry to full participation

                                                                315                                                       CSCL 2007
During interviews they would often pull up that page and point to a photo and say this is the person I am talking
about. They used the archives to see what their coworkers had published and patented as well as to look at examples
of works. Newcomers also used the archives to look at presentations they had made including their job talks to be
able to improve their presentation skills. They reported that they used the Intranet to start conversations and build
relationships by looking at a coworker's prior work and then going and talking to them about it. Newcomers with
preexisting relationships within the organization reported using technology far less for information acquisition, both
for interpersonal as well as organizational information, than those newcomers who did not know anyone when they
joined. Newcomers' use of technology changed with time. Over time technology was used used to get information
about artifacts and to understand how those artifacts, such as papers, demos, were produced. Technology, primarily
email, was   used    to a   large extent   for communication     but  informants    reported     that technology-mediated
communication    complemented     face-to-face  interaction but  did  not substitute   it and  evidence   from   the diaries
showed  communication       regarding the  same   topic through  both email   and   face-to-face  interaction. Newcomers
reported talking to coworkers to understand how to contribute to the Intranet, since these contributions were a part
of their practice. For instance, every month researchers had to write a monthly activities report which was submitted
to the manager and then he put it on the Intranet. Technology use changed gradually and technology use became a
practice in itself. Newcomers learned the value and meaning of technology use within the organization and started
to `engage' with technology.      Proficiency  in technology    was seen  as  being able   to speak   the "language  of   the
laboratory."

Implications and Discussion
        Engagement      with   technology, which  involves  more  than just  using  it for communication,     is critical for
newcomers to participate in a community of practice. Theoretically, this work shows that when looking at how
technology affects newcomers in an organization, it is important to look at not only how they are using technology
but how they are engaging with technology in different ways, including using technology as the raw material for
producing  artifacts and    as a  medium   to  display  and present  work.   In addition   to theoretical  contribution   on
newcomer literature and communities of practice, there are several design implications of this work. It highlights
that system designers need to pay more attention to designing systems for particular audiences in the organization
keeping in mind their practices. For instance, newcomers might be an audience towards whom a system is directed
and if well built that system might be adopted by others in the organization. A well designed system that serves a
particular audience really well is likely to be used by others (Cooper, 2004). Given the proliferation of technology
in organizations and    its manifestations  in different forms  such  as  for communication,     for   designing  work,   for
presenting work,  for   finding  information   about coworkers,  and  so  on, there  might    be a need   to fundamentally
reexamine how technology has changed our relationship to work and to other people.

References
Brown, J.S. & Duguid, P. (1991). Organizational Learning and Communities-of-Practice: Toward a Unified View
    of Working, Learning, and Innovation. Organization Science, 2 (1), 40 ­ 57.
Cooper, A. (2004). The Inmates are Running the Asylum. Sams.
Lave, J. & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated Learning: Legitimate Peripheral Participation. Cambridge University Press.
Louis, M.R. (1980). Surprise and Sensemaking: What newcomers experience in entering unfamiliar organizational
    settings. Administrative Science Quarterly, 25 (2), 226 ­ 251.
Miller, V. & Jablin, F. (1991). Information Seeking During Organizational Entry: Influences, Tactics and A model
    of the Process. Academy of Management Review, 16 (1), 92 ­ 120.
Morrison, E. W. (1993). Newcomer Information Seeking: Exploring Types, Modes, Sources and Outcomes. The
    Academy of Management Journal, 36 (3), 557 ­ 589.
Ostroff, C. & Kozlowski, S. (1992). Organizational Socialization as a Learning Process: The Role of Information
    Acquisition. Personnel Psychology, 45, 849-874.
Van Maanen, J., and Schein, E. (1977). Toward a theory of organizational socialization. Research in Organization
    Behavior, 1, 209 ­ 264.
Wenger, E. (1998). Communities of Practice: Learning, Meaning, and Identity. Cambridge University Press.

                                                            316                                                   CSCL 2007
