                                    Transcendent Communities

                                          Sam Joseph, Viil Lid, Dan Suthers,
                              University of Hawaii, 1380 East-West Road Honolulu, HI
                         Email: srjoseph@hawaii.edu, viil@hawaii.edu, suthers@hawaii.edu

        Abstract:   Online    communities     are potential   arenas  for  informal    and   lifelong  learning.  Even
        though   technology    fosters internal   sharing   and   collaboration     in online  communities,    it  also
        presents excessively strong external boundaries. These silo-like structures lead to fragmentation,
        counteracting   cross-community    collaboration    and   interdisciplinary    learning. We   are revising our
        own online community software to support a particular sociotechnical pattern: the emergence of
        "transcendent   communities"--networks         of participation  that transcend   collections   of related but
        distinct communities. In order to understand such inter-community activity we have developed a
        theoretical analysis of the basis for individual action and how this action can lead to value for the
        larger community. Investigating the relationships between individual action, social affordances of
        the technology and group identities will help us to design for functionality and for meaning.

Introduction
        Like traditional communities, online communities have their own identities, norms, and goals, and several
of a community's objectives may be shared with one or more related communities. Together these communities and
their purpose may benefit from sharing information, coordinating events, and collaborating towards their common
goals while still maintaining their distinctions as individual communities. For example, groups in an online teacher
community    we support  (hnlc.org) have  to  share    with each  other,  yet each     group needs  its own   virtual "place"  to
conduct its work. It has been challenging to provide these nested and overlapping groups with the identity and space
they need while    maintaining   awareness    and  sharing    of  resources   at  all  levels.   A similar  problem     exists in
postsecondary   education. Students    experience  courses    as  silos, isolated   from  each   other. Unfortunately    the silo
approach can inhibit the sorts of collaboration that can be most conducive to learning (Derry & Fischer, 2005). For
example,  students  and  faculty in our  own      interdisciplinary  Communication       and   Information    Science   program
(www.hawaii.edu/cis/)   participate in  multiple   nested   and   overlapping    groups    and   organizational   units and    are
members   of  a larger  community.1 Yet,  this    fact is not well   supported   by    current online   learning  environments,
including our own (disCourse.ics.hawaii.edu).

        Although    fragmentation   is  part  of   the    problem,  complete     unification     under  one   identity, goal   or
technological space is not the solution. Even though the constituent collectives share some goals, they are likely to
have additional objectives that are not shared and that make them unique. These goals are a part of each collective's
identity that attracts and ties the members to the collective and that in turn makes up parts of their own identities
(Tajfel & Turner, 1986). Fragmentation into smaller community sites is also a problem for large community sites
(Bruckman    &  Jensen, 2002).  The    desire to  maintain   existing    identities  can prevent   smaller  communities     from
merging into larger ones. Successful coordination between communities forms only by the deliberate and dedicated
effort of those who span their boundaries (Levina & Vaast, 2005).

        When two or more collectives share concerns, there is potential for an alternate solution: the formation of a
community that transcends formal boundaries and has greater potential to reach the critical mass (Markus, 1987)
needed to achieve a new level of collective activity. This approach resolves the fundamental tension that groups
need to be small and have a sense of shared intimacy, yet also need to become connected to a larger set of like-
minded groups in order to progress. To achieve this, flexible technological boundaries are needed similar to those in
traditional communities (Barth, 1981; Cohen, 1985) where boundary-spanning activities may take place. A balance
is needed between      global connectivity    and  distinct   groups,    requiring   support   for  permeable    boundaries    of
participation that lead to communities   transcending     associated     collectives   without violating  the integrity  of  each
collective unit. We need to overcome the tendency of technology to present stark digital boundaries that discourage
communication (Postmes, Spears, & Lea, 1998).

1 This paper uses the terms collective generically for social entities, group for networks of individuals who regularly
interact (e.g., workgroups), community for people sharing symbolically constructed identities, and organization for
collectives that are hierarchically structured to fill a functional need in society.

                                                              317                                                       CSCL 2007
From Activity Cycles to Communities
           Since transcendent communities will arise only based on
the actions of individuals, it is essential to understand the basis
for   individual   action   and   how   it  can   lead  to   value  for the
community. One way of looking at individual activity is through
the lens of the participation-reification duality (Wenger, 1998). In
this  view,  acts  of  participation   are  intrinsically  bound   up   with
reifications that both frame and leave a trace of that act. When
participants come across traces of previous participation, further
participation   may    occur   leading  to further  reification. Ideally  a
virtuous cycle occurs as participation levels increase along with a
well-organized     set  of  valuable  resources.   Figure    1 displays  an
activity cycle of findcareactpersist with the various factors
that  affect   each   stage  of   the   cycle,  bridging   the  realms   of     Figure 1. Activity cycle and related factors
functionality and meaning. We posit this cycle of online activity
as a basis for analyzing how the confluence of participation and identity in a technological environment increases
value for the community. Any participation involves a physical reification, but the persistence of that reification is a
function of the medium in which it is expressed. Media may be designed to increase the likelihood of capture and
persistence of individual activity as a potential source of value for others. A persistent trace of participation can
become the basis for subsequent participation in a two-step process. First of all, a given reification has to be found,
by   accident   or  intent. Again,    media    may   be designed    such   that past  reifications  are available for  chance  or
intentional  discovery,     by  promoting   awareness    and   associative   access. Second, given   that a reification has been
found by an individual, there arises the question of whether this individual will care enough to act on it. Caring
critically  involves    identity  and   acting    involves   motivation,   which   are   functions  of  the history of   previous
interactions. For example, if an individual encounters a reification of prior participation by a person she perceives as
belonging    to some    shared    community    or having   common      goals, then   the individual may   act on  this reification,
continuing the cycle of activity. In summary, in order to foster interactions between individuals that will lead to
collective value, this analysis guides design to ensure as best as possible that relevant reifications of activity are
persisted,  that  these traces    can be  easily  found,  and  that individuals  can   perceive group   and  individual identities
associated   with  the  reifications  and   their potential  value  so  that potential participants will  care enough   to further
participate.

           In the ideal environment the medium and its social-technical affordances will maximize the likelihood of
each of the individual processes that allow this cycle to be continued and connected across many individuals. Figure
2 shows how the persistence of reifications connects the activities of different individuals. Multiple interconnected
activity cycles    can  lead   to a group   of  repeatedly
participating   individuals    who  derive   benefit   from
access   to  the   aggregated     resources,   as  well   as
occasional    participants     who    perhaps   contribute
less, but   benefit    all  the   same.   Given   an   open
environment       the   number      of    participants    is
unlimited,   as  is the    value  that  may    be  created.
However     in  reality there   will  be   pools  of more
tightly interconnected reifications, as there will be
sets  of individuals    who    more   frequently   interact
with   each     other's     reifications,   creating    and
sustaining groups and communities.

           Individuals     may  participate    in multiple
groups   and    perceive   themselves    as belonging     to
different degrees to multiple communities. We can
see a group as a network of interacting individuals
and a community as a group that is distinguished
through common identity. In order to promote the
creation   of   emergent    communities      we   need    to
encourage more than just a few trajectories that go                   Figure 2. Persistence connecting activity cycles

                                                                  318                                                    CSCL 2007
                                                                                       across the tight networks--we need
                                                                                       to  encourage   "boundary     spanning"
                                                                                       as  a  natural     activity.  Boundary
                                                                                       spanning can be accomplished both
                                                                                       by the movement of individuals and
                                                                                       the sharing     of objects.     Figure 3
                                                                                       displays  the   creation     of  a  sub-
                                                                                       domain      or     boundary      domain
                                                                                       between     two     communities        as
                                                                                       participants       are   enticed       to
                                                                                       participate     in     activity    cycles
                                                                                       involving each others' reifications.

                                                                                       Conclusion
                                                                                                New       technologies      are
                                                                                       offering     new       potentials      for
                                                                                       collaboration,      but         increased
                  Figure 3. Pathways connecting communities                            connectivity must be balanced with
                                                                                       the need    for maintaining     intimate
communities. If transdisciplinary education is to succeed, we need to enable trans-boundary participation without
posing a threat to the involved communities' identities. In order to address this we need to understand the basis for
individual   action, how    this action can   lead to value   for the larger  community,   and  how    social  affordances    of
technology can amplify both of these. The activity cycles         reveal how individual action is influenced by factors of
both functionality   and  meaning     that should  be addressed   by  design: awareness   and access,  portrayal    of identity,
goal-relevance, and conversion of activity into value for others. We can then use this understanding of individual
action to   bridge   to the community      level, investigating   how sociotechnical   affordances    enhance   or  inhibit the
productive entanglements between individual trajectories of activity within and across communities. Analysis of the
activity cycles   should  help    us  better understand  the  operations   of boundary    spanners    and  boundary     objects;
ultimately allowing us to design sociotechnical affordances that facilitate the achievement of critical mass through
multiple inter-community interactions. Our ongoing work seeks to contribute towards a general understanding of
design   for transcendent    communities:     larger  spheres of   common     identity and  social  capital   that  arise from
interactions between individuals who participate in collections of related communities.

References
Barth, F. (1981). Process and Form in Social Life. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Bruckman, A. S., & Jensen, M. S. (2002). The mystery of the death of MediaMOO: Seven years of evolution of an
         online   community      in building virtual  communities.   In A. K.  Renninger   &  W.   Shumar     (Eds.),  Building
         Virtual Communities (pp. 21-33). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Cohen, A. P. (1985). The symbolic construction of community: Tavistock Publications.
Derry,   S.  J., &   Fischer,    G. (2005).  Transdisciplinary    Graduate   Education,   American     Educational     Research
         Association. Montreal, Canada.
Levina, N., & Vaast, E. (2005). The Emergence of Boundary Spanning Competence in Practice: Implications for
         Implementation and Use of Information Systems. MIS Quarterly, 29(2), 335-363.
Markus, M. L. (1987). Toward a critical mass theory of interactive media: Universal access, interdependence and
         diffusion. Communication Research, 14, 491-511.
Postmes,  T., Spears,   R., &    Lea, M.   (1998). Breaching  or  building social boundaries?   SIDE-effects     of computer-
         mediated communication. Communication Research, 25(6), 689-715.
Tajfel, H., & Turner, J. C. (1986). The social identity theory of inter-group behavior. In S. Worchel & L. W. Austin
         (Eds.), Psychology of Intergroup Relations. Chicago: Nelson-Hall.
Wenger, E. (1998). Communities of Practice: Learning, Meaning and Identity. Cambridge: Cambridge University
         Press.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the National Science Foundation under RSI award 0100393. Kar-Hai Chu
assisted with exploratory analyses.

                                                              319                                                      CSCL 2007
