   How Can The Design Of Educational Technologies Affect Graduate
                         Students' Epistemologies About Learning?

            Yael Kali and Tamar Ronen-Fuhrmann, Technion - Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa Israel
                                      yaelk@technion.ac.il, tamarrf@technion.ac.il

         Abstract: This paper describes a course in which graduate students learn practical and theoretical
         aspects of educational-design. The course was enacted with 14 students in education. Outcomes
         illustrate tensions   between  students'   professed beliefs about   learning  and their   actual   design
         practices  in   four dimensions  that characterize  the technologies   they designed:  Learner-activity,
         Collaboration,    Autonomy,    and  Content-accessibility.   By  peer-negotiating   of    these  tensions,
         students developed their skills to design educational-technologies and increased the coherence of
         their epistemological understanding.

Introduction
         Although     modern   learning theories emphasize    constructivist or socio-cultural  models    of learning, most
instruction  is still didactic.  Numerous    researchers   have  documented     the  resistance of   educators  to  employ
constructivist pedagogies in the classroom, even when they explicitly espouse constructivist learning theory (e.g.,
Maor & Taylor, 1995; Tobin et al., 1994). In this paper, we describe how a similar disconnect exists in educational-
design students, and how a practice-based approach helped these students develop practices more well aligned with
their espoused beliefs. Educational design is an important area of study both because of its inherent importance in
producing educational materials, and also as a model for studying learning in complex domains. Yet, design is an
elusive subject to teach. In traditional design fields such as architecture or graphic arts, design is taught through a
studio approach in which learners examine examples, conduct lengthy design projects in the company of others
doing similar projects, and proffer and receive frequent peer and expert feedback. Schön (1983; 1985), and Glaser
(1996)  have  described   this as an  important  way  to teach   design and  professionalism    in other  disciplines, while
Hoadley & Kim (2003) describe how such methods can be used in teaching educational design.
         In this paper, we describe a particular course in which students learn educational design through studio
methods. We show how the course format highlights tensions between students' professed beliefs about learning and
their actual design   practices. We  also look   at how  the  design studio  format  allowed students    to  negotiate these
tensions, ultimately leading to more coherence between ideas about learning and their designs.

Context
       The   design   of  the  course   was based   on   a previous   study  (Ronen-Fuhrmann       &  Kali,  2005),    which
characterized graduate students' use of a Design Principles Database (Kali et al., 2004) in designing new educational
technologies.   One   of the  main findings  were   that students had   difficulties in designing   their own  educational
technologies due to the open-ended nature of the task; based on this finding we decided to use a more structured
design process, and build the course around a model we call the design studio model. Our model for the design
process builds on the well known ADDIE stages (analyzes, design, develop, implement, evaluate) (Dick & Carrey,
2001), in which we expand the Design stage, to include three other non-linear iterating stages: Brainstorm, Build-
flow and Design-features. The Design Principles Database is used in four stages in this model as illustrated in figure
1.

Figure 1: The Design studio model ­ the yellow dots indicate stages in which the design principles database is used

                                                            320                                                   CSCL 2007
Methodology
The  design course  described     above   was   enacted in spring   semester   2005    with  fourteen  graduate students   at the
Technion. In order to characterize student learning, rich qualitative data was gathered throughout the semester. Data
sources included whole class online discussions about the literature, group online discussions (for the design studio
and analyzing technologies projects), student artifacts (documents produced at various stages of the in the design
studio in which students designed their own educational), entries in the Design Principles Database, and a reflective
diary in which we documented important events in each of the class meetings.
         To analyze the data and characterize student epistemologies at various stages of the design process we
developed   a rubric based     on  two    existing  frameworks.     The  first  is Reeves'     framework,    which   includes 14
pedagogical dimensions for assessing computer-based education (Reeves, 1994). The second is the SKI framework,
mentioned   above, for  designing     web-based    inquiry curricula    (Linn  et  al. 2004).  Since  these  frameworks   do  not
include a rubric for quantitatively assessing the design of educational technologies, we combined and modified these
frameworks    to develop  a  rubric   consisting   of four dimensions:    a)  Learner   activity,  b) Collaboration,  c) Content
accessibility, and d) autonomy.

Outcomes
         The analysis of the data indicates that most of the students expressed ideas that where categorized as "high"
according to the first three dimensions of the rubric (Learner activity, collaboration and content accessibility). These
expressions where found when students where engaged in face-to-face or online discussions. An example showing a
high degree of the "content accessibility" dimension, in one of the first online discussions, is: "as a school teacher, I
see that learning is meaningful when the context is tangible and relates to the learners' world; when I teach about the
concept of pendulum in physics, I connect it to the swing at the school yard".
         However, when they began designing their own technologies, many of them designed modules, in which
learners have a passive role, as consumers of information, and the interaction with the technology was restricted to
reading, or watching things on the computer screen. Students tended, at initial stages of their design studio project,
to design environments in which users work with the technology individually, in their own pace. In addition students
tended to build the flow of activities in their technologies based solely on the structure of knowledge in the domain
they intended to teach. They were mainly concerned with what learners should know at each stage of the flow, and
less concerned with how to make this flow engaging for the learners.
         As the semester proceeded, their designs incorporated more and more components in which learners have
an active role, and are engaged in construction of knowledge in interactive environments, using tools that allow
them to express their ideas, manipulate elements, or build artifacts. Students tended to embed more and more social
supports in their designs, and enabled their potential users to negotiate their understanding with their peers. Students
became   more    concerned   that  the domain    content   within   the technology     environments,   build on  learners'  prior
knowledge, connect with their everyday lives, and engage the learners.
         We   view  the  high   level  of pedagogical     ideas expressed    by   students   throughout  the semesters   as their
"theoretical epistemologies". We consider the ideas expressed by students' actual design practice as their "applied
epistemologies". As apposed to the other dimensions, the autonomy dimension did not reveal a clear gap between
students'  epistemologies   as  expressed  in   their sayings   and  their  doings.    However,   we  did observe   a  change  in
students' epistemologies in this aspect throughout the course. From the beginning of the semester, many concerns
were expressed by our students about the lack of control that teachers have in open-ended environments. The notion
that technology (or the teacher) should monitor and control student learning was most prominent. This notion was
consistent with   their designs    at  initial stages  of  the  design  process.   Many    of  the projects  were  tutorial type
environments that funnel learners in different learning paths according to their performances and provide teachers
with precise  information    of learners'  progress.   As  the  design   process   proceeded,   students' designs    increasingly
included  open-ended    activities and  tools   in which   learners  have   more   flexibility in  directing their own   learning
paths.

Discussion and Implications
         This study revealed a gap in students' "theoretical" and "applied" epistemologies. At the beginning of the
semester,  when   engaged    in theoretical    discourse,  students  tended    to  advocate    socio-constructivists  paradigms,
whereas   when   engaged  in designing    technologies     they tended   to  neglect   these ideas and  apply   more   traditional
approaches. The analysis also indicated that in three of the four dimensions (learner activity, collaboration, and
content accessibility)  this gap   was  reduced    during  the  course.  Thus,  as students    developed  their skills to design
educational technologies, they also increased the coherence of their epistemological understanding.

                                                                321                                                    CSCL 2007
        The outcomes indicate that these advances may have resulted from various aspects of the design of the
course. The three-theme structure of the course, including the, Technology Analysis, Design Studio and the Theory
themes, provided a rich variety of resources that made it possible for students to learn important aspects of design.
The cognitive apprenticeship model of instruction, and the supports for peer learning in the course, enabled students
to take advantage of these resources, and eventually brought to widening their intuition for designing educational
technologies, and to development of their epistemological understanding.

        This study reveals that epistemologies that are based on theoretical understanding about various approaches
in the field of education may lack coherency if they are not applied to real situations. Engaging students in design
using a studio  course  format, proved  to be a productive   way  for students to  examine   their own epistemological
beliefs, negotiate them with peers and experts, and explore them in relation to theory. Such engagement can bring to
expanding of students' design intuition as well as meaningfully enhance their epistemological understanding. We
therefore suggest that designing curricula in a studio fashion, whether it involves technology or not, should become
an integral part of the academic professional development program for graduate students in education.
    To   explore  the  generality of the   outcomes, we  continue  to  study   the course  in a   design-based research
approach,   in several enactments  with more   students  in other institutions in  the United States. Data  from  these
enactments will help examine the extent to which our current findings reflect a local situation, or are more widely
spread.

References
Dick, W., Carey, L., & Carey, J. O. (2001). The systematic design of instruction (5th ed.). New York: Longman, p.
      1-34.
Glaser, R. (1996). Changing the agency for learning: Acquiring expert performance, in Ericsson, K.A. (ed.), The
      road   to excellence:  The  acquisition of  expert performance   in  the  arts and  sciences, sports and  games,
      Mahweh, NJ, Erlabaum, pp 303-311.
Hoadley, C., & Kim, D. E. (2003). Learning, Design, and Technology: Creation of a design studio for educational
      innovation. In A. Palma dos Reis & P. Isaís (Eds.), Proceedings of the IADIS International Conference e-
      Society    2003  (pp. 510-519).   Lisbon,  Portugal:  International Association    for  the  Development  of the
      Information Society (IADIS).
Kali, Y., Spitulnik, M. and Linn, M. (2004). Building Community using the Design Principles Database, in Gerjets,
      P., Kirschner, P. A., Elen, J. & Joiner, R. (Eds.) Proceedings of the first joint meeting of the EARLI SIGs
      Instructional Design and Learning and Instruction with Computers: Tuebingen.
Kali, Y. (2006). Collaborative knowledge-building using the Design Principles Database. International Journal of
      Computer Support for Collaborative Learning.
Linn, M.C., Davis, E.A., & Bell, P. (2004). Internet Environments for Science Education. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
      Erlbaum Associates.
Maor,   D., &   Taylor,  P. C.  (1995).  Teacher  epistemology    and  science    inquiry in  computerized  classroom
      environments. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 32, 839-854.
Reeves, T. C. (1994). Evaluating what really matters in computer-based education. In M. Wild, & D. Kirkpatrick,
      (Eds.), Computer education: New Perspectives (pp. 219-246). Perth, Australia: MASTEC.
Ronen-Fuhrmann, T., & Kali, Y. (2005). Designing technology-based curricula using the design principles database.
      Paper presented at the structured poster session "Technology enhanced learning in science: An educational
      accelerator  for  classrooms,  research and design".  The   2005 annual   meeting   of the  American educational
      Research Association (AERA), Demography & democracy in the era of accountability, Montreal, 2005.
Schön, D.A. (1983). The Reflective Practitioner, NY, Basic Books.
Schön, D.A. (1985). The Design Studio, London, RIBA Publications.
Tobin, K., Tippins, D., & Gallard, A. J. (1994). Research on instructional strategies for teaching science. In D. L.
      Gabel (Ed.), Handbook of Research on Science Teaching and Learning (pp. 45-93). New York: Macmillan
      Publishing Company.

Acknowledgment
We gratefully acknowledge the financial support of the US National Science Foundation (grant
ESI/CLT 0334199), although opinions expressed here are those of the authors alone.

                                                          322                                                  CSCL 2007
