       Emergence of Learning in Computer-Supported, Large-Scale
                         Collective Dynamics: A Research Agenda
                                    Manu Kapur1, David Hung2, Michael Jacobson3
                                       National Institute of Education, Singapore
                  1manu.kapur@nie.edu.sg, 2 david.hung@nie.edu.sg, 3michael.jacobson@nie.edu.sg,

                                           John Voiklis4, Charles K Kinzer5
                               Teachers College, Columbia University, New York, USA
                                             4jv37@tc.edu, 5kinzer@tc.edu

                                                 Chen Der-Thanq Victor
                         National Institute of Education, Singapore, victor.chen@nie.edu.sg

         Abstract:    Seen  through   the lens   of  complexity    theory,  past    CSCL   research may  largely   be
         characterized as small-scale (i.e., small-group) collective dynamics. While this research tradition is
         substantive and meaningful in its own right, we propose a line of inquiry that seeks to understand
         computer-supported,    large-scale  collective    dynamics:      how large    groups of interacting  people
         leverage technology to create emergent organizations (knowledge, structures, norms, values, etc.)
         at the collective level that are not reducible to any individual, e.g., Wikipedia, online communities
         etc. How   does learning    emerge in   such   large-scale    collectives? Understanding   the interactional
         dynamics   of large-scale   collectives  is a  critical and   an open   research  question especially  in an
         increasingly  participatory,  inter-connected,     media-convergent      culture  of today. Recent    CSCL
         research has alluded to this; we, however, develop the case further in terms of what it means for
         how one conceives learning, as well as methodologies for seeking understandings of how learning
         emerges   in these large-scale   networks.    In  the final   analysis, we  leverage  complexity theory   to
         advance computational agent-based models (ABMs) as part of an integrated, iteratively-validated
         phenomenological-ABM inquiry cycle to understand emergent phenomenon from the "bottom up".

Introduction
         The past few decades have seen a consistent and persistent evolution from an individualized conception of
learning to a  more   collectivist, participatory  conception    (Lave    & Wenger,    1991;  Scardamalia &    Bereiter, 2003;
Hutchins, 1995).   By  and   large,  this forms     the epistemological     core    of CSCL   research  (Stahl  et al.,  2006).
Concomitantly, educational technology has also evolved from the days of individual computer-based instruction to
interactive and participatory online environments; the latter ranging from small-group, CSCL environments to large-
scale, multi-user, interactive environments      such   as 2nd   Life, Wikipedia,   topical online  communities,   etc.  At the
small-scale   or small-group   level (typically  2   - 30  people),    CSCL   research  has  made   substantive progress    into
unpacking the interactional dynamics, though, much important work still needs to be accomplished. At the large-
scale level (typically in the 100s and the 1000s), however, we understand very little of the phenomenon of how
people leverage technology to come together to interact, participate, collaborate, and form emergent structures and
patterns (Sawyer, 2005; Jenkins, 2006); a phenomenon hereinafter referred to as large-scale collective dynamics.

         Indeed, one of the most intractable problems in the social sciences, in general, and the learning sciences, in
particular, is how interacting groups of agents (e.g., people) create emergent organizations at the collective level that
are not reducible to any individual (Epstein & Axtell, 1996; Goldstone, 2006). For example, cognition and learning
emerge from a collective set of interacting neurons yet the notion of cognition is absent and incomprehensible at the
neural level. Highly coordinated behavior emerges in flocks of birds yet the notion of coordination is absent at the
individual bird level. Traffic jams propagate backward but they emerge from interactions between individual cars
(controlled by their drivers) going forward; movement at the collective level runs in a direction opposite to that at
the individual level. Social structures, beliefs, values, and norms emerge in groups of people--offline and online--
that cannot be attributed to or dictated by any individual per se, e.g., communities of practice, Wikipedia, and so on.

         How does such collective behavior emerge? How does learning emerge in these large-scale collectives?
More   importantly, how    are some   large-scale    collectives   able to  adapt,  learn, and persist, while   others  perish?

                                                               323                                                   CSCL 2007
Understanding the interactional dynamics of how large-scale collectives function and perform is a critical and an
open research question, especially in an increasingly computer-supported, inter-connected, media-convergent world
(Jenkins, 2006). It is also a subject of increasing scientific importance given its prolific coverage in the premier
scientific journals such as Nature and Science (for a review of this trend, see Goldstone & Janssen, 2005; also see
the Proceedings of the National Academy of the Sciences, 2002).

         CSCL researchers such as Stahl et al. (2006) and Suthers (2006) have also alluded to this. For example,
Suthers  (2006)   argued   that, "small groups   should    not be  the only   social granularity   studied. For  example,   the
emergence of social and knowledge capital in a community of practice may require tracing out the evolution of
relationships and the formation and spread of ideas in networks of individuals larger than the small group" (p. 16).
Notwithstanding, CSCL and learning sciences research in this area remains in its infancy (Jacobson & Wilensky,
2006; Goldstone, 2006). This is, in part, due to the focus of CSCL research primarily being on small-scale collective
dynamics (hereinafter synonymous with and a referent to small-group CSCL), which, of course, is substantive and
meaningful    in its own   right. The   purpose  of   this paper,  however,    is to extend the   CSCL   research  agenda   by
proposing a line of inquiry that seeks to understand computer-supported, large-scale collective dynamics.

Organization of the Paper
         The rest of this paper is organized into five sections. In the first section, we discuss what our proposal
means for how we conceive learning in small-scale versus large-scale collectives. Despite some obvious differences
between the two, we argue that learning in collectives is an emergent phenomenon regardless of the scale at which
the phenomenon       takes place.   An  emergent    conception    necessitates that  we   next unpack   the  very concept   of
emergence, and this forms the second section. The third section examines existing CSCL methods to see if and how
they may be used to gain understandings of emergent behavior of large-scale collectives, and whether we need to
integrate existing methods with others not currently used in CSCL research. Our analysis sets up an imperative for a
methodology that builds on existing CSCL methodologies and is able to capture and model emergent behavior of
large-scale collective dynamics. The fourth section advances computational Agent-Based Models (ABMs) as part of
an integrated, iteratively-validated phenomenological-ABM inquiry cycle to understand emergent behavior of large-
scale collectives from the "bottom up." The fifth and final section concludes with directions for future research.

Unpacking Learning
         A focus on collective dynamics--small-scale and large--requires that one adopt a broader conception of
learning. Traditional conceptions of learning in cognitive science and educational research have tended to focus on
the individual as the unit of cognition and learning; only the individual perceives, thinks, and learns. However, as
mentioned   earlier, the   past  few  decades have    seen a   consistent and  persistent  evolution  from  an  individualized
conception   of  learning  to a  more   collectivist, participatory conception     (Lave  & Wenger,    1991;  Scardamalia   &
Bereiter, 2003; Jenkins, 2006; Hutchins, 1995). While this evolution is generally in agreement with CSCL research,
a careful reading of CSCL research reveals a continuum of conceptions (for an excellent review, see Stahl, 2005).

         On   the  one  end,  learning  is conceptualized   primarily  as  an  individual-level   construct but one that may
benefit  from  the   collaboration.  On the  other,   learning is  conceptualized    primarily as  a group-level  construct or
activity in   which  individuals    participate and   interact with  each    other.  Between   these  two   ends, a range   of
conceptions exist of which we provide a sample; it is neither our intent nor is it possible to be exhaustive here. For
example,   if  one   leverages    the knowledge     acquisition    metaphor,   one   could  examine    individual  pre-to-post
intervention  gains  as  learning.   Alternatively, if one  leverages  the   participation metaphor,   one  could  selectively
examine the nature of an individual's participation in an activity or a community of practice as learning; conceptions
of  legitimate   peripheral   participation  (Lave    & Wenger,    1991)     and  internalization  (Vygotsky,   1978) can   be
justifiably invoked as individual learning. At the collective level, one could just as well leverage the participation
and interactional metaphors to conceive learning as an emergent property arising from the productive agency that
drives  participation  and  interaction between     group  members,    e.g., knowledge    building   (Scardamalia & Bereiter,
2003).   The  interactional   metaphor  could   even   be  leveraged   in  the   radical sense  to conceive  learning  not  as
something that is constituted through interaction but is the interaction (Koschmann et al., 2005). Further, and these
are perhaps less frequently invoked but just as valid, conceptions of learning at the collective level may be tied to
how groups adapt and reorganize in response to changing environmental and selection pressures (Kauffman, 1995).
Here, emergent organizations and structures can be conceived as collective learning; the more a group is able to
reorganize in a flexible and effective manner, the more it can be seen as learning.

                                                               324                                                   CSCL 2007
         Our own conception of learning is grounded in the science of complexity (Kauffman, 1995). We adopt the
broader conception to include cognition and learning at the collective level as well. This conception clearly falls on
the abovementioned continuum but is different in the sense that the "group" is not an a priori entity; it emerges
(sometimes) from the intersubjective interactions between individuals, and once such an organization emerges, it
shapes and constrains the very interactions it emerged from. While this dialectic is at the core of our conception,
complexity theory also suggests a rather clear ontological and epistemological position: both individual and group
cognitions   co-exist;    both the  individual and    the group   co-learn;    the nature of  such   learning   being   dialectical,
dynamic, and emergent (Kapur et al., 2006; Voiklis et al., 2006).

         Invoking      emergence,   however,   only   begs the   question:  how,   when,  and  why    does  collective  cognition
emerge?  Among       cognitive   and  learning scientists, interest  in collective   cognition and   its  emergence   is  a recent
phenomenon       (e.g.  Goldstone,   2006);  existing   theories  (e.g. Hutchins,    1995)    detail how    collective  cognition
propagates   once    structured  and  organized,  but  for a theory     of its emergence   which     does not   presuppose   these
structures ab initio, one needs to look towards complexity theory (Kauffman, 1995; Epstein & Axtell, 1996). This
need also stems from the cumulative effect of empirical research indicating that intersubjective processes at the local
(individual)   level   yield cognitions--e.g   opinions   (Isenberg,   1986),  knowledge    representations    (Schwartz,   1995),
among others--that differ, both in complexity and kind, from those produced by any collaborating agent or those
expected from the central tendency among collaborators (Vallacher & Nowak, 2004). Moreover, these group-level
cognitions emerge spontaneously, without forethought or awareness among collaborating agents (Goldstone, 2006).
Apparently, both the individual and the group learn; this learning being at once distinct, dialectical, and emergent.

         From the preceding paragraph, it perhaps follows that the closest match for our conception with CSCL
research is in the intersubjective learning epistemology. This is because intersubjective learning (as we understand
it)  focuses   on  the process   of meaning-making      in the   social interactions  distributed    across actions,  actors,  and
artifacts. It conceives learning at both the individual and collective levels although the ontology underpinning this
epistemology (e.g., is there really a collective mind? How is it possible for learning to be distributed?) is still being
debated (e.g., see Stahl, 2005; Koschmann et al., 2005). Notwithstanding this ontological debate (which we maintain
is   healthy),  we   do   see  sufficient  epistemological   coherence     and     consistency between      the  complexity    and
intersubjective conception of learning to move the conversation forward.

         Moving forward, therefore, we articulate five dimensions along which small- and large-scale collectives
exhibit critical differences in how they function and perform. In turn, these differences have implications for how
learning emerges in these collectives. Note that while we present these differences as analytical dichotomies, in our
conception they represent more of a difference of degree than of kind. Conceiving these analytical dichotomies as
continuums, the five dimensions are:
i.   Spatial-Temporal     landscape:   The   space   (both real  and   virtual) and   time over     which   large-scale collective
     dynamics evolve is relatively larger; individual members are typically distributed over a much larger space and
     the phenomenon typically unfolds over relatively longer life spans (typically months, often years). In contrast,
     small-scale collectives, while also distributed, are limited to a relatively smaller space (both real and virtual).
     Plus, their timescale or the life span is relatively shorter (typically days or weeks, sometimes months, rarely
     years). Thus, the spatial-temporal landscape on which the phenomenon unfolds differs to a substantive degree.
ii.  Open    vs.  Closed   systems:   Small-scale  collectives   in  CSCL   research   typically    tend to be  relatively  closed
     systems; once the group members and the mediating tools and artifacts (including scaffolds) are set up, there are
     typically   few,  if any,   additions within the  spatial-temporal    landscape   over   which   the group's   collaboration
     unfolds. Large-scale collective dynamics, in contrast, are relatively open systems, where the number of group
     members, mediating tools and artifacts, and the spatial-temporal landscape are typically co-evolutionary.
iii. Level   of  a priori  structure: The   level of  a   priori structure  in  small-scale   collectives   in CSCL   research  is
     relatively high; these are intentionally designed learning environments (witness the significant research efforts
     on the    efficacy of   interactional scripting  and  scaffolding  in CSCL     research). Large-scale     collectives, on the
     other hand, are typically decentralized and less structured. This does not mean that there are no structures in
     large-scale   collective  dynamics.    What   it means  is   that  many    (though   not  all) of   these structures   emerge
     spontaneously from within than being designed for from the beginning. Of course, structures emerge in small-
     scale collectives as well; we do not deny this. As stated earlier, it is a matter of degree; the likelihood of such
     structures emerging from within is greater in the large scale collectives than small-scale ones in CSCL research.
iv.  Individual    agency:    In small-scale   collective  dynamics,    individual    members    have    relatively  less   agency
     compared to individuals in open, decentralized, large-scale collectives. In the latter, individuals can choose to

                                                                 325                                                    CSCL 2007
     participate and collaborate if and when they want, and interact with whomever they want. This is relatively less
     so in the former.  This  difference  in   individual  agency   is important  when    one  considers    research on  the
     importance of productive agency in collaboration (Schwartz, 1999). Combined with the previous dimension, the
     structure-agency dialectic leans more towards a priori structure for small-scale collectives whereas it leans more
     towards individual agency for large-scale collectives, where individual agency can even result in a dynamic
     reorganization of collective structures. Again, this is a difference in degree, not kind.
v.   Diversity: Large-scale collectives also allow for relatively greater diversity among its individual members. Such
     diversity is relatively low for small-scale collectives mainly because of their relatively smaller size. Lack of
     sufficient diversity also makes the emergence of distributions in small-scale collectives highly unlikely (e.g.,
     consider if it is even meaningful to speak of a normal or power-law distribution in a small group)

         The relatively longer-term, open systems formed by computer-supported, large-scale collectives together
with lower  a  priori structure, higher individual   agency,  and   greater diversity make   for an exponentially    greater
system complexity when compared to the small-scale collectives in CSCL research. It is this very complexity that
sets up the stage for the emergence of learning--structures, interactional patterns, participation patterns and culture,
knowledge,  values,   norms, etc.--making      large-scale collective  dynamics  an   intriguing phenomenon      worthy  of
inquiry in its own right. If so, it becomes necessary that we unpack the very concept of emergence first before
seeking methodologies for understanding it in the context of large-scale collective dynamics.

Unpacking Emergence
         The  concept  of emergent   behavior   is, however,  rather   paradoxical. On   the one hand,   it arises from  the
interactions between agents in a system, e.g., individuals in a collective. On the other hand, it constrains subsequent
interactions between agents and in so doing, seems to have a life of its own independent of the local interactions
(Kauffman, 1995). For example, a traffic jam emerges from the local interactions between individual drivers; at the
same time, it constrains the subsequent local interactions between individual drivers. Traffic jams, once underway,
do seem to have a life of their own. Similarly, structures within social networks emerge from the local interactions
between individual actors. At the same time these structures constrain the subsequent local interactions between
individual actors (Watts  &  Strogatz,  1998),   and  so  on. It becomes    fundamentally    important to   understand  how
macro-level behaviors emerge from and constrain micro-level interactions of individual agents.

         Understanding the "how," however, requires an understanding of a cardinal principle in complexity: simple
rules at the local level can sufficiently generate complex emergent behavior at the collective level (Bar-Yam, 2003;
Kapur et al., 2006). For example, consider the brain as a collection of neurons (agents). These neurons are complex
themselves, but exhibit simple binary behavior in their synaptic interactions. This type of emergent behavior, when
complexity at the individual-level results in simplicity at the collective-level, is called emergent simplicity (Bar-
Yam, 2003). Further, these simple (binary) synaptic interactions between neurons collectively give rise to complex
brain "behaviors"--memory, cognition, etc.--that cannot be seen in the behavior of individual neurons. This type of
emergent behavior, when simplicity at the individual-level results in complexity at the collective-level, is called
emergent complexity (Bar-Yam, 2003).

         The distinction between emergent simplicity and complexity is critical, for it demonstrates that a change of
scale (individual vs. collective level) can be accompanied with a change in the type (simplicity vs. complexity) of
behavior.  "Rules that govern    behavior at   one  level of analysis  (the individual)  can cause  qualitatively  different
behavior at higher levels (the group)" (Gureckis & Goldstone, under review, p.1). We do not necessarily have to
seek complex   explanations  for  complex  behavior;   complex    collective  behavior   may  very  well  be explained   via
simple, minimal   information,   e.g., utility function,   decision rule,  or heuristic,  contained in   local interactions.
Repeated updating, interaction, and aggregation of local interactions can sufficiently generate the phenomenon over
time from the "bottom up" (Nowak, 2004). Bearing this albeit brief conceptual unpacking of emergence (within the
constraints of a conference proposal) in mind, we now turn our attention to methodologies for how one might seek
understandings of emergent behavior of large-scale collective dynamics.

Unpacking Collective Dynamics
         A  complexity-grounded    focus  on   collective  dynamics,   as argued earlier, requires  that one   undertake an
ontological and, consequently, a methodological shift. Making this methodological shift, in turn, requires that one
examine existing methodologies in CSCL research to see if and how they may be used to gain understandings of

                                                             326                                                   CSCL 2007
large-scale collective dynamics, and whether we need to integrate existing methods with others not currently used in
CSCL research. Broadly speaking, existing methodological approaches in CSCL research fall into one or more of
three categories: a) experimental, b) descriptive, and c) design (Suthers, 2006).

          For the purposes of our argument, however, the three categories may be reduced to two. This is because the
third category--design-based approach--at the compositional, methodological level (as opposed to the theoretical
level) uses methods that are typically descriptive, though sometimes integrative (descriptive cum experimental) to
understand and explain learning in CSCL groups. Design researchers offer rich accounts of an iterative exploration
of the possibility space of designs; once promising or effective design features are identified, experimental methods
may be used together with descriptive methods to document and explain the emergence of learning in collaborative
settings (e.g., Barab & Squire, 2004). At the methodological level however, one could reasonably posit that the
design approach, in the final analysis, typically resorts to descriptive or integrative (descriptive cum experimental)
approaches to gain and explain phenomenological understandings (Bielaczyc & Collins, in press). For the purposes
of  this paper,   therefore, it suffices that   we  discuss  the experimental   and   descriptive   approaches,  examine   their
usefulness and limitations in studying small-scale collective dynamics, and evaluate if and how they may be used
gain understandings of large-scale collective dynamics.

Experimental Approaches
          Experimental    (including  quasi   experimental)    approaches   are  pervasively   used    in CSCL   research (e.g.,
Suthers & Hundhausen, 2003; Kapur, 2006). They typically seek to establish causal or quasi-causal explanations of
design or intervention effects versus control conditions. Reductive quantification of qualitative interactional data
into categories    followed  by  counting   and   aggregation, and   then  linear statistical modeling    typify this approach.
While    this approach    allows  one  to   draw   aggregated-level   interpretations    and  conclusions   about relationships
between    manipulated    variables  and  their  effects, it has been     criticized for over-simplifying    the complexity  of
interactional dynamics in CSCL groups. Still, it serves a valuable purpose as a method for making quantified causal
or quasi-causal generalizations, especially as a complement to descriptive methods (Stahl et al., 2006). With our
focus on emergent behavior of collectives, we also need to examine this approach with regard to its assumptions of
linearity. The reason for this is startlingly simple: assumptions that work at the atomic or particle level may not work
at the human or social level (Kauffman 1995); one must closely examine the assumption of linearity.

          Linearity is usually conceived both as a mathematical operator as well as a functional relationship. A linear
operator   is essentially  an   additive operator.    For example,   traditional  analytical   methodologies     such as  linear
differential equations and statistical modeling, regardless of their mathematical sophistication, are essentially linear
operators. They work well for closed, linear systems (or approximations thereof) where the whole is equal to the
sum of its parts, thus allowing for a reductive analysis; one can break a system into its components or parts, study
the  parts individually,   and  then add    the parts together   to form   the whole.    Applying   the linear operator  and its
associated    methodologies   to the study   of  collective  dynamics     means that  a  collective is  no more  than  a  simple
aggregate of the individuals. Clearly, critical information is lost when heterogeneous actors (parts) are aggregated or
averaged   into   factors (Eidelson,  1997).    However,  large-scale  collective    dynamics  is   an  emergent  phenomenon;
emergent properties, by definition, can not be obtained and analyzed no matter how one adds or aggregates the parts.
Thus, a study of collective dynamics calls for methodologies which permit the modeling of open, non-linear systems
where the whole is greater than the sum of its parts, systems that exhibit emergent behavior.

          Linearity may also be conceived as a functional relationship--constant proportionality or a straight line.
Thus conceptualized, methodologies resting on an assumption of linearity are restricted to studies of phenomena in
which    the  effects are proportional   to their causes;  a restriction  that precludes  a   wide  range  of  real-world social
phenomena, including large-scale collective dynamics. Linearity tends to treat small changes or perturbations as
temporally transient without any long-term effects. However, collective dynamics is a phenomenon that exhibits
non-linear effects. One can no longer assume that effects are proportional to their causes. In fact, small changes or
perturbations can and usually do have large effects. Therefore, important non-linear relationships among variables
may be missed entirely, or worse, be modeled linearly since that is what the method can handle. As Holland (1995)
explained    it, "Nonlinearities  mean   that   our most  useful    tools for  generalizing   observations  into  theory--trend
analysis, determination of equilibria, sample means, and so on--are badly blunted" (p. 5).

          Taken together, traditional experimental approaches and its underlying assumption of linearity may fail to
capture let alone model emergent and self-organizing behavior of complex phenomena such as large-scale collective

                                                               327                                                     CSCL 2007
dynamics.   This   is not to   suggest that we  abandon   their use  altogether; instead,  understanding  the limitations of
applying linear reductive methods to study non-linear emergent phenomenon requires that one exercise caution and
humility in what can be accomplished with using this approach for large-scale collective dynamics.

Descriptive Approaches
         One of the fundamental orientations in CSCL is the social-participatory construction of meanings as an
inter-subjective, in-situ phenomenon (Koschmann et al., 2005; Stahl et al., 2006). CSCL research has focused on
this emergent meaning-making process through descriptive approaches designed to gain rich, data-driven, bottom-up
understandings of the phenomenon as it unfolds. These methods include conversation analysis (Sacks, Schlegoff, &
Jefferson, 1974), discourse analysis (Johnstone, 2002), narrative analysis (Hermann, 2003), and the likes. In CSCL
research (e.g., Roschelle & Teasley, 1995; Koschmann et al., 2005) these methods have been used to uncover the
emergence of learning in small groups. Because one could use these methods at multiple scales of a phenomena
(e.g., conversation   or  discourse analysis   at a micro   level, and  perhaps  narrative analysis at a phenomenological
level), when used together, they make for a more ecologically valid understanding of emergent phenomenon. Even
so, limitations of descriptive methods for small-scale collective dynamics have been well-articulated. These include,
in the main, an inability to establish causal explanations/generalizations of interventions and design decisions as
well as an overemphasis on theory building as opposed to theory application (Stahl et al., 2006).

         Other limitations are specific to their use in large-scale collective dynamics, which forms our main concern.
Specifically, the sheer spatial-temporal scale of large-scale emergent phenomenon limits (not negate) the usefulness
of in-depth, descriptive analysis, which, by definition, requires that one focus on a humanly-manageable portion of
the spatial-temporal landscape: the entire space and time over which the phenomenon unfolds (Eidelson, 1997). For
example, if one is examining authorial dynamics in Wikipedia using descriptive methods, then the choice of the
method itself limits the scope of what one might choose for an in-depth study, perhaps one or a few articles. This, of
course, would    not  pose any   problems   if the  spatial-temporal   landscape of Wikipedia   (and   large-scale collective
dynamics in general) was uniform so that an understanding of a small part may be applied uniformly to the whole;
unfortunately though, this is rarely the case.

         From    a temporal    standpoint,  self-organizing  and   emergent behavior    often occurs through  abrupt  phase
transitions that  tend  to happen   in  a  narrow   temporal band   of  a phenomenon's     evolution (Kauffman,    1995). A
descriptive analysis likely makes it difficult (though not impossible) to detect this in a consistent and reliable manner
(Kruse & Stadler, 1993). Similarly, large-scale dynamics can display drastically different characteristics in different
parts of their spatial-temporal landscape. For example, an in-depth description of a small part of that landscape,
while informative and meaningful in its own right, does little if what one is really seeking is an understanding of the
entire landscape. Large portions of the landscape may appear highly orderly, yet the seeds of chaotic and emergent
behavior may be located in a small part. Again, a descriptive analysis may make it difficult (though not impossible)
to detect this in a consistent and reliable manner (Kruse & Stadler, 1993). Still, an army of descriptive studies large-
enough to be distributed over varied portions of the spatial-temporal landscape of the phenomenon may yet prove to
be highly useful provided one could somehow coordinate and integrate these efforts into a meaningful whole.

Moving Forward
         Realizing that each approach has something to offer small-scale collective dynamics, CSCL researchers
have called for greater integration of these approaches moving forward (e.g., Suthers, 2006). We second this call.
However,    as we  have   argued,  both   the experimental   and   the descriptive approaches--alone   or   combined--have
limitations as methodologies for understanding large-scale collective dynamics. We see combining the two to be a
necessary   step;  yet,   that alone   is  insufficient for  examining    large-scale collective dynamics.    The   inherent
complexities of large-scale emergent phenomenon place limits even on an integrative approach (Holland, 1995).

         In light of our focus on large-scale collective dynamics, this sets up an imperative for a methodology that
builds on the experimental and descriptive methodologies and is also able to sufficiently generate the phenomenon
from the "bottom up". Given the technological advances in computational simulation power, Agent-Based Modeling
(ABM; we use ABM as short for both agent-based models and agent-based modeling) provides a methodological
complement that is increasingly being used not only in the natural sciences (Jackson, 1996) but also in economics
(e.g., Arthur, 1990),    sociology  (e.g.,  Watts  & Strogatz,  1998),   socio-cultural psychology   (e.g., Axelrod, 1997),
organizational science (e.g., Carley, 2002), etc., just to name a few. Grounded in complexity theory, agent-based
modeling has already provided significant theoretical and empirical insights into the dynamics of large-scale social

                                                              328                                                  CSCL 2007
systems  (Eidelson,   1997).    In  the following  section,   we  briefly  describe agent-based    modeling     and    examine  its
methodological potential for understanding the dynamics of large-scale collectives.

Agent-based Modeling (ABM)
         Over   the past    two  decades,   computational   agent-based    modeling  has   emerged    as   an  important tool   for
social scientists  seeking    to understand     complex   social  phenomenon      (Eidelson,   1997).   In fact, evidence     from
computational ABMs is increasingly being argued and endorsed as a third legitimate source of scientific evidence, a
third way of doing science (Axelrod, 1997); the other two being direct observation and mathematical manipulation
(Jackson, 1996). It is not surprising then that computational ABMs are being used pervasively in both the natural
and the social sciences (e.g., the work cited earlier). It is only recently though that learning sciences' researchers
have begun to entertain the possibility of using computational ABMs (see Jacobson & Wilensky, 2006; Goldstone,
2006). However, their potential and use in the learning sciences and CSCL research remains largely unexplored.
Therefore, a brief description of computational ABMs is in order.

         ABMs     shift  the   focus from    factors to actors;   one   no longer   has  to  work  with    homogeneous       actors
aggregated into factors. Instead, one could maintain the diversity of agents in a population as heterogeneous actors,
each  with  its own set    of genetic   and cultural traits as well  as simple    rules of behavior   (Axelrod,    1997).    ABMs
leverage  the   cardinal principle   of complexity   stated earlier  or what   is also  known   as the   principle of  dynamical
minimalism (Nowak, 2004): simple rules at the local level can sufficiently generate complex emergent behavior at
the collective level (Bar-Yam, 2003). Requiring complex explanations for complex behavior is not an ontological
necessity   (Kapur  et   al., 2006); complex     collective behavior    may   very  well  be   explained   via  simple,  minimal
information, e.g., utility function, decision rule, or heuristic, contained in local interactions. Repeated updating and
interaction of local interactions can sufficiently generate the phenomenon over time from the "bottom up" (Nowak,
2004). Heterogeneous actors interacting with each other over space and time give rise to emergent global structures
and patterns and these, in turn, dialectically shape and constrain the subsequent interactions between agents. ABMs
model  these    emergent   behaviors    from the  "bottom   up"   by computationally    simulating    the  interactions  between
individual actors and letting the system evolve in silico (Epstein and Axtell, 1996). So, rather than positing emergent
structures ab initio, ABM seeks to generate and understand how these structures emerge in the first place and shape
the very local behaviors they emerged from (for a review, see Vallacher & Nowak, 2005). Thus, one is no longer
restricted to an analysis of static equilibria in social phenomena. With ABMs, one can take a pro-active, process-
oriented analysis of collective dynamics.

         As an example, consider the computational ABM of Social Impact Theory (Nowak, Szamrej, & Latané,
1990) that simulates how polarized clusters naturally emerge in public opinion. Building on previous theory and
empirical   evidence,    an   ABM    for social  influence    operating   via two   interlocking,  dialectical   mechanisms      is
hypothesized: the group influences each person, and each person influences the group. The intensity of the dialectic
is derived from a function of three variables: group size, personal persuasiveness, and personal position in physical
(or social) space. During the course of evolution, i.e., the iterative application of the social influence function to each
group-on-person    and   person-on-group     interaction, the  simulation  evolves   from   an  initial random    distribution   of
opinions  into  emergent      organizations of  islands (clusters)  of  minority  opinion   in  a sea   of majority    opinion; an
emergent organization of opinions not unlike that in the real world.

         In this example as well as others cited earlier, simple agents interacting with each other using simple rules
could  sufficiently generate    the  emergent   complexities   that are qualitatively   similar to what    we  observe   in  social
phenomenon.     Thus,    verisimilitude--the     plausibility  of   behavior  and   patterns--lends     explanatory     power    to
computational ABMs (and indeed to other scientific methodologies as well; the notion of sufficiency of explanation
is integral to  scientific  inquiry  though  standards  for   what  counts as  sufficient  vary   across   the fields, e.g., in the
learning sciences and CSCL research, a p-value of .05 or less is commonly accepted as sufficient to demonstrate a
causal  or  correlational     explanation).  If simple  mechanisms      operating   on  minimal    variables    produce  realistic
phenomena in a simulated world, perhaps the same simple mechanisms operating on the same minimal variables
produce real phenomena in the real world (Nowak, 2004). What seems life-like could perhaps be like life (Voiklis et
al., 2006).   Thus,  one      could  hypothesize   theoretically-sound,    computational     ABMs,      perform    computational
experiments, and validate the results against theory and empirical data (Goldstone & Janssen, 2005). In so doing,
computational ABMs push the very notion of what it means to explain a phenomenon, what Goldstone and Janssen
(2005) refer to as a "proof-by-construction." Epstein and Axtell (1996) articulate this notion succinctly in their book
Growing Artificial Societies. They argue,

                                                               329                                                       CSCL 2007
         "What constitutes an explanation of an observed social phenomenon? Perhaps one day people will
         interpret  the  question,  "Can  you     explain  it?" as  asking  "Can    you   grow  it?"  Artificial society
         modeling    allows   us to  "grow"    social    structures  in  silico demonstrating    that   certain  sets  of
         microspecifications are sufficient to generate the macrophenomena of interest. And that, after all,
         is a   central  aim. As   social    scientists, we   are  presented    with   "already  emerged"      collective
         phenomena,      and we  seek   microrules    that can  generate   them...But     the ability to grow    them--
         greatly facilitated by modern object-oriented programming--is what is new. Indeed, it holds out
         the prospect of a new, generative, kind of social science." (Epstein & Axtell, 1996, p. 20)

         While this may seem somewhat an over-enthusiastic endorsement, the ability of computational ABMs to
model   or  "grow"  emergent     social phenomenon        from  the  "bottom    up"    does provide   an ontological   coherence
between the method and its object of inquiry. Epistemological and, consequently, methodological debates within the
scientific discourse about the nature of knowledge and knowing from computational ABM experiments are also
increasingly leaning in favor of computational ABM (PNAS, 2002). Still, these debates suggest that computational
ABM is not without its own set of limitations. For example, while verisimilitude proves essential to the theory-
building   efforts of   those trying   to understand      large-scale   collective   dynamics,   clearly,  an    over-reliance on
verisimilitude may strain one's evidentiary standards (Voiklis et al., 2006). Because of this, there is a great need for
phenomenological validation of results derived from computational ABM (Goldstone & Janssen, 2005).

         How might one achieve such phenomenological validation? Cioffi-Revilla (2002) suggests concrete steps
for robust sensitivity and invariance analyses of computational ABMs to ensure that the simulated results are not
merely "synthetic outcomes." Minimally, this may include examining the sensitivity and invariance of simulated
results to system size (number of interacting agents), agent geometry (the structure of the spatial landscape on which
agents interact, e.g., lattices), and network topology. Additionally, simulated results also need to be calibrated with
respect  to real-world   phenomenon.     Phenomenological       time  calibration   would   help ascertain  the   correspondence
between notional time (the number of iterations in the simulation) and referent time (hours, days, months, years,
etc.). Phenomenological      magnitude    calibration    would  help    ensure  correspondence    between   simulated     and  real
phenomenon in terms of the magnitude or size or intensity of emergent behaviors. Phenomenological distributional
calibration  would    help   ensure  that distributions    (often   power   laws)    that   emerge   in  simulated    phenomenon
parametrically correspond with those in the real phenomenon.

         As  the   field advances,  this  list will  grow,  as  well  it should.    It is hoped  that a  persistent   conversation
between advocates and skeptics will potentially generate new ideas for phenomenological validation of computation
ABMs.    Over   time,   standards  and   metrics     for what   makes    a sufficient   explanation   may  emerge      within  this
conversation. From the conversation thus far though, one thing is crystal clear: computational ABM alone too is
insufficient; it cannot be done in isolation. One needs an integrative approach that builds on existing methodologies.
For    example, existing   theoretical   and   empirical   phenomenological         understandings    (gained   through   methods
experimental,   descriptive,  or both)  could     be used  to articulate   critical variables  and   interactional rules  between
individuals agents in a collective. This, in turn, could be used to design agents and their interactional rules, which
the computational     ABMs    could  then    simulate.   Upon    phenomenological       validation,   insights derived    from the
simulated   collective  behavior  could   in turn  inform   our  theory  building   efforts.  Importantly, a   repeated,  iterative
application of this process cycle is most essential and forms the thrust of our methodological position for the study
of computer-supported, large-scale collective dynamics. It is through such an iterative process of building from and
validating with phenomenological theory and data--an iterative "phenomenological-ABM-theory building" cycle--
that we seek a better understanding of large-scale collective dynamics: ABMs are hypothesized from theory and
empirical data. Computational experiments using ABMs, in turn, provide new insights, explain empirical data, and
inform theory building. This dialectic forms the epistemological and methodological core of our proposal.

Implications for a Research Agenda
         To reiterate, our proposal for an overarching question driving the research agenda for computer-supported
large-scale collective dynamics is: How and under what conditions does learning--structures, participation patterns
and culture, organizations, knowledge, values, norms, etc.--emerge from the interactions between individuals in
computer-supported,      large-scale  collectives,    and  how     do   these   emergents   shape    and  constrain    subsequent
interactions  between    and  participation    of individuals   in these   collectives?   The research   question,  at this stage,
remains necessarily broad. Still, it has been identified as a substantive and critical area for further inquiry not only

                                                                330                                                       CSCL 2007
by social scientists in general (e.g., Epstein & Axtell, 1996; PNAS, 2002) but also by cognitive scientists (e.g.,
Goldstone & Janssen, 2005) as well as learning scientists and CSCL researchers (e.g., Suthers, 2006). In CSCL
research, the proposed research agenda might also help validate a fundamental hypothesis underpinning small-scale
collective dynamics: small-groups form the critical organization that mediate between the individual and the larger
community (Stahl et al., 2006). If this is so, this can be tested using the phenomenological-ABM inquiry cycle. For
example, if one starts to see small group organizations emerging within the larger collective as the system evolves,
then that may be one source of evidence--a generative, bottom-up, proof-by-construction--for the hypothesis.

        We also argue, however, that any comprehensive research agenda for understanding large-scale collective
dynamics  will have   to be  multi-modal--offline  and online.    Why  this  is the  case may   not immediately   obvious.
Hence, it merits an explanation. One of the reasons for studying large-scale collective behavior in online societies
and communities such as 2nd Life, Wikipedia, communities of practice, etc. is that a lot of people are increasingly
participating in them (Jenkins, 2006). The emergence of an online community is contingent on such participation by
real people in real networks across the world, i.e., as more people participate, they collectively create emergent
structures online. In turn, this makes even more people participate setting up an increasing returns (Arthur, 1990)
feedback loop. Clearly, emergent collective behavior in these environments not only shapes but is shaped by their
spread in the  real (as  opposed  to virtual) large-scale network,   e.g., a population    or a system.  Thus,  a study of
collective behavior in large-scale online environments is incomplete without a study of how participation in such
environments   spreads  in a real population  or a system,  i.e., the real  and  the virtual  become   a co-emerging, co-
evolutionary phenomenon, and we argue that they must be examined and understood as such. If this is a plausible
proposition, then   a co-evolutionary   research  question  becomes:    How     does  emergent     behavior of  computer-
supported, large-scale collectives co-evolve with their diffusion or spread in a real (as opposed to virtual) large-
scale network, e.g., a population?

        Finally, driving this research agenda is also an opportunity for data collection that is somewhat unique to
computer-supported large-scale collectives. Many of these collectives have fairly complete records of their evolution
automatically archived. Better still, these archival data are often freely available or one can design web-crawlers to
seek required data from these archives. This clearly presents a unique opportunity to further the research agenda in
this area (Goldstone & Janssen, 2005), which is precisely what the proposed research agenda aims to achieve.

References
Arthur, W. B. (1990). Positive feedbacks in the economy. Scientific American, Feb, 92-99.
Axelrod, R. (1997). The dissemination of culture: A model with local convergence and global polarization. Journal
        of Conflict Resolution, 41, 203-226.
Barab, S. & Squire, K. (2004). Design-based research: Putting a stake in the ground. The Journal of the Learning
        Sciences, 13(1), 1-14.
Bar-Yam, Y. (2003). Dynamics of complex systems. New York: Perseus Publishing
Bielaczyc, K. & Collins, A. (in press). Design research: Foundational perspectives, critical tensions, and arenas for
        action.   To appear in J. Campione, K. Metz, & A.M. Palincsar           (Eds.) Children's learning in and out of
        school: Essays in honor of Ann Brown.
Carley, K. M., (2002). Computational organizational science: A new frontier. Proceedings of the National Academy
        of Sciences, 19(3), 7257-7262.
Cioffi-Revilla, C. (2002). Invariance and universality in social agent-based simulations. Proceedings of the National
        Academy of Sciences, 19(3), 7314-7316.
Eidelson, R.  J. (1997).   Complex   adaptive  systems in   the   behavioral  and   social sciences.   Review  of General
        Psychology, 1(1), 42­71.
Epstein, J. M., & Axtell, R. (1996). Growing artificial societies: Social science from the bottom up. Washington,
        D.C./MA: Brookings Institution Press/MIT Press.
Goldstone, R.  L.  (2006).  The complex   systems  see-change     in education.  The Journal    of the Learning   Sciences,
        15(1), 35-43.
Goldstone, R.  L.,  &  Janssen, M.   A. (2005).  Computational    models   of collective   behavior. Trends  in Cognitive
        Sciences, 9(9), 424-429.
Gureckis, T. M., & Goldstone, R. L. (under review). Thinking in groups. Manuscript submitted for publication.
Hermann, D. (Ed.) (2003). Narrative Theory and the Cognitive Sciences. Stanford, CA: Center for the Study of
        Language and Information.

                                                           331                                                    CSCL 2007
Holland, J. H. (1995). Hidden order: How adaptation builds complexity. Reading, MA: Addison Wesley.
Hutchins, E. (1995). Cognition in the wild. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Isenberg,  D.   (1986). Group   polarization: A  critical review   and meta-analysis.   Journal  of  Personality  and  Social
         Psychology, 50, 1141-1151.
Jackson, E. A. (1996). The second metamorphosis of science: A second view (SFI Working Paper No. 96-05-059).
         Santa Fe Institute.
Jacobson, M. J., & Wilensky, U. (2006). Complex systems in education: Scientific and educational importance and
         implications for the learning sciences. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 15(1), 11-34.
Jenkins, H., (2006). Convergence culture: Where old and new media collide. New York and London: New York
         University Press
Johnstone, B. (2002). Discourse analysis. Oxford: Blackwell.
Kapur, M. (2006). Productive failure. Proceedings of the International Conference of the Learning Sciences 2006,
         Bloomington, Indiana, USA.
Kapur,   M.,   Voiklis, J., Kinzer,  C., &  Black  J. (2006).      Insights into  the emergence  of   convergence  in  group
         discussions.   Proceedings   of the  International    Conference   of the  Learning Sciences    2006,  Bloomington,
         Indiana, USA.
Kauffman, S. (1995). At home in the universe: The search for the laws of self-organization and complexity. New
         York: Oxford University Press.
Koschmann, T., Zemel, A., Conlee-Stevens, M., Young, N., Robbs, J. & Barnhart, A. (2005). How do people learn?
         Members' methods and communicative mediation. In R. Bromme, F.W. Hesse & H. Spada (2005), op. cit.
         (pp. 265-294.)
Kruse, P., & Stadler, M. (1993). The significance of nonlinear phenomena for the investigation of cognitive systems.
         In H. Haken & A. Mikhailov (Eds.), Interdisciplinary Approaches to Nonlinear Complex Systems (pp. 138­
         160). Berlin, Germany: Springer-Verlag
Lave,  J., &   Wenger,   E.  (1991). Situated  learning:  Legitimate   peripheral     participation. Cambridge:   Cambridge
         University Press.
Nowak, A. (2004). Dynamical minimalism: Why less is more in psychology. Personality and Social Psychology
         Review, 8(2), 183-192.
Roschelle, J., & Teasley, S. D. (1995). The construction of shared knowledge in collaborative problem solving. In C.
         E. O'Malley (Ed.), Computer Supported Collaborative Learning (pp. 69-197). Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
Sacks, H., Schegloff, E. A., & Jefferson, G. (1974). A simplest systematic for the organization of turn-taking in
         conversation. Language, 50(4), 696-735.
Sawyer, K. R. (2005). Social emergence: Societies as complex systems. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (2003). Knowledge Building. In J. W. Guthrie (Ed.), Encyclopedia of Education.
         New York, USA: Macmillan Reference.
Schwartz, D.L. (1995). The emergence of abstract dyad representations in dyad problem solving. The Journal of the
         Learning Sciences, 4(3), 321-354.
Schwartz,   D.   L. (1999)   The   productive  agency     that drives  collaborative   learning. In   P. Dillenbourg   (Ed.),
         Collaborative learning: Cognitive and computational approaches (pp. 197-218). NY: Elsevier Science.
Stahl, G. (2005). Group cognition in computer assisted learning. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning.
Stahl, G.,     Koschmann,   T., &    Suthers, D. (2006).     Computer-supported       collaborative  learning:  An historical
         perspective.   In  R.  K. Sawyer   (Ed.), Cambridge       handbook    of the  learning  sciences. Cambridge,   UK:
         Cambridge University Press.
Suthers, D. D. (2006). Technology affordances for intersubjective meaning making: A research agenda for CSCL.
         International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 1(3), 315-337.
Suthers, D., & Hundhausen, C. (2003). An empirical study of the effects of representational guidance on
         collaborative learning. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 12(2), 183-219.
Vallacher, R. R., & Nowak, A. (2004). Dynamical social psychology: Toward coherence in human experience and
         scientific theory.  In A.   W.  Kruglanski   &   E. T. Higgins     (Eds.), Social psychology:   Handbook   of basic
         principles. New York: Guilford Publications.
Voiklis,   J., Kapur,   M.,  Kinzer, C.,  &   Black,  J.  (2006).   An  emergentist    account   of  collective cognition in
         collaborative problem solving. Proceedings of the Cognitive Science conference 2006, Vancouver, Canada.
Watts, D. J., & Strogatz, S. H. (1998). Collective dynamics of "small-world" networks. Nature, 393, 440­442.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in Society: The Development of Higher Psychological Processes. Cambridge, MA:
         Harvard University Press.

                                                               332                                                  CSCL 2007
