Animated science education: Possible pitfalls of computer supported
                                         collaborative learning

            Göran Karlsson, IT University of Göteborg, Box 8718, SE-402 75, Göteborg, Sweden, Email:
                                               goran.karlsson@ituniv.se
 Jonas Ivarsson, Göteborg University, Department of Education, Box 300, SE-405 30, Göteborg, Sweden, Email:
                                               jonas.ivarsson@ped.gu.se

         Misconceptions ­ This notion is one of the grand themes of educational research in general and science
education in particular. Students' misconceptions of various scientific principles are recurrent topics in numerous
studies, in for instance physics (D. E. Brown, 1992; Jones, 1991), biology (C. R. Brown, 1990; Odom, 1995) and
chemistry (Goh, 1993; Nicoll, 2001; Sanger & Greenbowe, 1999). The means to meet the educational challenges
spelled out by educators and educational researchers has obviously varied, but throughout the twentieth century, the
use of technological innovations has been an increasingly frequent strategy (Petraglia, 1998a, 1998b).

         Given all the time and effort invested in these matters, however, positive and stable results from the use of
educational technologies are remarkably few. To underscore this observation we would like to point to a claim by
Euler and Müller (1999) who hold that, within the area of physics education, the technology known as probeware is
the only computer-based    learning  environment  that has   a  proven  general positive learning   effect. Adding to  the
picture, that, the area of physics education is intensely studied, renders the remark by Euler and Müller even more
conspicuous.   Thus,  as a general   pattern, students seem    to be  invariably  immune   to   any simple   technological
treatments; despite whatever new technologies we introduce into our educational systems, learning continues to be a
struggle for educators and students alike.

         In  spite of this rather gloomy    outlook, ever-new     items  are added  to the list of  possible  remedies  of
educational dilemmas and student difficulties. One item on this list, and the topic of the current study, is the use of
animations as educational resources. Our specific field of investigation concerns secondary school science education
and the aim is to analyze the reasoning students perform when working with animated sequences of the carbon
cycle.

The carbon cycle as a topic for education
         One of the main topics in curricula for primary and secondary schools for education of natural science is
the carbon cycle and its vital importance for conditions concerning life on earth. Studies of the two main processes
in the carbon cycle, photosynthesis (Barak, Sheva, & Gorodetsky, 1999; Cañal, 1999; Eisen & Stavy, 1993) and
respiration (Sanders, 1993; Seymour & Longden, 1991; Songer & Mintzes, 1994) report that students' knowledge of
these  gaseous processes   is poorly understood   and  that misconceptions    are   frequent. A major  problem    with the
conceptualization  of the  processes  in the  carbon cycle   is that they involve   gaseous   forms that are  not directly
observable and therefore have to be grasped trough some representational system. Textbooks most often illustrate
the carbon  cycle  in pictures furnished  with  arrows describing    the course  of the circulating  material. Given   this
educational framing, one can conclude that there should be potential gains from developing educational material
which  build on more   dynamic    forms  of representations, e.g.  computer   animations.  From  a  research  perspective,
however, this still remains an open question.

Aim of the study
         So far, studies of animations for educational use have mainly been concentrating on the learning outcomes
in quantitative terms. In this study, we attempt to study the interplay and interaction taking place when the groups of
students collaborate in connection with the animated phenomenon. Interaction analyses of knowledge building in
small groups is an emerging and important methodology in the area of computer supported collaborative learning
(CSCL) (Stahl, 2006). Arguably, the better we understand the students' reasoning in collaborative settings about a
presented phenomenon     the  better we  can  design computer     support and   the learning  environment   in which   this
support is intended to serve. Evaluating a new educational technology also raises the problem of how the technology
influences students' conceptualization about the observed phenomenon. By analyzing the students' interaction, we
aspire to gain insights into their interpretations of the depicted phenomenon. The overall aim of this study is to

                                                           344                                                   CSCL 2007
explore some of the pedagogical potentials, as well as limitations, of animations displaying complex biochemical
processes.

Study design and implementation
          As   a   first  part   of   our    larger   research     project,  a    pedagogical    application    (available  at:
http://www.ituniv.se/~gorkar/) was developed where visualizations by means of 3-D animations depicted some of
the processes in the carbon cycle. The index page contains a text describing the main outlines of the carbon atom
cycle. At the bottom is a row of clickable miniatures linking to the different animations and to the left a menu with
links  to the pages   in  the application.  The  pages   describe   the  different processes   of; photosynthesis,   breathing,
combustion    and moldering.    Each  page   has an explanatory     text and underneath   the  captions   there is a miniature
image linking to the animations.

          A total of 40 students attending a science course in a Swedish secondary school were chosen for the study.
The students were grouped into dyads or triads, totaling 19 groups, thus allowing peer discussions and engaging the
students in reflection and comparing their different views with each other. The study was conducted during a 1.5-
hour study session for each group. Before starting their exploration of the animations the students were given a short
instruction about how to manage and navigate within the learning environment. There was no tutorial introduction of
the topic  but the students   had  the opportunity    to  consult  the  teacher  during  the learning  session. For  about  20
minutes the students worked with the animations. During this time they were given the task of writing down what
they saw happening in the different animations. After that, while still having access to the computer animation, they
were requested to discuss and jointly give answers to two problems concerning the carbon cycle.

          To get a richer picture of how the students interpreted their tasks and reasoned about the animations, three
groups were videotaped during their co-operative work. The analyses build on the videotaped interactions and focus
on  how   the students   made  use  of and   reasoned    about  the developed    computer   animations.   The   analysis of the
students'  interaction   with each  other   and  with  the technology    draws   on  extensive  work   concerning   interaction
analysis (Jordan & Henderson, 1995).

Results
          Three  salient  themes  are  discernible  in the video    material of  the  students reasoning  in  connection   with
observing the animations and solving the given tasks. These three themes all point to problematic issues that need
more   attention  and  further  scrutiny  in relation  to  the  development    of  specific  educational  materials  based  on
animations. Our ambition with this study has merely been to identify some relevant aspects that should and will be
addressed more in detail in our upcoming work.

          The first issue concerns the risk of misrepresentations and focusing the attention on misleading aspects of
the animation which is a problem in some respect related to the design of the technology. As the animations are
mere models of unobservable molecular processes, the interpretations of these representations can result in several
misleading    inferences. In  the material   such   misleading   models     could  be  discerned   when   some  students   drew
undesired  conclusions    about the driving   force behind   the   gaseous   exchange   occurring  in organisms    and organic
material. Examples were interpretations of molecules `blowing' into and away from a leaf and oxygen `coming' into
a fire or  a  dead tree   and  being   `consumed'.    In  order to  depict   the  gaseous   exchange   in photosynthesis    and
combustion    the molecules    were  illustrated as moving     objects.  For example    carbon   dioxide  molecules   are  seen
moving into a leaf and oxygen molecules are leaving the leaf. Providing molecules with locomotion can seem an
inevitable consequence of visually illustrating an otherwise passive gaseous exchange but can lead the observer to
assume such a salient feature for the actual fact.

          A second observed problem was the students' different understandings of what resources they were going
to use when performing a given task. In the initial task the students were working with, they were instructed to
"describe  what   they could   observe   in  the animations".   Depending    on   this formulation  of  the assignment,    there
sometimes arose conflicts between previous knowledge of the subject matter at hand and what were visible and
observable in the animation. An example of this conflict became visible in a discussion between two girls when
dealing with the animation of breathing. The two girls at first conclude that there occurs a transformation in the
lungs but then one of the girls pointed out that it actually is a more complex process involving the gas exchange
occurring inside the cells. The other girl then referred to the written task where they have to explain what they see

                                                               345                                                   CSCL 2007
happens, in the animation. They then concluded that it is what they could observe that they had to report in their
notes.

         The    last problem   observed   in  the  study could     be described  as   a form of  isolated   reasoning,  partly
originating from the animations. As the animations show only limited parts of the complex biochemical processes
occurring inside organic material, this can be a cause of delimited and somewhat erroneous reasoning, perhaps even
leading to  false   impressions about   what  the  animation   attempts  to  achieve.   One of  the  tasks  performed  by   the
students was to give an answer to the question about the origin of the carbon in the exhalation air. Most groups gave
the scientifically acceptable answer that the carbon originated from the food. In one, deviant, however interesting
case, the answer provided was that carbon in the exhalation air originates from exhaust emissions. When looking at
the dialogue between these two boys, it became apparent that they took as their starting point the assumption that
carbon atoms originates from an airborne external source and reaches our lungs trough the inhalation air. In their
discussion they therefore endeavored to conceive of a source emitting carbon atoms into the air. In summary, their
discussion was completely focused on the circulation of gas the in the lungs where the carbon atom never reaches
the tissue cells. In one important sense, this should be seen as an adequate and fully rational way of reasoning, given
that the animation of the breathing was only visualizing the gaseous exchange in the lungs. One interesting, however
not studied, reflection in relation to this observation is whether the animation, in comparison to static images, more
often are treated as "more complete"? From our ubiquitous acquaintance with images we know that they render
occurrences    that are  stretched out in time  rather  poorly. With   animations   however,  it could   be the  case that  the
borders between what is represented and what has been omitted are less clear.

         The exploratory character of the study makes it impossible to answer the question about the commonality
of these   occurrences.   Taken    together, these observations    point out   a field  of investigation   that needs  further
attention. In the worst case scenario, the animation will operate as a counteracting force that ­ instead of supporting
knowledge building and working against the formation of possible misconceptions ­ will do the exact opposite; it
may take the role of an antagonist of conceptual development.

References
Barak,  J., Sheva,   B., &  Gorodetsky,   M.  (1999).  As `process'   as it can  get: students' understanding    of biological
         processes. International Journal of Science Education, 21(12), 1281-1292.
Brown,   C.  R. (1990).   Some  Misconceptions     in  Meiosis  Shown    by  Students   Responding    to an Advanced    Level
         Practical Examination Question in Biology. Journal of Biological Education, 24(3), 182-186.
Brown, D. E. (1992). Using Examples and Analogies to Remediate Misconceptions in Physics: Factors Influencing
         Conceptual Change. Journal Articles; Reports - Research, 29(1), 17-34.
Cañal,  P.  (1999).  Photosynthesis    and   'inverse respiration' in  plants: an inevitable  misconception?     International
         Journal of Science Education, 21(4), 363-371.
Eisen,  B., &   Stavy,   R. (1993). How   to  make    learning of  photosynthesis  more    relevant. International  Journal of
         Science Education, 15(2), 117-125.
Euler, M., & Müller, A. (1999). Physics learning and the computer: A review, with a taste of meta-analysis. Paper
         presented at the Second International Conference of the European Science Education Research Association.
Goh,   N.-K.   (1993).   Some  Misconceptions     in  Chemistry:    A  Cross-Cultural   Comparison,    and  Implications    for
         Teaching. Australian Science Teachers Journal, 39(3), 65-68.
Jones, D. G. C. (1991). Teaching Modern Physics--Misconceptions of the Photon That Can Damage Understanding.
         Physics Education, 26(2), 93-98.
Jordan, B., & Henderson, A. (1995). Interaction analysis: Foundations and practice. The Journal of the Learning
         Science, 4(1), 39-103.
Nicoll, G.     (2001).  A   Report  of Undergraduates'    Bonding     Misconceptions.    International   Journal   of Science
         Education, 23(7), 707-730.
Odom,   A.   L.  (1995).    Secondary  &   College    Biology  Students'  Misconceptions     About   Diffusion   &    Osmosis.
         American Biology Teacher, 57(7), 409-415.
Petraglia,  J. (1998a).   The real  world  on  a  short leash:  the   (mis)application  of constructivism   to  the design  of
         educational technology. Educational Technology Research and Development, 46(3), 53-65.
Petraglia, J. (1998b). Reality by design. Manwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Sanders, M. (1993). Erroneous ideas about respiration: The teacher factor. Journal of Research in Science Teaching,
         30(8), 919-934.

                                                               346                                                   CSCL 2007
Sanger, M.  J., &  Greenbowe, T. J. (1999). An  Analysis        of College Chemistry Textbooks as     Sources of
        Misconceptions and Errors in Electrochemistry. Journal of Chemical Education, 76(6), 853-860.
Seymour, J., & Longden, B. (1991). Respiration-that´s breathing isn't it? Journal of Biological Education, 25(3),
        177-183.
Songer, C., & Mintzes, J. (1994). Understanding cellular respiration: an analysis of conceptual change in collage
        biology. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 31, 621-637.
Stahl, G. (2006). Group cognition: computer support for collaborative knowledge building. Cambridge: MIT press.

                                                         347                                               CSCL 2007
