                                   From the individual to the group:
                            tracing preservice teachers' conceptions
                                   of transformational technologies
                          Elvira K. Kati, Ramapo College of New Jersey, ekatic@ramapo.edu

          Abstract: This study describes the conceptions of technology held by two preservice teachers and
          how they may have influenced group talk and work within a collaborative technology infusion
          project. Analyses establish that preservice teachers saw technology as a utilitarian tool rather than
          a transformational one. These conceptions were influenced by their personal experiences and were
          not altered greatly by peer contributions. They could also be seen to influence group talk and the
          ultimate creation of the infusion project.

Introduction
          Due   to the   variety of   "text forms"   that  are  being   created  as a   result of improving    information   and
multimedia    technologies,    understandings    of literacy must    be  broadened   to  include  a variety  of  discourses  and
meaning-making      modes    in  order  to  include   and   emphasize     different social,  cultural,  and  material  contexts.
Technology has great potential for helping learners become constructive producers of knowledge rather than just
reactive consumers of information because its affordances encourage the integration and reformulation of both old
and new knowledge (Cope & Kalantzis, 2000; Luke, 2003; Kress; 2003; The New London Group, 2000). Although
the catchphrase "technological integration" pervades the educational realm, not all preservice teachers see the value
of incorporating technology in their teaching aims. If teacher educators are to foster effective, progressive uses of
technology,    they   must   first identify   the   conceptions     that  affect preservice    teachers'   understandings    and
implementations     of technology.    When    conceptions    of technology     interface directly  with  teachers'   pedagogical
knowledge and practices, then technologies can move from existing as mere artifacts, to being used as significant
tools, to  becoming    potential transformers    of education    (Zhao,   2003). Preservice    teachers  can make    connections
between    what  they  already   know   and   what  they  are   learning  and  thus  engage    with the  material  in ways   that
precipitate meaningful and authentic learning. For example, a webquest that hosts copies of primary sources makes
available to the preservice teacher the experience of engaging firsthand with those sources as a historian (in addition
to engaging   with  them    as a traditional  preservice   teacher). In   this way,  the preservice    teacher may   construct a
learning experience that is both socially relevant and personally meaningful, and subsequently more likely to be
applied   in other  experiences.   Such     affordances  often   aid the  transformation    of  educational  experiences    from
experiences where information is merely received and processed to experiences where information is authentically
applied and retained.

          This study explores the ways in which two preservice teacher's conceptions were received and understood
by  the  other  members     of  their  group  and   how    these understandings     may   have    influenced   the creation  and
organization   of  their subsequent    technology    infusion   project.  Sociocultural  theories   of learning  place a   strong
emphasis on the social construction of knowledge (Cole, 1996; Greeno, Collins, & Resnick, 1996; Pea, 1993). From
this perspective, the members of a group construct knowledge as they interact with each other and share information
(Cole, 1996; Greeno, Collins, & Resnick, 1996). Likewise, in a joint problem space group members interact with
each   other in  order   to arrive  at joint  solutions  to  some    task or   problem   (Hmelo,    Nagarajan,   &  Day,   2000).
Collaborative learning research also demonstrates the importance of introspective, high quality discourse because
such   discourse  provides   opportunities   for constructive   processing   (Greeno,    1998). In  this study,  the  technology
infusion   project was   designed   to serve  as  an  innovative    and  authentic  technology    learning practice   that would
encourage    preservice  teachers  to  safely model   educational    technology   integrations  before   testing them  in  "real"
classroom environments. The project asked preservice teachers to look at the processes behind the technological
media   in order   to  determine   what  purposes    those  processes    could  serve in  an   educational  context.  Preservice
teachers needed to work collaboratively in order to not only ask quality questions about the underlying principles of
their project, but also to complete the assignment.

                                                                348                                                    CSCL 2007
Methodology
         Qualitative methodology was used in order to construct a detailed, intrinsic case study that allowed for
intense descriptions and close analyses of these preservice teachers' conceptions within the larger culture of the
educational technology course (Stake, 2000; Johnson & Onwuegbuzie, 2004). Data collection included a variety of
sources: field notes, class observations, participant responses to four online, open-ended prompts, pre- and post-
project interviews, and digital video of group work during the technology infusion project. The preservice teachers
were enrolled in a required educational technology course designed to encourage the appropriation and integration
of transformative uses of technology. Their conceptions of technology were examined in order to 1) explore the
preservice teachers' understandings of technology and 2) describe and trace how these particular conceptions may
have contributed to group talk and the group collaboration that shaped the creation of the final group project. The
group examined consisted of 2 English education and 2 Social Studies education preservice teachers. This study
focused on the conceptions of the 2 English preservice teachers in comparison to the rest of their group in order to
look  at conceptions   of  technology    that may  be  formed    within    disciplines that  concentrate on   literacy aims.  The
technology    infusion  project  encouraged     each content   area   group to  create  a sample   lesson plan   that  integrated
technology for a fictional class of high school history preservice teachers. Viewing the video corpus several times
allowed for the identification of potentially significant clips, were then transcribed verbatim and coded by themes.
Occurrences    of  group   talk  that indicated  themes    that significantly   alluded   to conceptions  of  technology     were
selected  as   significant clips. .   The   analyses   of the  pre-   and  post-project   interviews  were    situated against  a
hermeneutic analysis of the themes revealed in the other data sources in order to develop an intrinsic case study for
each participant. The data was analyzed using constructivist grounded theory methodology in order to facilitate the
building   of  dominant    categories  by   coding  turns   within  all of  the individual   participant data  and     group  data
(Charmaz, 2000).

Discussion
         The   participants  described    technology   as  an  academic    tool that   could support  learning  practices.   They
described technology in general as: powerful, frightening, fascinating, facilitating, and extraneous. As a whole, the
participants' conceptions of technology did not include those of a potential transformative medium that encouraged
the emergence of new or changing educational goals and practices. Conceptions of technology as a facilitating tool
in support of traditional literacy practices prevailed in both their individual conceptions and during group discussion
of the group technology infusion project. Cross-case analyses established that the conceptions the English preservice
teachers held, which saw technology as a primarily utilitarian tool rather than a transformational one, were greatly
influenced by their personal experiences with technology and were not altered greatly by the content and/or theories
presented by their instructor or their peers in the educational technology course. Technology was referred to as a tool
that  could support    learning, but  it was  not  referenced   as  a transformational    agent  that could   potentially change
learning experiences. Elements of their conceptions could clearly be seen in different aspects of the final group
infusion project. Although the two Social Studies education group members did not exactly share all of the same
conceptions about technology as the English education participants, all group members did have several conceptions
in common. The most-referenced common conception was that technology best served education as a supportive
tool. However,     the final project  created   by all group   members     clearly exhibited  elements   that could    be directly
attributed  to statements    made   about   the utilitarian function    of technology   by   the English  education    preservice
teachers. Based on the analyses of both individual and group talk in the joint problem space, it did not appear that
the Social Studies education preservice teachers were persuaded or intimidated by the English education preservice
teachers to define and structure technological application in their project in the utilitarian way that they did. Rather,
it seemed that their own, perhaps somewhat less keenly expressed (or explored) ideas about technology, were not
only reaffirmed by the English education preservice teachers' voiced sentiments, but were subsequently and easily
adopted  as   part of  the group's    joint solution.  Despite  a   well-intended   course   curriculum,  all of   the preservice
teachers seemed to see technology as an "add-on," rather than an integrative component. Finally, these conceptions
could also be identified in the English education preservice teachers' own predications of the types of technological
integration they foresaw themselves employing in their future classes.

         Understanding preservice teachers' conceptions with regards to technological tools is important to future
technology    and  education    integration,  especially    in light  of   constructivist and    poststructuralist calls  for the
reconceptualization of traditional concepts of technology, learning, and teaching (Luke, 2003). As a result of this
research, I suggest that two key practices be incorporated into educational technology courses. If these two practices
have already been built into an educational technology course, it is critical that they are re-examined in terms of

                                                                349                                                     CSCL 2007
actual instructional  objectives,  sequencing   of both   independent     and  dependant  enabling    skills, and  genuine
opportunities for student engagement. In the educational technology course observed in this study, it appeared that
these practices were vaguely alluded to as information that the preservice teachers were assumed to have read and
comprehended (e.g., transformational technology practices were discussed in one chapter of the text for this course).
It was not   observed that   these practices were  concretely   and  deliberately   implemented  or   (rather  importantly)
modeled for the students. First, preservice teachers need to articulate and explore their conceptions of technology
within a larger  societal  context where   collaborative  activity may    encourage   community  discussion.    By  having
preservice teachers identify and communicate their understandings of technology to others, they engage both their
critical and reflexive thinking skills. Also, it may compel them to think affectively about the roles and spaces where
technology intersects their lives and to think about disengaging technology from societal and cultural biases in order
to understand what personal relevance technology has for each of them. Second, preservice teachers need to be
deliberately  engaged in   collaborative, potentially transformative  educational   technological  activities  in order  to
expand intellectual resources available to individuals and subsequently the knowledge base from which they draw
their conceptions of technology from. Activities that engage preservice teachers in inquiry projects using web-based
resources, computer   simulated   discovery,  and  exploration  or digitally  aided measurement   and  analysis   could  be
some   ways   of integrating  technology   into an educational     curriculum. Applying   such  practices     may create a
potentially different and transformative technology experience to compare to other experiences that already exist in
their personal histories.

References
Charmaz, K. (2000). Grounded theory: Objectivist and constructivist methods. In N. K. Denzin & Y. S. Lincoln
         (Eds.), Handbook of qualitative research (2nd ed.), (pp. 509-535). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications,
         Inc.
Cole, M. (1996). Cultural psychology: A once and future discipline. Cambridge, MA: Harvard.
Cope, B., & Kalantzis, M. (2000). Multiliteracies: The beginnings of an idea, in: B. Cope & M. Kalantzis (Eds.),
         Multiliteracies: literacy learning and the design of social futures. London, UK: Routledge.
Greeno, J. G. (1998). Where is teaching. Issues in Education, 4, 110-119.
Greeno, J., Collins, A., & Resnick, L. (1996). Cognition and Learning. In D. Berliner & R. Calfee (Eds.), Handbook
         of educational psychology (pp. 15-46). New York, NY: MacMillan.
Hmelo, C. E., Nagarajan, A., & Day, R. S. (2000). Effects of high and low prior knowledge on construction of a
         joint problem space. Journal of Experimental Education, 69, 36-56.
Johnson, R. B., & Onwuegbuzie, A. J. (2004). Mixed methods research: A research paradigm whose time has come.
         Educational Researcher, 33(7), 14-26.
Kress, G. (2003). Literacy in the new media age. New York, NY: Routledge.
Luke, C. (2003). Pedagogy, connectivity, multimodality, and interdisciplinarity, Reading Research Quarterly, 38(3),
         397-403.
Stake, R. E. (2000). Case studies. In N. K. Denzin & Y. S. Lincoln (Eds.), Handbook of qualitative research (2nd
         ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications, Inc.
The  New   London    Group.  (2000). A    pedagogy  of   multiliteracies: Designing   social futures. In B.    Cope &   M.
         Kalantzis   (Eds.), Multiliteracies:   literacy learning  and    the design  of social  futures.     London, UK:
         Routledge.
Zhao, Y. (2003). What teachers need to know about technology? Framing the question. In Y. Zhao (Ed.), What
         should  teachers  know    about  technology? Perspectives   and   practices. Greenwich,  CT:    Information  Age
         Publishing.

                                                            350                                                   CSCL 2007
