                          Exploring Self-Regulation in Group Contexts
           Toni M. Kempler, Rutgers University, Graduate School of Education, 10 Seminar Place, New Brunswick,
                                     NJ 08901-1183, tkempler@rci.rutgers.edu
           Lisa Linnenbrink-Garcia, Duke University, P.O. Box 90086, Durham, NC 27708-0086, llinnen@duke.edu

        Abstract: Research on group processes that advances student learning has the potential to support
        current efforts aimed at introducing technological innovations into classrooms that encourage
        student collaboration. The current study focuses specifically on group processes that emerge
        during collaborative learning by exploring how groups use behavioral and cognitive regulation
        when working on collaborative tasks. Within our analyses, we examined evidence for group self-
        regulation among two 4-person groups of sixth grade students while they worked on three
        different group activities as part of a mathematics unit on statistics and graphing. Results suggest
        that groups made consistent efforts at regulating their learning and engagement, but that the
        overall quality of group regulation varied. In addition, our findings support the application of the
        general categories of behavioral and cognitive regulation to regulatory processes in groups, but
        suggest that specific aspects of self-regulation may be especially important in group contexts.

Introduction
        As technological tools begin to promote student collaboration, it is important to look to the group process
literature in considering  how  students learn in  group settings.  Educational research emphasizes   the    benefits   of
collaboration  for learning because it provides students with   the opportunity  to question, share, and justify ideas
(Cohen, 1994). However, many of the research questions concerning the specific group processes that contribute to
advancing student learning remain unresolved (Cohen, 1994; Erkens, Prangsma, & Jaspers, 2006).        One reason for
this problem is that researchers have not carefully considered how learning processes may differ between individual
and  group   settings. Research on  self-regulated learning    suggests that self-regulation can enhance    learning    in
traditional classroom settings (Pintrich, 2000). It seems plausible that self-regulated learning would be beneficial in
group contexts as well. For example, the inherent social nature of students working in groups makes it likely that
off-task behavior will frequently occur. Moreover, the task of planning and monitoring the group's work may be
especially important because it is critical that the group ensure that all students are benefiting from the group task.

        Accordingly, the purpose of the current study is to investigate how small groups regulate their behavior and
cognition. We use prior research on individual self-regulation as a guide to understanding group self-regulation, and
thus distinguish   between  behavioral   and cognitive regulation   (Pintrich, 2000). More    specifically,  behavioral
regulation refers to a student's efforts at sustaining his or her on-task behavior and persistence by attempting to
eliminate distractions or using self-talk as a form of encouragement. Cognitive regulation consists of the processes
of planning, monitoring, and evaluation.  Planning refers to a student actively and consciously setting task-specific
goals for learning, performance on the activity, and time use.   Monitoring refers to a student's active evaluation of
understanding or progress. Student monitoring of understanding refers to checking whether he or she understands
the content being studied and the skills needed to engage in an activity. Students can also monitor their progress
toward specific task requirements and time. Monitoring may influence a change in strategy or a revisiting of the task
directions. Finally, effective self-regulators evaluate and reflect on their task performance once a problem or the task
has been completed.

Method
        The research reported here is part of a larger study investigating students' motivation and learning in small
groups in mathematics (Linnenbrink, 2005). For the current research, two groups of sixth grade students (n=8) from
the same classroom were videotaped while working in their small groups for three days across a mathematics unit
(129 minutes for each group). Both groups were heterogonous with regard to prior math knowledge. Both Group A
(Charles, David, Angela, and Rochelle) and Group B (Sam, Peter, Briana, and Julie) consisted of two males and two
females (1).

        Groups were observed working on three different tasks designed as part of a larger unit on statistics and
graphing. This mathematics unit focused on teaching students how to read and interpret a variety of types of graphs

                                                           357                                                CSCL 2007
(e.g. bar graphs, line graphs, stem and leaf plots) and how to calculate basic statistics such as the mean, median, and
mode. The 3 group activities were designed to include both lower (calculate the mean, median, mode) and higher-
order questions (e.g., after calculating the mean, median, and mode for each graph, students were asked to write a
paragraph describing which statistic best represented the data presented in the graph).

         The data were analyzed using a qualitative approach, which allowed us to explore and describe the group
self-regulatory processes that emerged. Narratives were prepared that thoroughly describe the group's interactions.
Together, the two co-authors coded the narratives along a set of 8 dimensions (e.g. quality of group interactions,
social comparison) (2). For the current study, we focus on the self-regulation dimension, but note the interplay with
other dimensions when appropriate. We distinguished an individual's attempts to regulate his or her own learning
and engagement from a group's attempts to regulate the group's learning and engagement. The latter, group self-
regulation, is the   focus of the  current paper.  Narratives   were sub-coded   for  three  aspects of group   regulation:
planning, monitoring, and behavioral engagement (3). Group interactions were characterized as planning when there
was evidence of students discussing task directions, assigning group roles, and planning how to go about solving the
problem(s).  Group    monitoring   was  coded   when    students  were  seen checking   their  work   after  completing  a
component of the task, or when monitoring progress or the time spent on the task.        We did not code the narratives
for evidence   of evaluation  because   we did  not observe   the completion of   the tasks. Group   efforts at behavioral
engagement were identified when students tried to encourage the group or an individual student to re-engage in the
task. As a final phase of the analysis, the authors reviewed the codes and created summaries for each category for
each of the narratives. The summaries provided an in-depth description of the types of group self-regulation that
occurred in the group.

Results and Discussion
Behavioral regulation
         Our analyses indicated that there were frequent attempts to behaviorally re-engage the group and that these
attempts seemed    to play  an important   role in  the functioning  of the group. The   strategies  used to    behaviorally
regulate the group included both low and high-level strategies. Groups frequently used brief, low-level attempts in
order to get students back on task. For example, students used quick reminders such as, "Come on, we need to get
back on  task!"   or "Hurry   up!" in order to  encourage  re-engagement     with the  task.  With respect to high-level
behavioral regulation, we observed three patterns. One pattern was for students to encourage behavioral engagement
by trying to involve group members in the task. For example, after realizing that Charles was disengaged, Rochelle
suggests to Charles that he could help her write the summaries of the graphs. A second observed pattern was for
group members to support a feeling of group cohesion or sense of team. For example, Briana encouraged persistence
saying "Come on, if we work hard we can get this done," suggesting "let's get this done" together. In a third pattern,
students used between-group comparison by turning to other groups and comparing their group's progress as a way
to encourage persistence and engagement.     For example, Briana compared their speed to other groups by suggesting,
"Okay we have to get back to work. Everybody else is ahead of us."           There were some drawbacks to trying to
sustain progress   and  engagement,     however.    Thoughtful    task  related questions    and attempts    at monitoring
understanding were sometimes thwarted by group members' concerns about time and maintaining engagement. For
example, while Peter and Briana were selecting data for the line graph, Peter asked a thoughtful question about how
to make a line graph using the selected data. Rather than responding to the question, Briana interrupted him in the
interest of continuing to make progress on the task. In this manner, behavioral engagement sometimes served to
focus the group on completion rather than on attempts at deepening understanding. Overall, the high-level strategies
used to behaviorally engage the group may have been more effective because these collaborative attempts seemed to
sustain on-task involvement.

Cognitive regulation
Planning. Many of the patterns observed for group planning were similar to those proposed by the literature on
individual self-regulation.  The group context, however, afforded a unique window into the process of planning. For
example, group members worked together at the beginning of an activity to interpret and clarify the presented task
directions. By  interpreting  the  task directions  together, Briana and  Peter   were able  to  recognize   that they had
misinterpreted the directions. In addition, students in the group also planned how to go about solving the task.     Here,
the group discussed the order in which to progress, planned their next steps, or assigned group roles. Groups also
demonstrated evidence of more advanced planning within the group. For example, when planning to draw the next
graph, groups discussed the type of graph which would best represent a set of data.     In an interesting pattern, we also

                                                            358                                                   CSCL 2007
observed interplay between monitoring and planning, such that students revised their plans for working on the task
when their monitoring indicated a problem. For instance, when checking whether their group had done the task
correctly, Group  B realized    that they  had  drawn the   wrong   graph   and that   they needed      to alter their plan.     The
relation between monitoring and planning seemed more advanced because students revised and adapted their plans
in response to monitoring and task feedback.

Monitoring.    As with behavioral engagement, there were varying patterns of monitoring observed. Less effective
monitoring included superficial forms of monitoring that did not serve to deepen understanding. For example, group
members would simply take over a fellow student's work without taking the time to explain their corrections and
provide feedback.  There were also attempts at group monitoring that were tempered with a negative tone or signs of
disrespect. Students were observed grabbing other students work, taunting their group members, and voicing put-
downs of a student for incorrect responses.     For example, Angela explicitly told her group that they would need to
check over David's work "because it is probably all wrong." In this way, less effective forms of monitoring seemed
to occur during negative group interactions.

           We also  observed     more   effective attempts   at   monitoring.   First,  effective  monitoring       involved     the
collaboration of  the   whole    group  in  monitoring     their  progress, rather  than    one group      member      taking    the
responsibility. Group members were observed leaning in and working together to check the group's work on the
task. For instance, Group B questioned the mean that they had calculated because it ended in a repeating decimal. As
a result, they spent 10 minutes re-working their calculations using the provided calculator, re-calculating the mean
by hand, and explaining why they continued to get the same repeating decimal. This example highlights that some
collaborative efforts at monitoring understanding were prolonged. In addition, this instance revealed an interesting
role of technology. The group seemed to question the accuracy of the calculator and wanted to ensure that they
would receive the same answer when calculating the findings by hand. As such, the use of technology in this group
seemed to encourage monitoring, as students questioned their findings. While this may seem counterintuitive in that
many  students  assume    that a calculator or  computer    "can't be wrong,"   our    findings are     encouraging    in that   the
technology seemed to encourage rather than discourage group regulation. A second pattern of effective monitoring
was seen when group members provided informational feedback in response to incorrect answers and then worked
together to incorporate the suggested changes.      For instance, Briana checked Peter's work, made suggestions about
how to clarify the bar graph, and then they both worked on incorporating her feedback.             Finally, we also observed
that between-group social comparison contributed to effective monitoring. Group B used social comparison as a
source of feedback regarding their task progress. For example, Briana noticed that they had finished the task before
other groups, saying, "Are we doing something wrong...then why are we the first ones done?" This prompted Peter
to turn and deliberately monitor the work of other teams to check if there was a section of the task that they had not
yet completed. While there were instances when groups engaged in between-group social comparison that did not
serve an informational purpose (e.g. competing with other groups), this example indicates that social comparison
may serve a regulatory purpose in that it led the group to revisit the directions and check their work.

        Overall,  our   results  indicate  that the two    groups  made     consistent  efforts at  regulating     their  group's
engagement and learning, demonstrating a high quantity of group regulation. While these attempts at group self-
regulation were frequent, the overall quality of group regulation varied, with instances of high quality planning,
monitoring  for understanding,    and   behavioral  engagement     occurring  less   frequently.   In    addition,  our   findings
suggest that the general categories of behavioral and cognitive engagement that were developed for understanding
individual  self-regulation can  be    applied to interpret  regulatory  processes   in groups.   Different      aspects  of  self-
regulation, however,    appear   to  be  especially salient   in   group  contexts.    For  example,       efforts at  behavioral
engagement were recurring and played an important role in group functioning, most likely because off-task behavior
is common in group contexts. Given the descriptive nature of the current study and the small sample, it will be
important for future research to confirm these patterns and to consider how group regulatory processes relate to
other aspects of group functioning. As technology becomes integrated into collaborative learning, future research
should also   investigate whether    these  same  group    regulatory processes    can  be  applied     to  technologically-rich
collaborative contexts.
Endnotes
(1)  Please note that all students' names are pseudonyms.
(2)  We are not able to calculate an inter-rater reliability score because all narratives were coded together. Any discrepancies
     were resolved through discussion.
(3)  Additional details regarding these codes and the process of coding are available from the authors.

                                                              359                                                       CSCL 2007
References
Cohen, E. G. (1994). Restructuring the classroom: Conditions for productive small groups. Review of Educational
       Research, 64(1), 1-35.
Erkens, G., Prangsma, M., & Jaspers, J. (2006). Planning and coordinating activities in collaborative learning. In A.
       M. O'Donnell, C. E. Hmelo-Silver & G. Erkens (Eds.), Collaborative learning, reasoning, and technology
       (pp. 233-263). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Linnenbrink, E. A. (2005). The dilemma of performance-approach goals: The use of multiple goal contexts to
       promote students' motivation and learning. Journal of Educational Psychology, 97(2), 197-213.
Pintrich, P. R. (2000). The role of goal orientation in self-regulated learning. In M. Boekaerts (Ed.), Handbook of
       self regulation (pp. 451-502). San Diego, CA, US: Academic Press.

                                                         360                                               CSCL 2007
