        Sharing Visual Context to Facilitate Late Overhearer's
        Understanding of the Handheld-Based Learning Activity
                             Kibum Kim, Deborah Tatar, Steve Harrison
                                Center for Human Computer Interaction
                                   Department of Computer Science
                                                 Virginia Tech
                          kikim@vt.edu, tatar@vt.edu, sharrison@vt.edu

         Abstract:   Peripheral    participation  is  fundamental     to   collaborative  learning.  In  the
         classroom, we see two situations in which peripheral participation is essential: formative
         assessment, during which a teacher attempts to assess the utility of an ongoing activity
         and   intervenes if necessary;   and  peer-monitoring,     during  which   a   student attempts  to
         learn what  other   students  are doing.  When     augmenting     the  classroom   with handheld,
         wireless computing     devices,  handling   peripheral    participation becomes    more  difficult.
         The proposed new handheld network service, Look, allows a late overhearer, who has not
         witnessed  the   creation of  common     ground,   to   monitor   the interaction  between    group
         members    already    engaged  in  a  collaborative     situated  learning  without    interrupting.
         Laboratory  experiences    with   our  prototypes    indicate   that  Look  balances   lightweight
         implementation,     ease  of use,  and    utility in    a way    that could    enhance  classroom
         communication and learning.

Introduction
         In discourse, people frequently switch their roles between central participation (such as speakers
or addressees) and peripheral participation (such as overhearers or bystanders). Many computer-supported
collaborative learning (CSCL) or computer-supported cooperative work (CSCW) tools focus on supporting
central participants  in  a    communication;     however,    none    that we    know    of focuses    on     peripheral
participants--that is, those who are attending to the conversation overtly or covertly but are not current
addressees  or  responders.  Considerable   evidence   exists    that such  participants   have  different    access  to
information  and  different  cognitive burdens    than do   central   participants. However,    very   little is known
about  how  to support   their needs,  especially  in light-weight    interactions. In   classroom  group     activities,
active  changes  of social   roles occur   often.  When    we    introduce handheld     technology,  we   change     the
affordances available to peripheral participants. In the context of task-oriented discourse processes with
handheld computers, in this paper we focus on one type of peripheral participant: an overhearer. We (1)
analyze the challenges faced by overhearers, (2) suggest a possible solution to overcome the challenges of
overhearers  within  the  constraints  of  our vision  of  classroom     use,  and  (3)  report experimental     results
showing the proof-of-concept of our solution in an abstracted form.

Restrictions Faced by Overhearers
         The problem of overhearer sufficiency occurs when two people engage in a primary task involving
face-to-face focused interaction using handhelds as well as speech, while a third person, the overhearer,
must monitor or join the interaction. In the classroom, this problem takes two forms: formative assessment,
during which a teacher attempts to determine whether the activity happens in an appropriate and sufficient
manner   and   intervenes if it does  not, and    peer-monitoring,    wherein    a  peer attempts   to learn     what is
happening and join the activity. At its most general, the problem can arise whenever one or more people
focus on information that cannot be seen by a latecomer, making it difficult for the latter participant to
gauge interruption and thus raising the effort involved in attaining sufficient common ground for informed
participation.

         According   to   Schober  and   Clark   (1989),   in actively    collaborating  to reach   common       ground
discourse participants possess an advantage over an overhearer because they have understood each other's
intentions. Simply  put,  discourse   participants engage     in a process  of  gathering   the moment-by-moment
evidence necessary to ensure that what is said is understood. For example, periodically a speaker might

                                                        364                                                        CSCL 2007
check an addressee's    understanding    before  proceeding  in  the conversation    and an addressee    might  also
respond to   a speaker  to  clarify  points  of confusion.  This  paradigm    presents the  collaborative view   of
language usage.

        In such a collaborative situation, overhearers face several disadvantages in understanding what is
said. First, an overhearer has limited resources in grounding the mutual beliefs, knowledge and assumptions
required for current purpose of understanding conversation. (Grounding refers to the interactive exchange
of evidence by discourse participants regarding what is understood.) Overhearers cannot join the process of
coordinating   between  a   speaker  and  an  addressee. Instead,   they  receive only   what is  given  by central
participants (i.e., speaker and addressee). Second, overhearers cannot control the pace of the conversation,
and once they lose track of the content, their misunderstandings can accumulate easily. Overhearers must
contend with each speaker's next utterance while trying to complete understanding of the last one. They do
not have    an opportunity   to  keep    the speaker   informed   of  the state   of their  confusion   and clarify
misunderstandings.   Third,  although    an  addressee can  determine    what a speaker    means   from  conclusive
evidence of their common ground, an overhearer, on the other hand, can only conjecture about what the
speaker means using inconclusive evidence. This problem intensifies if overhearers were not present to
witness the    buildup of   common    ground    between  conversational   participants.  Without   knowing     what
constitutes  the speaker's  and  addressee's    common   ground,  the overhearer   finds it difficult to determine
exactly what the speaker means. In most, if not all cases, the overhearer's only recourse is to conjecture
based on his own assumption of common ground between a speaker and an addressee.

Handheld Devices
        Since we are supporting both monitoring and the potential for joining the conversation adeptly, we
are concerned    with  device    mobility.   Handhelds   have a   relatively  restricted bandwidth    for wireless
communication.    Furthermore, we need utmost simplicity in usage. Therefore, we must ask about the utility
of minimal representations that enable peripheral participation.     Full monitoring is not an option.

        To meet these concerns, we designed a new handheld network service called Look, which provides
overhears with the ability to engage in real-time capture of activities and focal artifacts from other handheld
screens by   infrared  (IR)   beaming    or  radio frequency    (RF)  communication.     Look    allows  peripheral
participants to  get a snap     shot of  another person's   screen.  This synchronized     visual  co-presence  can
establish that the items or concepts indexed are within the joint range of attention and enable participants to
focus on the topic rather than on the technology.

Experiment
        We studied the utility of Look in a laboratory setting that abstracted and intensified the need for
shared visual understanding compared its natural occurrence in the classroom. The experiment contrasted
two different settings. In one, the overhearers had Look implemented with Bluetooth technology. In the
other, they did not. The main participants engaged in a game that involved rearranging Korean characters
(KCs) on the screen to put them in a specified order. Our hypothesis was that, compared to No-Look, Look
improves how an overhearer understands a conversation.

        Forty-four groups of three were recruited from the psychology subject pool at Virginia Tech and
randomly assigned to condition. Participants in the main task were trained in the names of KCs and asked
to use them in accomplishing the task. The principle test of the benefits provided by Look was based on
accuracy--in   this  case,  the  percentage  of KCs  placed   correctly.  According   to our  hypothesis,   the late
overhearers  whose   handhelds    were   equipped  with  the  Look   functionality   should better understand   the
conversation   and  be better   able  to rearrange the  figures   correctly. This  was   precisely what   occurred.
Through  all three  trials, late overhearers  in the group   that had access   to Look   experienced  significantly
fewer errors than did those who were not supported with Look. When the late overhearer first entered the
discourse, in trial 3, those who had access to Look were able to place 90% (SD: 17.6%) correctly, compared
69% (SD: 24.2) of those without Look (F (1, 41) = 11.15, p < .002). As the task was repeated from trials 3
to 5, correct placement increased in both the groups with Look and without Look. However, statistically
significant differences remained through trial 5 between groups with and without Look (F (1, 43) = 9.97, p

                                                        365                                                    CSCL 2007
< .003 on trial 4; F (1, 40) = 9.87, p < .004 on trial 5). These differences suggest that the Look handheld
network   service, which   provides  a  visual context   for  focal  artifacts, greatly  influences  an  overhearer's
understanding of the conversation. A second test was used to gauge, in a limited way, learning. After each
trial, participants were asked to choose a name for each KC. Over all three trials, the percentage of correct
naming of the KCs was higher for the groups who had access to Look, though the effect was in some cases
small. Specifically, on trial 4, an analysis of variance yielded a significant advantage, with F (1, 44) = 4.15,
p < .05. The result showed also marginal improvements on trial 3 and 5 (F (1, 44) = 3.22, p < .08 on trial 3;
F (1, 43) = 2.44, p < .125 on trial 5).

Discussion
        Active participation in conversation is not the only means by which learning can occur. Because it
is fundamentally a social process that dwells in contextualized settings, learning also takes place through
the observation of others (Stenning et al., 1999). Technologically, such an understanding demands that we
shift the way we approach collaborative learning. New technology paradigms broaden the scope and style
of interaction beyond the desktop into the real world, where users encounter increasingly rich contexts. For
example, the mobile nature of handheld devices like a $100 Laptop, Tablet PC, Pocket PC, and Smartphone
offers students new opportunities for increasing interaction and facilitating collaborative learning. Devising
a solution that within any particular situation satisfies both varying human needs and capabilities and the
affordances of mobile computing presents unique design challenges. In this project, we worked through the
particular set of design problems, how to use handhelds to promote the rapid acquisition of common ground
and shared meaning for peripheral participants.

        To support overhearers, we implemented special and even idiosyncratic handheld network features
and tested under   experimental   settings   that closely  approximate    the   range of  situations that we  find in
classroom  learning  aided  by  ubiquitous   and   pervasive   computing   devices.   The  proposed   new   handheld
network   service, Look,   allows a minimal    but   moderately   up-to-date  view   of  the task state. It maintains
awareness,  and    enables improved     understanding    based  on   that awareness.     User experiences   with our
prototype provide preliminary indications that Look could enhance classroom communication and learning.
Two outcome measures were used to assess the benefits of a peripheral participant having the prototype
versus not having it, placement correctness and naming KCs. Based upon our initial findings, we expect
that our studies will contribute in important ways to the ongoing discussion among educational researchers
and  computer  scientists  in   designing  mobile     computing   systems   that    will enhance  future    ubiquitous
classroom.

        The project reported in this paper is part of our continuing study investigating the influence of
shared visual context on the learning for many different types of peripheral participants, including side-
assistants and side-participants (Kim & Tatar, 2005; Kim et al., 2006). In this study, we showed a clear
advantage to overhearers from access to the Look feature. In real classroom settings, we argue that the need
for Look may not arise often, but is important when it does. Therefore, to avoid misunderstanding and to
allow flexible entry into conversations, it is worth the difficulty and expenses of implementing what may
appear to be "extra" functionality. Further, we have shown that such functionality can be useful without
increasing the computational cost of continuous monitoring.

References
Kim, K.   &   Tatar, D.  (2005)   Weak   Guidance     with  "Look"   Functionality    in Handheld-based     Classroom
        Activities.   Proceedings    of  the 2005    Conference   on Computer-Supported       Collaborative  Learning
        (CSCL '05), Taipei, Taiwan,      296-300.
Kim, K, Tatar, D. & Harrison, S. (2006) Handheld-Mediated Communication to Support the Effective Sharing of
        Meaning in Joint Activity. Proceedings of the 4th IEEE International Workshop on Wireless, Mobile
        and Ubiquitous Techniques in Education, Athens, Greece, 82-89.
Schober, M. & Clark, H.(1989). Understanding by Addressees and Overhearers, Cognitive Psychology, 21, 211-
        232.
Stenning, K., McKendree,    J., Lee, J., Cox,  R.,    Dineen, F., &  Mayes,     T., (1999) Vicarious  Learning  from
        Educational   Dialogue,   Proceedings     of the 1999  Conference   on   Computer-Supported      Collaborative
        Learning (CSCL '99), Stanford, CA, USA.

                                                          366                                                    CSCL 2007
