Group Awareness and Self-Presentation in the Information-Exchange
                             Dilemma: An Interactional Approach

Joachim Kimmerle, Ulrike Cress, Knowledge Media Research Center, Konrad-Adenauer-Str. 40,
                                                    72072 Tuebingen
                       Email: j.kimmerle@iwm-kmrc.de, u.cress@iwm-kmrc.de

       Abstract. A common challenge in many situations of computer-supported collaborative learning
       is   increasing the  willingness    of  those  involved    to  share   their knowledge     with  other group
       members.     As a prototypical     situation of  computer-supported      information    exchange,   a shared-
       database setting was chosen for the current study. This information-exchange situation represented
       a social dilemma: while the contribution of information to a shared database induced costs and
       provided    no  benefit for  the individual,  the   entire group   suffered  when   all members   decided   to
       withhold information. In order to alleviate the information-exchange dilemma, a group-awareness
       tool   was employed.    It was   hypothesized    that participants  would    use group   awareness    for self-
       presentational   purposes.    For   the    examination  of    this assumption,    the   personality   variable
       `protective self-presentation' (PSP) was measured. An interaction effect of group awareness and
       PSP    was   found: when     an  awareness    tool  provided   information    concerning     the contribution
       behavior   of  each individual,    this tool was   used as  a  self-presentation    opportunity.  In  order to
       understand this effect in more detail, single items of the PSP-scale were analyzed.

Introduction
       A crucial prerequisite for nearly all settings of computer-supported collaborative learning (CSCL) is the
willingness of the involved persons to share their knowledge and the information they possess. If those involved
refuse to share their knowledge with the other members of a team of learners or collaborators, team work is much
less efficient than it could be. Indeed benefiting from others' knowledge by reciprocally exchanging information is
the very option open to team members which makes cooperative team work efficient (Hinds & Kiesler, 2002). From
the perspective of CSCL it is of particular interest and relevance to analyze ways in which information exchange
between team members interacting via computers can be supported (Olson & Olson, 2003).

       The    establishment  of   a shared  database    is one    possibility  when  it comes    to making    individual  team
members' knowledge available to the whole group. Such a shared database enables each group member to enter
information  into and  retrieve   information  from   the  database   (Jian   & Jeffres,   2006). Technically    speaking,  the
implementation of a shared database is quite simple. Practically speaking, however, many problems tend to arise:
many studies report low motivation of team members in entering information into the database and thus making it
available for their group  mates    (Ardichvili,   Page,   &  Wentling,    2003;    Argote &   Ingram,   2000;   Huber,  2001;
Orlikowski, 1993; Yuan, Fulk, Shumate, Monge, Bryant, & Matsaganis, 2005).

       One important explanation for this poor willingness to share information with others will be presented in
the following section on the so-called information-exchange dilemma. Subsequently, a concept will be discussed
which may potentially be successful in influencing people's willingness to share information: the concept of group
awareness.  Following  this,   a  further aspect   supposed   to  affect  people's   information-sharing     behavior  will be
presented: the need for self-presentation. This need is conceptualized as a personality variable.

       An empirical section follows these theoretical considerations, beginning with a description of the methods
employed in the current study. The results of the study are subsequently reported. In conclusion, the major findings
are reviewed in the discussion section.

The Information-Exchange Dilemma
       From a psychological point of view, a poor willingness to share knowledge with others is not a surprising
observation:  transmission of  information     is often regarded   as a   loss of   power, and  entering   information   into a
database is additionally associated with extra time and effort. Therefore, the decision regarding whether to pass on

                                                             367                                                     CSCL 2007
information   or  not, represents  a  social dilemma    (Dawes,    1980;  Kollock, 1998;   Komorita  &  Parks,    1995;  Olson,
1965; Weber, Kopelman, & Messick, 2004). An individual group member does not benefit from sharing his/her own
knowledge with others (Cabrera & Cabrera, 2002; Kalman, Monge, Fulk & Heino, 2002). On the contrary, he/she
saves time    and  remains   in  a  leading  or  advantaged    position   by withholding   information.  On    these  grounds,
withholding information is the most advantageous strategy. An individual is able to retrieve information from the
database without contributing information in turn (Cress & Hesse, 2006). However, if all involved group members
decide to behave according to this self-advantageous strategy, then nobody can use the shared database and each
member has to compile the needed information for his/herself. As a consequence, the group as a whole suffers from
individually efficient behavior (Cress & Kimmerle, in press; Cress, Kimmerle & Hesse, 2006).

         However, recent research has shown that the individual's willingness to share knowledge in the face of the
information-exchange dilemma can be influenced by the use of so-called group-awareness tools (Cress & Kimmerle,
in press). The notion of group awareness and the application of corresponding tools will thus be presented in the
following section.

The Concept of Group Awareness
         Over    the last few   years, the   concept    of group awareness   has  found   increasing interest  in the  relevant
literature (e.g. Begole, Rosson & Shaffer, 1999; Briggs, 2006; Endsley, 1995; Gross, Stary & Totter, 2005; Soller,
Martinez,   Jermann    &  Mühlenbrock,     2005;    Tam    &   Greenberg,  2006).  Group-awareness     refers  to information
received by   members     of a  group  about    the other  group  members,   about  mutually   employed  objects,   and  about
current group processes, in order to efficiently carry out certain tasks (Gross et al., 2005). Normally, in face-to-face
situations, this kind of information is directly available. In situations of computer-mediated communication (CMC)
and CSCL, however, group-awareness information is only available via technical support.

         Carroll, Neale, Isenhour, Rosson and McCrickhard (2003) distinguish three kinds of awareness in CMC
settings and point out that each variant can be supported by certain tools:
·  With social awareness, Carroll et al., (2003) refer to the user's consciousness of the presence of others. A tool
   which   makes     the presence  of  others   visible (e.g. by providing   photographs   of the team members)     can  foster
   social awareness.
·  Tools which support action awareness provide information about what is going on, e.g. which actions the group
   is carrying out.
·  Activity awareness relates the actions of group members to the task to be performed. Activity-awareness tools
   therefore provide information regarding completion of the group goal: activity-awareness increases knowledge
   on the group's task performance.

         In   the current  study,   a  group-awareness      tool was   used  to   provide  social-awareness    information  by
presenting  personal     information  as well    as photographs    of the involved  team   members.   Additionally,    the tool
fostered activity awareness by presenting feedback on the contributions made to the database by group members.
Awareness     information  was   presented    in three  conditions    differing according  to their  richness: In  the  control
condition no activity awareness was induced. In the group-feedback condition, activity awareness in the sense of
information about cooperative group members was provided. And in the individual-feedback condition, information
was provided concerning cooperative group members as well as additionally allowing for self-presentation.

         These    three  conditions  were  implemented      on the  basis of our  belief that the individual's  need  for  self-
presentation could play an important role in their willingness to share their knowledge with others. In order to test
whether this is the case, self-presentation as a personality variable is considered in the current study. In the following
section, the self-presentation construct will be explored, before we turn to the study's hypotheses.

Self-Presentation
         Self-presentation is an important motivation of behavior in both offline (Taylor & Altman, 1987) and online
situations (Joinson,     2001; Joinson   &   Dietz-Uhler,   2002;   Wallace, 1999;  Walther,   1996).  Self-presentation   and
impression  management       have  recently  been   examined   in   online-dating settings (Ellison, Heino,   &   Gibbs, 2006;
Gibbs, Ellison, & Heino, 2006) and diaries in web communities (Moinian, 2006), as well as with respect to personal
web sites (Marcus, Machilek, & Schütz, 2006; Schau & Gilly, 2003). Self-presentation refers to strategic activities
designed   to give   certain   impressions   to  other  persons  (Goffman,   1959).  In  computer-supported     environments,

                                                                368                                                  CSCL 2007
individuals have greater control over their self-presentational behavior than in offline settings. Online interactions
can thus be managed more strategically. For this reason, self-presentation is also thought to play an important role in
information-exchange situations. It is assumed that virtually all people have a need for and the ability to present
themselves in a certain way.

         It is, however, also conjectured that people differ in terms of the intensity of this need. In line with this
consideration, Snyder (1974, 1987) developed a personality construct termed self-monitoring. The self-monitoring
(SM) of expressive behavior comprises self-observation and self-control and is guided by situational cues to social
adequacy  (Gangestad     &  Snyder,  2000).  In an   alternative conception   of  the SM    construct  proposed  by  Wolfe,
Lennox, and Cutler (1986), a distinction is made between acquisitive and protective self-presentation. Acquisitive
self-presentation pertains to the tendency to actively realize social profits, i.e. an acquisitive self-presenter presumes
social reward given that she/he manages to behave appropriately. Protective self-presentation (PSP) refers to the
avoidance of social rejection, i.e. a protective self-presenter fears social disapproval if he/she does not manage to
behave appropriately in a social situation.

         We   believe that  people  are   interested in self-presentation  in general.  We  thus suppose    that individuals
present themselves in a more positive light when their behavior is identifiable by others. Consequently, we expect
the highest contribution rate to occur in the individual-feedback condition:
                              A main effect for activity awareness with respect to participants'
                                          cooperation rate is hypothesized (H1).

         In addition, it is supposed that high protective self-presenters are more cooperative than low protective self-
presenters, when activity awareness allows for the identification of individual behavior and consequently for self-
presentation. Where such activity awareness is lacking, high and low protective self-presenters are assumed to be
equally cooperative:
                            An interaction effect of PSP and activity awareness with respect to
                                          cooperation rate is hypothesized (H2).

Method
Participants
         119 university students participated in the study (70 women and 49 men, mean age = 24.3 years). They
were informed    that they  would  be   participating in  a group    study using  computers.  Participants  were  randomly
assigned  to  one of  the three conditions  with 43     participants in the control  condition,  37 in the  group-feedback
condition, and 39 in the individual-feedback condition.

Procedure
         Participants were led to believe that they would be one of six persons working in a group that is distributed
across six locations and that is connected via a database. In fact, participants worked independently of the others: the
behavior of the other participants was simulated using software. The participants' task entailed the calculation of
fictitious salespersons' salaries (cf. Cress, 2005). In a first phase, participants were required to calculate the base
salaries of as many salespersons as possible. In a second phase, the total salaries were to be calculated. Participants
received money according to the number of base and total salaries calculated. Following the calculation of a base
salary, participants had to decide whether to share their result with the other group members by contributing it to the
shared database. When contributing a base salary, the respective participant had to wait for the somewhat lengthy
transfer of  the  result to the database.  During    this waiting time,    he/she was   not able to continue  with   further
calculations. Hence,  each    participant could calculate   and  consequently   earn  more,  the less  base salaries she/he
contributed to the database. In the second phase, participants received money for each total salary calculated. In
calculating a total salary participants required the appropriate base salary. If this base salary was not available (i.e. it
was neither in the database nor had it been calculated by the participant in the first phase), the participant had to
catch up on this calculation in the second phase. This resulted in a loss of time in which the participant was not able
to earn money. Each person therefore earned less, the less pieces of information in the database. Hence, participants
found themselves in a characteristic information-exchange dilemma: an individual earned less, the more information
he/she shared  with   others, and at the   same time,   everybody    earned more,   the more  pieces   of information were
available in the database. The succession of phase 1 and 2 was repeated three times. Except for the control condition,

                                                             369                                                  CSCL 2007
awareness information was presented by an awareness tool after each of the three trials. The different experimental
conditions are presented in the following.

Conditions
       Three experimental conditions were realized in this study:
·  a control condition without feedback.
·  a group-feedback condition in which an awareness tool presented the average contribution behavior of the other
   five group members and the participant's own contribution behavior in the first phase of the preceding trial (cf.
   Figure 1).
·  an individual-feedback condition in which an awareness tool separately provided the contribution behavior of
   each group member in the first phase of the preceding trial (cf. Figure 2).

                                                       8
                                                              8

                                                       6
                                                              6

                                                       44

                                                       22

                                                        00

                                                                                          Ma rnti                              Du rc h sc h n itd e rK o le g e n
                                                                              MaMrtairtnin                    AvDeurrachgscehnoitft dgerroKuolplegmenates

                    Figure 1. The group-feedback condition with "Martin" as relevant participant.

                                                            8
                                                                     8

                                                            6
                                                                     6

                                                            4
                                                                     4

                                                            2
                                                                     2

                                                             0
                                                                     0                      Ma rnti                              D u rc h sc h n tid e rK o el g e n
                                                                                       Martin                           Durchschnitt der Kollegen

         Figure 2. The individual-feedback condition enabling identification of each participant's behavior.

       In both feedback conditions, the contribution behavior of cooperative group members was presented on the
basis of the same pool of data. Photographs of the team members were provided in all conditions in order to foster
social awareness.

                                                                                                                  370                                                                                      CSCL 2007
Measures
       A German version of the self-presentation scale according to Wolfe et al. (1986) was employed. This scale
consists of two subscales (Laux & Renner, 2002): "acquisitive self-presentation" and "protective self-presentation".
The subscale "acquisitive  self-presentation" was    excluded     based on considerations   that the  individual-feedback
condition ­ as operationalized here ­ is socially too reduced to allow for social profits such as making new friends.
The subscale "protective  self-presentation"  on    the other hand,  was  considered    relevant for the present research
question, given the adequate situational authenticity, whereby individuals sensitive to such processes could indeed
experience social disapproval. The PSP-subscale consisted of twelve items. All items were rated on a 4-point scale
with endpoints labeled 1 (not at all) and 4 (very).

Results
       The employed scale showed satisfactory internal consistency. Cronbach's alpha for PSP was =.83. With
respect to PSP, participants were separated into two groups via a median split (cf. MacCallum, Zhang, Preacher, &
Rucker, 2002). Cooperation rate was defined as the quotient of contributed and totally calculated base salaries. This
quotient in the second and third trial served as the main dependent variable (the first trial was excluded because
feedback was provided for the first time after the first trial).

Test of Hypotheses
       In order to test both hypotheses, an ANOVA with PSP and group awareness as independent variables was
calculated. A marginally significant main effect     of group awareness with respect to cooperation rate (H1), F(2,
113)=2.63, p=.076 was yielded. Post-hoc tests (Scheffé) showed that only the control condition and the individual-
feedback condition differed significantly from   each    other:   Mcc=.54 (SD=.35)    vs. Mifc=.69 (SD=.28). The  group-
feedback condition lay between the two: Mgfc=.56 (SD=.32).

       The ANOVA also showed a significant interaction effect         for PSP and group awareness (H2),
F(2, 113)=4.28, p=.016. Figure 3 illustrates this effect.

                       0,8

                       0,6

                                                                                             high PSP
                       0,4
                                                                                             low PSP

                       0,2

                         0
                               no feedback          group feedback        individual
                                                                          feedback

    Figure 3. Cooperation rates for the three conditions according to PSP (low vs. high protective self-presenters).

       As expected, there was no difference between high and low protective self-presenters in the group-feedback
condition: Mlow=.52 (SD=.33) vs. Mhigh=.62 (SD=.32), p>.05, but a significant difference in the individual-feedback
condition: Mlow=.61 (SD=.30) vs. Mhigh=.77 (SD=.24), p<.05. However, an unexpected difference was also found in
the control condition: Mlow=.65 (SD=.33) vs. Mhigh=.43 (SD=.34), p<.05.

                                                            371                                                  CSCL 2007
Single Items Analyses
        In order to better understand the way in which the need for PSP influences people's willingness to share
their knowledge, it is worthwhile taking a closer look at those items which were more exactly able to predict the
protective self-presenters' selective contribution behavior. We found three items showing the same interaction effect
with group awareness as the total twelve-item scale. In the following list, these items are presented with their exact
wordings (own translations from German) and corresponding statistics resulting from ANOVAs with the PSP-items
and group awareness as dependent variables:
1.  "If all persons of a group act in a certain manner, then I feel that this must be the appropriate way to behave."
    The ANOVA yielded an interaction effect with respect to cooperation rate, F(2, 113)=6.03, p=.003.
2.  "The slightest hint of disapproval in the eyes of another person is sufficient to make me change my behavior."
    The ANOVA yielded an interaction effect with respect to cooperation rate, F(2, 113)=4.73, p=.011.
3.  "It is important for me to fit into the group to which I belong." The ANOVA yielded an interaction effect with
    respect to cooperation rate, F(2, 113)=3.54, p=.032.

        That which these three items have in common is that they all loaded onto the same factor resulting from a
main component analysis of the twelve PSP-items with quartimax rotation. This procedure revealed three factors.
·   The first factor had an eigenvalue of 4.30 and accounted for 35.8% of the explained variance. With regard to
    content and in accordance with Laux and Renner (2002), we labeled this factor "protective variability".
·   The second factor had an eigenvalue of 1.93 and accounted for 16.1% of the explained variance. With regard to
    content, we labeled this factor "fear of social disapproval".
·   The third factor had an eigenvalue of 1.06 and accounted for 8.9% of the explained variance. With regard to
    content and in accordance with Laux and Renner (2002), we labeled this factor "protective social comparison".

        The three items showing an interaction effect with group awareness all loaded onto the factor "fear of social
disapproval".

Discussion
        The individual's motivation to share her/his knowledge with other persons is an essential precondition for
successful CSCL (Stahl, Koschmann, & Suthers, 2006). A central reason for people's poor willingness to share their
knowledge can be found in the viewpoint that computer-supported knowledge exchange represents a social dilemma.
The  present  article studied   the role of group  awareness    and  self-presentation within  this information-exchange
dilemma. On the one hand, the study entailed the examination of three different group-awareness conditions in a
dilemma situation. On the other hand, the personality variable of protective self-presentation was investigated. The
study thus   takes an explicitly  interactional perspective, i.e. it examines   situational and personal  determinants of
behavior as well as their interactions within an information-exchange dilemma. The construct of PSP as a personality
variable is employed as an auxiliary means, insofar as knowledge concerning individuals' characteristics can help
provide information about the situation in which these people exhibit a certain behavior. In doing so one can learn
more about the effectiveness of group awareness. To this end, we observed the way in which persons with high and
low  scores  in  PSP   reacted  to  the  group-awareness information     provided.  Based    on observations   of ensuing
behavioral reactions, conclusions can be drawn regarding the effect of group awareness which is generated by a
respective tool.

        Persons receiving individual feedback on cooperative group mates clearly increase their cooperation rate in
comparison to those receiving no feedback. The result showing that group feedback failed to increase cooperation
rates suggests that ­ at least in the study reported here ­ mere feedback on cooperative group mates in itself does not
necessarily  enhance   the willingness     to share one's    knowledge.    Rather, in   addition    to this perception of
cooperativeness and the resulting trust in others in the information-exchange dilemma (Kimmerle, Cress, & Hesse,
2006), self-presentation opportunities should be made available.

        The   interaction  effect   found for feedback and   PSP     shows that persons  with   a high  need  for PSP  are
particularly  cooperative  in    the    individual-feedback  condition.    However,    without    feedback   allowing  for
identifiability, it is this very subgroup, that proves particularly selfish in demonstrating a low willingness to share
knowledge. Two insights can be gained from this finding. Firstly, we learned how group awareness can be affected
by individual feedback: a situation in which the behavior of every single person concerned can be exactly identified
is used by   the   participants in  the  information-exchange   dilemma    for purposes  of  self-presentation. Secondly,

                                                            372                                                   CSCL 2007
important insights can be gained concerning the psychology of individuals with a high need for PSP: even though
this result cannot be generalized beyond the current CMC setting, it can be concluded that high protective self-
presenters do not simply try to present themselves in a positive manner when their activities are recognizable to
others, but that they are also especially uncooperative when this is not the case.

        Taking    a  closer   look at  those  individual items    showing  the same   interaction effects  with   the group-
awareness   condition  as  the  total PSP-scale,   can facilitate a more  detailed understanding  of   high protective  self-
presenters'   contribution  behavior.   In its entirety, the   PSP  construct  is  composed  of   three facets: "protective
variability", "fear of social   disapproval",  and  "protective   social comparison".   The fact  that the individual  items
concerned all load onto the factor "fear of social disapproval" suggests that contribution behavior is caused merely
by people's dread of being negatively evaluated by their peers. However, this can in our opinion only explain why
high protective self-presenters enhance their cooperation rate when their behavior is identifiable. It cannot, however,
explain why these very individuals decrease their cooperation rate in an anonymous situation. Further research is
required to examine this issue in greater detail.

        While    underlying    processes   of  information  exchange     were not  uncovered in   their entirety, it  can be
concluded   that the approach     adopted  in  the present  article ­ gaining  new  insights by   capturing interactions  of
personal and situational aspects ­ proved fruitful. This approach could help researchers gain new insights concerning
the effects of group awareness and the influence of PSP as a personality variable. It is therefore our view that such
an interactional perspective can also be recommended for research in other issues of CMC and CSCL.

References
Ardichvili, A.,  Page, V.,    & Wentling,   T. (2003).   Motivation   and barriers to participation in  virtual knowledge-
        sharing communities of practice. Journal of Knowledge Management, 7, 64-77.
Argote, L. & Ingram, P. (2000). Knoweldge transfer: A basis for competitive advantages in firms. Organizational
        Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 82, 150-169.
Begole, J.,   Rosson,  M.   B., &   Shaffer,   C.  A., (1999). Flexible   collaboration transparency:   Supporting    worker
        independence       in  replicated   application-sharing    systems.   ACM   Transactions    on   Computer-Human
        Interaction, 6, 95-132.
Briggs, R. O. (2006). On theory-driven design and deployment of collaboration systems. International Journal of
        Human-Computer Studies, 64, 573-582.
Cabrera, A. & Cabrera, E. F. (2002). Knowledge-sharing dilemmas. Organization Studies, 23, 687-710.
Carroll, J. M., Neale, D. C., Isenhour, P. L., Rossen, M. B., & McCrickard, D.S. (2003). Notification and awareness:
        Synchronizing task-oriented collaborative activity. International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 58,
        605-632.
Cress, U. (2005). Ambivalent effect of member portraits in virtual groups. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning,
        21, 281-291.
Cress, U. & Hesse, F. W. (2006). The social complexity in establishing and sharing information resources. In J. Elen
        & R. E. Clark (Eds.), Handling complexity in learning environments: Research and theory (pp. 67-87).
        Amsterdam: Pergamon.
Cress, U. &   Kimmerle,    J. (in  press). Guidelines   and feedback  in  information exchange:   Behavioral    anchors   and
        descriptive norms in a social dilemma. Group Dynamics: Theory, Research, and Practice.
Cress, U., Kimmerle, J., & Hesse, F. W. (2006). Information exchange with shared databases as a social dilemma:
        The effect of metaknowledge, bonus systems, and costs. Communication Research, 33, 370-390.
Dawes, R. M. (1980). Social dilemmas. Annual Review of Psychology, 31, 169-193.
Ellison, N., Heino, R., & Gibbs, J. (2006). Managing impression online: Self-presentation processes in the online
        dating environment. Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication, 11, 415-441.
Endsley, M. R. (1995). Toward a theory of situation awareness in dynamic systems. Human Factors, 37, 32-64.
Gangestad, S. W. & Synder, M. (2000). Self-monitoring: Appraisal and reappraisal. Psychological Bulletin, 126,
        530-555.
Gibbs, J. L., Ellison, N. B., & Heino, R. D. (2006). Self-presentation in online personals: The role of anticipated
        future interaction, self-disclosure, and perceived success in Internet dating. Communication Research, 33,
        152-177.
Goffman, E. (1959). The presentation of self in everyday life. New York: Anchor.

                                                              373                                                 CSCL 2007
Gross, T., Stary, C.,  &  Totter, A.  (2005). A   user-centered awareness  in   computer-supported    cooperative    work-
        systems: structured embedding of findings from social sciences. International Journal of Human-Computer
        Interaction, 18, 323-350.
Hinds, P. & Kiesler, S. (2002). Distributed work. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Huber, G. P. (2001). Transfer of knowledge in knowledge management systems: Unexplored issues and suggested
        studies. European Journal of Information Systems, 10, 72-79.
Jian, G. & Jeffres, L. W. (2006). Understanding employees' willingness to contribute to shared electronic databases:
        A three-dimensional framework. Communication Research, 33, 242-261.
Joinson, A. N. (2001). Self-disclosure in computer-mediated communication: The role of self-awareness and visual
        anonymity. European Journal of Social Psychology, 31, 177-192.
Joinson, A. N. & Dietz-Uhler, B. (2002). Explanations for the perpetration of and reactions to deception in a virtual
        community. Social Science Computer Review, 20, 275-289.
Kalman, M., Monge, P., Fulk, J., & Heino, R. (2002). Motivations to resolve communication dilemmas in database-
        mediated collaboration. Communication Research, 29 125-154.
Kimmerle, J., Cress, U., & Hesse, F. W. (2006). A challenge for knowledge management: Situational and personal
        factors   of  influence   in web-based    information-exchange.   In  M.    Boumedine,     &  C.  Touzet     (Eds.),
        Proceedings    of the  Forth  IASTED   International   Conference on    Knowledge   Sharing   and   Collaborative
        Engineering (pp. 57-62). Anaheim, Calgary, Zürich: ACTA Press.
Kollock, P. (1998). Social Dilemmas: The anatomy of cooperation. Annual Review of Sociology, 24, 183-214.
Komorita,  S.  S. &   Parks,  C.  D.  (1995). Interpersonal  relations: mixed-motive    interaction.  Annual   Review    of
        Psychology, 46, 183-207.
Laux,  L.  &  Renner,  K.-H.   (2002).  Self-Monitoring   und  Authentizität:   Die verkannten     Selbstdarsteller. (Self-
        monitoring and authenticity: The misjudged self-presenters). Zeitschrift für Differentielle und Diagnostische
        Psychologie, 23, 129-148.
MacCallum,    R. C.,  Zhang,  S., Preacher, K. J., &  Rucker,   D. D.   (2002). On  the practice   of dichotomization    of
        quantitative variables. Psychological Methods, 7, 19-40.
Marcus,   B., Machilek,   F., &   Schütz, A.  (2006). Personality  in   cyberspace:  Personal  web    sites as media     for
        personality expressions and impressions. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 90, 1014-1031.
Moinian, F. (2006). The construction of identity on the internet: Oops! I've left my diary open to the whole world!
        Childhood: A Global Journal of Child Research, 13, 49-68.
Olson, M. (1965). The logic of collective action. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Olson,  G. M.  &  Olson,  J.  S.  (2003). Human-computer-interaction:    Psychological     aspects of the   human    use of
        computing. Annual Review of Psychology, 54, 491-516.
Orlikowski, W. (1993). Learning from notes: Organizational issues in groupware implementation. Decision Support
        Systems, 15, 267-284.
Schau, H. J. & Gilly, M. C. (2003). We are what we post? Self-presentation in personal web space. Journal of
        Consumer Research, 30, 385-404.
Snyder, M. (1974). Self-monitoring of expressive behavior. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 30, 526-
        537.
Snyder, M.    (1987). Public   appearances    and private realities: the  psychology    of self-monitoring.   New    York:
        Freeman.
Soller, A., Martinez, A., Jermann, P., & Mühlenbrock, M. (2005). From mirroring to guiding: A review of the state
        of art technology for supporting collaborative learning. International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in
        Education, 15, 261-290.
Stahl, G., Koschmann, T., & Suthers, D. D. (2006). Computer-supported collaborative learning. In R. K. Sawyer
        (Ed.), Cambridge handbook of: The learning sciences (pp. 409-425). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Tam, J. & Greenberg, S. (2006). A framework for asynchronous change awareness in collaborative documents and
        workspaces. International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 64, 583-598.
Taylor, D. & Altman, I. (1987). Communication in interpersonal relationships: Social penetration processes. In M.
        E. Roloff and G. R. Miller (Eds.), Interpersonal processes: New directions in communication research (pp.
        257-277). Thousand Oaks: Sage.
Wallace, P. (1999). The psychology of the internet. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Walther, J. B. (1996). Computer-mediated communication: Impersonal, interpersonal, and hyperpersonal interaction.
        Communication Research, 23, 3-44.

                                                           374                                                  CSCL 2007
Weber, J. M., Kopelman, S., & Messick, D. M. (2004). A conceptual review of decision making in social dilemmas:
       Applying a logic of appropriateness. Personality and Social Psychology Review, 8, 281-307.
Wolfe, R. N., Lennox, R. D., & Cutler, B. L. (1986). Getting along and getting ahead: Empirical support for a theory
       of protective and acquisitive self-presentation. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 50, 356-361.
Yuan, Y., Fulk, J., Shumate, M., Monge, P. R., Bryant, J. A., & Matsaganis, M. (2005). Individual participation in
       organizational information commons: The impact of team level social influence and technology-specific
       competence. Human Communication Research, 31, 212-240.

                                                         375                                               CSCL 2007
