 Demonstration of a Discussion Terminal for Knowledge Acquisition
                     and Opinion Formation in Science Museums

 Kristin Knipfer, Department of Applied Cognitive Psychology and Media Psychology, University of Tuebingen,
                     Carmen Zahn, Friedrich W. Hesse, Knowledge Media Research Center,
                             Konrad-Adenauer-Strasse 40, 72072 Tuebingen, Germany
                  Email: k.knipfer@iwm-kmrc.de, c.zahn@iwm-kmrc.de, f.hesse@iwm-kmrc.de

        Abstract: There is a trend for active visitor engagement at science museums: Visitors' opinions
        about   science topics are     often integrated into   exhibitions,  today. Modern    discussion-based
        installations are described in this paper. In particular, we present a computer-mediated discussion
        terminal  which   was designed   to  mediate  and  encourage  elaboration   on  and  opinion exchange
        about the   topic nanotechnology     as  one of the  most explosive   science  topics nowadays.   It  is
        supposed  to foster   critical thinking, knowledge     acquisition, and opinion  formation   at science
        museums. The rationale behind and assumptions about the impact of this discussion terminal are
        explicated.

Science Museums and Public Understanding of Science
        Oppenheimer has already stated 1968 that there is an increasing need to develop public understanding of
science and technology, and today - due to rapid growth of new technologies - this need is even increasing. Informal
learning in science museums can be a major contributor in promoting public understanding of science as museums
are one central medium    in  communicating     scientific ideas and presenting   relevant  objects  (Durant,  1992). In
addressing current socio-scientific issues science museums are challenged to present the ambiguity and controversy
of these topics and to support visitors in developing reflective and critical thinking. Boyd (1998, p. 214) considers
the modern science museum as a "marketplace of multiple points of view, a forum where controversy can be aired".
However, museums might not only provide information about competing viewpoints and sources but also place
visitors into the centre of the debate by giving them an own voice: Cameron (2003, p. 21) states that "the key issue
in the reformation of museums is the audience participation in debates". Thus, museums face the challenge to
develop new   installations which  emphasize     visitors' involvement,     challenge their views,  and  foster  opinion
formation about current scientific issues.

Modern Discussion-Based Installations for Active Visitor Engagement
        The idea to collect visitors' impressions about an exhibition and its content is not new: Guest books are
common practice to provide space for personal opinions. However, modern technologies offer new opportunities to
integrate these personal opinions into an exhibition and to engage visitors in discussion and debate about presented
issues. Some interesting new installations have been developed in the last years which provide "talk-back" areas
where visitors can express their feelings or opinions about the exhibition and find out what other people think. At
Deutsches Museum (Munich, Germany), an asynchronous discussion terminal was implemented into an exhibition
about stem cell research where visitors could listen to various expert statements, type an own statement into the
forum, and read through others' statements (cp. fig. 1a). Visitor research showed that this terminal was used quite
intensively but also identified a lack of quality of visitors' statements. This field observation hints to the need for
research how to explicitly support elaboration on relevant information to raise quality of opinion expression.

        Figure 1 shows design proposals (© Kaiser Matthies, Berlin) for a new exhibition about nanotechnology
(NT) at Deutsches Museum. Visitors' personal visions about their future life with nanotechnological applications
and their opinion about   chances and    risks  will be video-recorded  and   integrated into  the  exhibition as "nano
visions". Other visitors can view various videos and learn about others' opinion about NT and its implications for
daily life. Figure 1b shows a discussion area which was designed to gather visitors' personal statements and votings
with regard to concrete controversial questions. These votings will be aggregated and displayed on large screens to
provide an overall feedback about all visitors' opinions (cp. fig. 1b). Similarly, the London Science Museum projects
controversial questions on a large table and visitors can vote by pressing the buttons `yes' or `no' (cp. fig. 1d). The
displayed results might then serve as a starting point for f2f-discussion. Such installations follow the current trend to
personalize exhibition context, to evoke emotions, to actively involve museum visitors, and promote critical and
reflective thinking at science museums (Pedretti, 2006). The question whether museums really accomplish this will
be addressed in our research about the potential of discussion terminals at science museums.

                                                           376                                                 CSCL 2007
                                                                                  c)
                                                 b)

       a)

                                                                  d)

                            Figure 1: Examples for new discussion-based installations
               (Deutsches Museum, Munich, Germany, 1a - 1c; London Science Museum, 1d)

A Discussion Terminal Informed by (Socio-) Cognitive Theories
        The idea of scaffolding systematic and deep processing of relevant information about risks and potentials of
NT and thereby enhance critical thinking and opinion formation of museum visitors is central to our research: A
discussion terminal has been designed which considers relevant pre-requisites that information processing theories
(e.g., ELM, Petty, & Cacioppo, 1986; HSM, Eagly, & Chaiken, 1993) have identified, namely, involvement, and
availability of relevant information. The discussion terminal will be integrated into an exhibition about NT, and
visitors have the opportunity to elaborate on relevant information and write down their own opinion about NT, and
read through others' statements. Furthermore, they will get specific feedback on others' opinion about NT.

        Different types of cognitive mechanisms are assumed to lead to deeper elaboration of content and belief-
based opinion formation when visitors interact with the discussion terminal:
1.  Active   participation, involvement, and  personal  relevance.     The discussion   terminal   increases  visitors'
    involvement by asking for their personal opinion and by challenging this personal opinion by social comparison
    with others' opinions. Writing down one's personal opinion should result in higher motivation and involvement
    and also support reflection and abstraction (e.g., Petty, & Cacioppo, 1986).
2.  Salience of multiple perspectives. A main objective of the discussion terminal is to support bottom-up processes
    of opinion  formation   by increased salience of available    and relevant arguments     from various perspectives
    (Rosenberg, 1956). Expert statements might be presented as these are necessary information about NT required
    for critical evaluation of this new technology. To support critical thinking, these expert statements could be
    rated by visitors with regard to agreement and relevance (cp. figure 2a). This should help to identify relevant
    attributes of NT and should therefore scaffold belief-based, thoughtful opinion formation. Alternatively - and
    probably more adequate for the museum context - one could imagine a game-based activity like a drag and
    drop-quiz where visitors have to assign the experts to their statements (cp. figure 2b).
3.  Social comparison information and opinion exchange. Social influences are important for individual opinion
    formation and information processing as according to social comparison theory people tend to evaluate their
    own opinion by using similar others as models (Suls, Martin, & Wheeler, 2004). The discussion terminal offers
    new possibilities to support communication and debate between visitors - independent from their time of visit.
    Therefore, this research   project considers the impact    of reported opinions  of other   visitors on individual
    cognition. An awareness    tool is used that summarizes    others' opinions  and displays   one's own   opinion in
    comparison to others'. In addition to this specific social comparison information, all individual statements can
    be accessed, too. Congruent feedback might increase visitors' confidence in their opinion. Conflicting feedback
    elicits a cognitive conflict or makes it salient. This conflict should elicit further activities at the discussion
    terminal and within the exhibition (Buchs, Butera, Mugny, & Darnon, 2004; Lowry & Johnson, 1981). Visitors
    might, for example, read through others' statements to learn about their arguments, too ("Why do they think
    that?").

                                                          377                                                 CSCL 2007
                                      b)

                                                                                        c)
a)

                         Figure 2: A discussion terminal for knowledge acquisition
                                    and opinion formation at science museums

Impact     of   a    Discussion          Terminal      on      Knowledge      Acquisition         and  Opinion
Formation
          It is assumed that salience of controversial arguments, possibility to express one's own opinion, and social
comparison information are all crucial factors for both learning and opinion formation. Elaboration on information
should be deeper when these factors are implemented. Visitors should gain most (attitude-relevant) knowledge,
remember   more relevant arguments     and have  more  sophisticated opinions  about NT    if the discussion terminal
presents relevant information and gives the opportunity to write down one's own opinion. Salience of arguments
might support acquisition of attitude relevant knowledge as relevant information is presented at the discussion
terminal. Belief-based opinion formation on basis of presented arguments should be more likely which would result
in more adequate and sound-standing attitudes towards NT. Social comparison information and opinion exchange
should further stimulate elaboration of arguments and evaluation of visitor's own opinion, especially if a cognitive
conflict between one's own opinion and others' opinions is elicited. An experimental study was developed to test
these assumptions.

References
Boyd, W. L. (1999). Museums as centers for controversy. Daedalus, Journal of the American Academy of Arts and
          Sciences, America's Museums, 128 (3), 185-228.
Buchs, C., Butera, F., Mugny, G., & Darnon, C. (2004). Conflict elaboration and cognitive outcomes. Theory Into
          Practice, 43 (1), 23-30.
Cameron, F. (2003). Transcending fear ­ engaging emotions and opinions - a case for museums in the 21st century.
          Open Museum Journal, 6. Retrieved 15-03-2007 from http://amol.org.au/omj/volume6/cameron.pdf.
Durant, J. (1992). Museums and the public understanding of science. London: Science Museum.
Eagly, A. H., & Chaiken, S. (1993). Psychology of attitudes. Fort Worth, TX: Harcourt, Brace, Jovanovich.
Lowry, N., & Johnson, D. W. (1981). Effects of controversy on epistemic curiosity, achievement, and attitudes.
          Journal of Social Psychology, 115, 31-43.
Oppenheimer, F. (1968). A rationale for a science museum. Curator, 11 (3), 206-209.
Overwien, B. (2000). Informelles Lernen im Museumskontext. [Informal learning in the museum context.] Museum
          und Bildung, 53, 135-149.
Pedretti, E. (2006).  Learning     about science through  science   centre exhibitions. Retrieved  15-03-2007   from
          http://140.127.36.20/95seminar/lecture/2.pdf
Petty, R. E., & Cacioppo, J. T. (1986). Communication and persuasion. Central and peripheral routes to attitude
          change. New York: Springer.
Rosenberg, M. J. (1956). Cognitive structure and attitudinal affect. Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 53,
          367-372.
Suls, J., Martin, R., & Wheeler, L. (2000). Three kinds of opinion comparison: The triadic model. Personality and
          Social Psychology Review, 4 (3), 219-237.

                                                           378                                               CSCL 2007
