   Are core objectives of web-based collaborative inquiry learning
                          already core learning prerequisites?
   The case of argumentation competences and computer literacy
      Ingo Kollar, Christof Wecker, Frank Fischer, University of Munich, Leopoldstr. 13, D-80802 Munich
                           {ingo.kollar, christof.wecker, frank.fischer}@psy.lmu.de
     Carmen Kohnle, Kaufmännische Schule, Schlossackerstr. 82, D-72379 Hechingen, kohnlecm@gmx.de
James D. Slotta, University of Toronto, 252 Bloor Street West, Toronto, Ontario, M5S 1V6, slotta@oise.utoronto.ca

       Abstract: We investigated whether argumentation competence and computer literacy, which are
       typically regarded as goals of web-based collaborative inquiry learning, also constitute important
       learning prerequisites for the acquisition of domain-specific knowledge. Results of two empirical
       studies showed that  learners with higher argumentation     competence  and     learners with lower
       computer  literacy acquired more domain-specific      knowledge. Core objectives   of collaborative
       inquiry learning can be influential prerequisites as well, albeit not always in the way that may be
       expected.

       Collaborative inquiry learning is recognized as a powerful way to enable students to acquire scientific con-
cepts. It requires them to conduct activities similar to those of scientists. From a socio-cultural perspective, it is ex-
pected that, through their participation in scientific activities, students develop domain-general competences such as
argumentation competence. One further advantage of web-based collaborative inquiry learning environments is that
they may foster students' computer literacy. In two studies we investigated to what extent these two domain-general
competences also constitute important learning prerequisites for domain-specific knowledge acquisition.

Study 1: Argumentation in inquiry learning ­ prerequisite and outcome?
       Argumentation competence comprises the ability to understand and produce sophisticated single arguments
and argument sequences. According to Toulmin's (1958) argument scheme or simplified variants of it, sophisticated
single arguments have certain structural components such as claims, data and reasons. According to the model of
Leitão (2000), an argumentation sequence particularly beneficial for collaborative learning should consist of argu-
ment, counterargument, and integration. We subsume these aspects of argumentation competence under the concept
of "internal scripts on collaborative argumentation". Schank (1999) viewed scripts as individual memory structures
that guide individuals in acting in and understanding specific situations. In terms of the structural and the sequential
model of argumentation, individuals with high structured internal scripts on collaborative argumentation should be
more capable of constructing arguments containing data, claims, and reasons as well as in producing counterargu-
ments and integrative arguments than individuals with low structured internal scripts. As inquiry learning as strongly
requires learners to engage in collaborative argumentation, our hypothesis for study 1 was that learners exhibiting a
high structured internal script on collaboration argumentation prior to the inquiry learning session will acquire more
domain-specific knowledge than learners exhibiting low structured internal scripts.

Method
       Participants and Design. Participants in this study were 46 students from grades 8 to 10 from secondary
schools. We compared two conditions from a larger study (Kollar, Fischer & Slotta, 2005) with students with a high
vs. low degree of structuredness of their internal scripts on collaborative argumentation. The degree of structured-
ness of the internal scripts was assessed by a test based on simplified Toulmin and Leitão models of argumentation
(Cronbach's  = .61). Using a median-split, we identified 24 learners with a high structured internal script and 22
learners with a low structured internal script on collaborative argumentation. Participants in each of the two groups
were coupled homogeneously with respect to gender and to their internal scripts' degrees of structuredness.

       Procedure. In a first session of about 45 minutes, learners were asked to complete several questionnaires
for their domain-specific prior knowledge and the degree of structuredness of their internal scripts. In the second
session (two weeks later) the learners received a short technical introduction, collaborated in dyads for 120 minutes
on a German version of the unit "The Deformed Frogs Mystery" from the WISE environment. There, the learners
faced two competing hypotheses explaining why so many frogs were deformed in the nineties in the U. S. Their task
was to discuss the two hypotheses against the background of evidence presented in the environment. On several oc-

                                                         379                                                CSCL 2007
casions, they were asked to discuss the two hypotheses against the background of the information they just had re-
viewed and to type their ideas into a text box. Finally they individually completed a post-test,for their domain-speci-
fic knowledge. Each dyad shared one computer.

       Instruments. Processes of collaborative argumentation were analyzed based on ten samples of five minutes
from each transcription of the dialogues during the inquiry unit. Transcriptions were first coded for the occurrence
of argumentative or non-argumentative talk (Cohen's  = .78). Then two coders independently from each other iden-
tified single arguments. Each argument was rated for its structure as low, medium, or high (Cohen's  = .68). The
outcomes of collaborative argumentation were assessed by the same test for domain-specific knowledge before and
after collaboration. It included five open-ended questions about mechanisms assumed in the two hypotheses, empiri-
cal evidence, and plans concerning how to decide what caused the deformities (Cronbach's  = .58).

Results
       On the process level, dyads with high structured internal scripts produced more arguments than dyads with
low structured internal scripts (t(11.33) = 3.32; p < .01). Learners with high structured internal scripts produced
more arguments with medium (t(14.42) = 3.32: p < .01) and high (t(15.57) = 3.41; p < .01) levels of structure than
learners with low structured internal scripts, but about the same amount of arguments with low structure (t(20) =
0.60; n.s.). On the outcome level, learners with high structured internal scripts outperformed learners with low struc-
tured internal scripts on the post-test for domain-specific knowledge (F(1,43) = 4.64, p < .05, Eta² = .10).

Study 2: Computer literacy in web-based inquiry ­ prerequisite and outcome?
       According to assumptions about a so-called "second-level digital divide", people's computer literacy may
affect their chances to acquire knowledge from digital media (Hargittai, 2002). In this study, we focuss on familiari-
ty with computers as one aspect of computer literacy (Richter, Naumann, & Groeben, 2001). Typically, web-based
inquiry learning environments require learners to engage in two types of media-related activities. On the one hand,
learners are required to engage in active processing of media elements for receptive use, such as text, pictures or
films. On the other hand, they are often provided with the opportunity to actively manipulate media elements for
productive use, such as the so-called SenseMaker in many WISE environments, in which students can sort evidence
according to the claim it supports by drag-and-drop manipulation. To benefit from such elements, learners need to
have actively processed the content of elements for receptive use in which the evidence is presented (Kintsch, 1998).
As it can be expected that students with a high level of computer literacy exhibit a more effective pattern of media
use in a sense that they are more capable in adopting adequate strategies for both the receptive and the productive
use of media elements, our hypothesis for study 2 was: Learners with higher computer literacy will acquire more do-
main-specific knowledge than learners with lower computer literacy.

Method
       Participants and Design. The participants were 37 students from a secondary school; 15 fulfilled the crite-
ria for inclusion in the analysis. The design compared students with high vs. low computer literacy. This was as-
sessed by a seven items (Cronbach's  = .83) adaptation of the subscale "familiarity with computers" from the Ger-
man computer literacy inventory (INCOBI; Richter et al., 2001). The median of 0.43 was used for a split. 8 par-
ticipants had high and 7 had low computer literacy. Dyads were homogeneous in gender, but not computer literacy.

       Procedure. On the first day, learners filled in several questionnaires, including tests of prior domain-speci-
fic knowledge and familiarity with computers. Then they received an introduction to the learning environment, and
collaborated in dyads on a German version of the WISE unit "How far does light go". Again, they faced two compe-
ting hypotheses they were supposed to discuss against the background of evidence presented in the learning environ-
ment. For example, they could view pages with text, pictures and films (media elements for receptive use), and use
notepad windows and the SenseMaker tool to document their findings (media element for productive use). On the
second day, dyads continued collaboration and finally completed a post test for domain-specific knowledge. Again,
each dyad shared one computer

       Instruments. The main dependent variable was the learners' domain-specific knowledge gains from pre- to
post-test, as measured by an adapted version of a test specific for this unit (Cronbach's  = .77 in the post-test). We
analyzed the patterns of media use by coding segments (10sec each) from screen recordings of the learning proces-
ses with respect to the media element displayed (receptive, productive, or other; Cohen's  = .75).

                                                         380                                                  CSCL 2007
Results
         With respesct to domain-specific knowledge we found an unexpected result: Learners with high computer
literacy had higher domain-specific knowledge gains than learners low computer literacy (t(13) = 2.60, p < .05).
Correspondingly, we observed a substantial negative correlation between computer literacy and knowledge gains
(r = -.54, p < .05). To explain this surprising finding, we analyzed the patterns of media use on a single case basis.
In one   prototypical dyad    with high computer   literacy,   we observed a  tendency  to  quickly   rush  through   the
environment and to focus mainly on media elements for productive use. In contrast, in a prototypical dyad with low
computer literacy, the students proceded at a lower pace, often going back and forth between media elements for re-
discussion. This may indicate that they elaborated the material more deeply than the first dyad, which might be an
important precondition to successfully interact with media elements for productive use. They also distributed their
attention over media elements for receptive and productive use more evenly (Wecker, Kohnle & Fischer, in press).

General discussion
         The two studies show that argumentation competence and computer literacy, which both can be regarded as
core learning objectives of web-based collaborative inquiry learning environments, also play a role as individual
learning prerequisites for domain-specific knowledge acquisition. Both domain-general competences were found to
influence the amount of domain-specific knowledge acquired by the students. Learners with less sophisticated argu-
mentation competences may be disadvantaged with this learning approach without further instruction. However,
higher competence levels do not always guarantee higher learning gains: Higher computer literacy may be associa-
ted with worse outcomes in terms of domain-specific knowledge acquisition lower computer literacy. Our analysis
of the patterns of media use reveals possible explanations for this surprising finding. It appears that learners with a
high level of computer literacy may easily transfer their usual web-browsing behaviour to web-based collaborative
inquiry learning environments, in which a more profound elaboration of information would be necessary. Addition-
ally, they seem to be attracted a lot by media elements that afford active manipulation, but often use them without
deep  elaboration of  the learning  material. ­ From our   perspective, these results  lead to at least three important
consequences. First, theory-building on inquiry learning should focus more on individual learner characteristics that
may influence the success of inquiry learning. Second, designers should try to explore ways how to design web-
based  collaborative  inquiry  learning  environments     that accommodate    learners with    a  variety of  individual
competence profiles based on online-assessments of individual competences. Third, teachers need to find out about
their students' competence profiles and to decide for which inquiry activities they need support. To guide teachers in
this challenging task, we need theoretical accounts and aligned empirical research on the question how individual
learning prerequisites,   the use  of digital media, and    teaching behaviors   must  be   "orchestrated"   (Fischer &
Dillenbourg, 2006) in order to accommodate heterogeneity among students.

References
Fischer, F. & Dillenbourg, P. (2006). Challenges of orchestrating computer-supported collaborative learning. Paper
         presented at the 87th Annual Meeting of the American Educational Research Association (AERA), San
         Francisco, USA.
Hargittai, E. (2002). Second-level digital divide: Differences in people's online skills. First Monday, 7(4). Retrieved
         November 30, 2005, from http://firstmonday.org/issues/issue7_4/hargittai/index.html
Kintsch, W. (1998). Comprehension. A paradigm for cognition. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
Kollar, I., Fischer, F., & Slotta, J. D. (2005). Internal and external collaboration scripts in webbased science learning
         at schools.  In  T.  Koschmann,  D.   Suthers, &  T.  -W.  Chan (Eds.), Computer    Supported    Collaborative
         Learning 2005: The Next 10 Years (pp. 331-340). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Leitão, S. (2000). The potential of argument in knowledge building. Human Development, 43, 332-360.
Richter, T., Naumann, J., & Groeben, N. (2001). Das Inventar zur Computerbildung (INCOBI): Ein Instrument zur
         Erfassung von Computer Literacy und computerbezogenen Einstellungen bei Studierenden der Geistes- und
         Sozialwissenschaften   (The  computer   literacy inventory  (INCOBI): An  instrument     for the assessment  of
         computer literacy and attitudes toward the computer in university students of the humanities and the social
         sciences). Psychologie in Erziehung und Unterricht, 48(1), 1-13.
Schank, R. C. (1999). Dynamic memory revisited. Cambridge, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Toulmin, S. (1958). The uses of argument. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Wecker, C., Kohnle, C., & Fischer, F. (in press). Computer literacy and inquiry learning: When geeks learn less.
         Journal of computer-assisted learning.

                                                           381                                                 CSCL 2007
