        Fostering argumentation with script and content scheme in
                                             videoconferencing
              Birgitta Kopp, Heinz Mandl, University of Munich, Leopoldstraße 13, 80802 München,
                                Birgitta.Kopp@psy.lmu.de, Heinz.Mandl@psy.lmu.de

        Abstract:     This study  examines   the   support    of argumentation      in collaborative   task    solving  in
        videoconferencing.     In  particular,  it investigates    the effects   of  a  script  (which   supported     the
        collaboration) and a content scheme (which fostered the focusing on the content) on transactivity
        in   argumentation  and   on   justifications of  single   arguments   in   the learning   discourse    and   task
        solutions.    Learners  were   asked    to  learn  a   theory   individually    before     working   on   a  task
        cooperatively.   Altogether,   52   triads were   randomly     assigned  to  one  of   four  conditions   in  a 2
        (with/without script) x 2 (with/without content scheme)-factorial design. To measure the effects of
        the  intervention,  the   argumentation    in  the learning    discourse     and in  the   task  solutions    was
        analyzed. Results show no effects of the script on transactive reactions, but small effects of the
        content  scheme.    The    content   scheme      also influenced     the  construction     of arguments      with
        justifications  positively. Justifications    in task  solutions   were   supported     by  script  and   content
        scheme.

Introduction
        Argumentation is an important ability in everyday life and scientific work. To justify a point of view, to
compare    different opinions  and  thus  achieve   an   integration   or arrive  at a  conclusion    is a  main   antecedent   for
deciding on difficult tasks. Argumentation is defined as "a verbal and social activity of reason aimed at increasing
(or decreasing) the   acceptability  of  a  controversial  standpoint     for the   listener or reader,     by  putting forward  a
constellation of propositions intended to justify (or refute) the standpoint before a rational judge" (Van Eemeren,
Grootendorst,  & Henkemans,      1996,   p. 5). In  scientific   discourse,   argumentation     is a  very  important   ability for
establishing diverse   perspectives  in  collaborative   task-solving     by  confronting    cognitions     and their  foundations
(Andriessen, Baker, & Suthers, 2003). These perspectives comprise different knowledge, information or points of
view which are necessary for solving an interdependent task collaboratively (Jonassen, 2000). In this collaborative
discourse, argumentative    activities  are necessary.    These    imply  that   group   members      have  to  disseminate   their
different points of view on the task, that they exchange their knowledge about it and discuss task-relevant aspects.

Argumentation in collaboration
        Regarding argumentation in collaboration, there are especially two aspects relevant: transactive reactions
and justifications in single arguments. These are explained in the following two chapters.

Transactive reactions in argumentation
        Looking at argumentation as discursive exchange of different opinions between collaborating partners more
closely (Leitao, 2001), it is important how collaborating partners react to each other argumentatively in joint task-
solving. In argumentation, one action and three reactions are important (Leitao, 2000): Statements as action, and
confirmations, counter-arguments and replies as reactions. The reactions can follow on statements, but also on other
reactions. The  processes  behind   these   action  and  reactions   are  the  following.    In the   first step, people   have  to
elaborate their own point of view to start argumentation in collaboration (statements). Secondly, the collaborating
partners have to cognitively process the explanations and elaborations they heard, compare them with their own
point of view and draw a conclusion concerning their reaction on it. This could for example be a confirmation and a
counter-argument.    Confirmations   show   the agreement     with   a point  of  view,  while     counter-arguments    express  a
different point of view (Leitao, 2000; 2001). The third kind of reaction includes a reply (Leitao, 2000), which could
be an integration of different points of view, an evaluation or conclusion of the argumentation. The activities behind
replies are based on comparing and evaluating the different points of view and on drawing a conclusion concerning
the most adequate argumentation. Argumentative action and reactions can permanently alternate due to the dynamic
in collaboration. Regarding reactions in argumentation, there are particularly two kinds of reactions possible: one in
which collaborating partners refer their utterance to a previous assertion of another member of the group and one in
which they do not relate their opinion to former statements. The first reaction is classified as transactive. A reaction
is "considered transactive when it extends paraphrases, refines, completes, or critiques the partner's reasoning or the

                                                               382                                                       CSCL 2007
speaker's own reasoning" (Teasley, 1997, p. 362). Transactivity is one important characteristic of argumentation
because by relating utterances to other people, the discussants' cognitive processing is shown.

         Research in the field of argumentation regarding transactivity was investigated by Leitao (2000). In a study
with   two  real groups,     she   qualitatively analyzed    the   argumentative    discourse    concerning     the   validity of
argumentation and the kind of argumentative reactions of group members according to the categories statement,
confirmation, counterargument and reply. Results showed that the discussants modified or specified their opinions
during argumentation, but did not give them up in favor of a counter-argument. Other studies focused on transactive
reactions in a quantitative way. In a study by Berkowitz and Gibbs (1983), individuals who reacted more frequently
in a transactive way    to each  other  during   discussion  changed   their moral   points of  view    more   often, too. Thus,
transactive reactions may evoke deeper cognitive processes of elaboration and reflection, so that individuals improve
their own argumentation. Therefore, it is important to analyze these elements of argumentation during collaboration.

         Regarding      such  discourse   elements   in  argumentation,    for   many people     it is  difficult  to  formulate
statements, to confirm and refuse them (Kuhn, Weinstock, & Flaton, 1994) or to reply in an integrative or deductive
way with the aim of solving a task collaboratively. First, people often do not elaborate and justify their points of
view  so  that their  collaborating  partners   are  able to understand    their arguments.     Second,    the reaction to   these
statements requires complex processes of comparing one's own opinion with the uttered opinion. And third, coming
to an  integration  or  conclusion   due  to an  evaluation    process of  all different points   of view     necessitates meta-
cognitive  abilities, which    are difficult to  perform   (Dansereau,  1988).    Therefore,    people   need   support in   their
argumentative collaboration. One possible method comprises the structuring of this collaboration.

Justifications in argumentation
         Apart from transactivity, a second aspect concerning argumentation refers to the justifications of single
arguments. Referring to logical reasoning, arguments comprise two components: premises and conclusions (Fisher,
1988). In  this  context  Kuhn   (1991)   defines   arguments   as "assertions   with accompanying       justification" (p.   12).
Therefore, an argument is a meaningful expression to support another utterance (Andriessen et al., 2003). Justifying
points of  view  is   a main   antecedent  for   convincing  collaborating   partners of  the   correctness    and  adequacy   of
arguments.  In  collaboration,   learners not  only  have  to  take their  own   reasoning  into   consideration,   but also   the
externalized   statements  of  their collaborating   partners. Therefore,  learners  not only   have    to reflect on  their own
argumentation, but also on their collaborating partners' argumentation. The antecedent for correct justifications in
arguments is the concentration on adequate and relevant content. A main problem in this context concerns the fact
that people often do not justify their points of view at all, but simply put forward claims and hypotheses (Kuhn,
1991). In scientific task solutions, theory and evidence must both be considered and related to each other (Kuhn,
Schauble, & Garcia-Mila, 1992). Focusing on these two aspects is very challenging for learners. Furthermore, if
learners do  not know    which   content  they   should   stress, they will  not be  able to    justify their  arguments   in  the
intended direction. In this context it is helpful to support learners focusing on the content.

         To sum it up, many studies show that people often do not argue in collaboration in an adequate and logical
way.   For collaborating   partners   exchanging     arguments    transactively  in collaboration    and   constructing    logical
arguments with justifications is often difficult and it is due to the lack of such abilities that support is necessary.

Fostering collaborative argumentation in videoconferencing
         In  settings   of   computer-based     learning  argumentation     can  be   fostered   by  the   design   of  learning
environments. In concrete terms this means that the computer is used as external knowledge representation which
could be structured in such a way that argumentation is fostered (Andriessen, et al., 2003). In this contribution, we
focus on indirect support methods fostering the interaction and discussion of collaborating partners and thus also
argumentation only implicitly (Van Bruggen, & Kirschner, 2003). These methods rely on the computer as external
knowledge representation tool. In computer-mediated communication, learners mostly have to solve a task together
by using   the computer    for externalizing   their knowledge     and for  recording  their task   solution   which   implicitly
influences  argumentation     both   in transactive  argumentation     and  in   justifications of  arguments.     In respect   to
transactive argumentation, the representational tools can have two effects: First, the explication of different points of
view is initiated (Munneke, Van Amelsvoort, & Andriessen, 2003). Secondly, by representing ideas and different
perspectives on the task in a shared way, the joint representation may function as external group memory that allows
learners to  refer  to  previous   ideas  (Van   Bruggen,    Boshuizen,   &  Kirschner,   2002).    These   references  express
transactive reactions. Concerning the justifications of arguments, the external representations activate processes of

                                                               383                                                     CSCL 2007
identifying components of arguments and of evaluating their consistency, accuracy or plausibility (Munneke, et al.,
2003) which can improve the externalized knowledge.

          Beyond   these  effects  of  representational   tools  for  argumentation    per   se, there  are    further  indirect
instructional support methods for fostering transactive argumentation and the justifications of arguments, namely
scripts and  content schemes.    These   do not   concentrate   on the  enhancement     of argumentation     directly,  but are
focused on strategic and content-specific aspects of the task collaboration. Strategic support could be realized by
scripts. These structure the collaboration process itself with a pre-defined procedure, in which every step of the
collaboration  process itself is  prescribed with  sub-tasks.   There  are  a  lot of different  definitions   and application
scenarios concerning scripts (Kollar, Fischer, & Hesse, in press). The term, usually taken from cognitive psychology
(Schank, & Abelson, 1977), is increasingly used in CSCL learning environments as instructional support method
(see Fischer, Kollar,  Mandl,    & Haake,   2007). In   this context,  scripts mainly   sequence    collaboration  and   assign
specific activities to the learners (Ertl, Kopp, & Mandl, 2007).

          In videoconferencing,    scripts  focus on  the    assignment  of   specific  tasks to  foster  the  application   of
collaboration strategies. These tasks aim at the learners exchanging information, replicating important information
and  reflecting about   the  relevance   of  the  tasks for  their   collaborative  task   solution   (Reiserer,   2003). Two
videoconferencing studies show a positive effect of the script intervention on the learning discourse (Härder, 2004;
Reiserer, 2003). Yet, it is not investigated whether this effect also concerns transactive reactions in argumentation
during the collaboration process, the justifcations of arguments, and the justification of collaborative and individual
task solutions. As scripts foster the exchange of information as well as the discussion and reflection on it, they can
also have an influence on transactive reactions in argumentation. Furthermore, focusing on information exchange
may also effect that relevant information is used for justifying task solutions.

          Content schemes represent and pre-structure the key concepts of a certain domain (Brooks, & Dansereau,
1983).  This  means  that  important  content-specific  components     are labeled   on  a meta-level  to  focus   learners on
aspects  which  are  relevant for  the collaborative    task solution.  In  CSCL    learning  environments,      these  content
schemes are realized by pre-structuring the computer which is used as external representation. Potential realizations
include tables (Reiserer, Ertl, & Mandl, 2002), matrices (Suthers, & Hundhausen, 2001) and maps (Fischer, Bruhn,
Gräsel, & Mandl, 2002). The underlying assumption behind the support with content schemes is based on the theory
that the visualization of main task-relevant aspects increases the learners' awareness of the content they are to focus
on.  In this  context, the  concept   of `representational   guidance'   is   of importance     (Suthers, 2003;    Suthers,  &
Hundhausen, 2003) which refers to the salience of the task: Because the content scheme keeps the task-relevant
components permanently salient, learners rely and focus on them.

          Studies in videoconferencing     scenarios often   showed   a beneficial    effect of  the  content  scheme   on  the
collaboration discourse (Fischer, Bruhn, Gräsel, & Mandl, 2000; Reiserer, Ertl, & Mandl, 2002). However, it has not
yet been investigated, whether the content scheme can foster argumentation and if so whether this effect then also
shows in the collaborative and individual task solution. As content schemes stress main components of the task
solution,  they may    influence   argumentation   in   a  way   that  different   statements    and  counter-arguments     are
disseminated. In addition to this, making important aspects of the task salient may improve the justifications of
arguments, which could become manifest not only in the learning discourse itself, but also in more justifications
during the collaborative and individual task solution.

          Although script and content scheme give first hints of beneficially influencing collaborative activities, it
has to be asked whether the instructional support helps learners to justify their task solution more adequately. In this
context, the collaborative and the individual task solution is relevant (Salomon, 1992). There are only few studies
which focused on this aspect. For example Weinberger, Segmann, Fischer, and Mandl (2007) only found an effect of
their script on the individual knowledge about argumentation sequences and about the structure of arguments, but
not on the collaborative and individual task solution. Furthermore, there was no effect of scripts on the collaborative
task solution either in  a study   by Baker  and  Lund    (1997).  The  content    scheme  had   also no  clear  effect on  the
collaborative task  solution  in a discussion (Kanselaar,    Erkens,   Andriessen,    Veerman,   &    Jaspers, 2003;   Suthers,
2003). Only the SenseMaker had a positive influence on the learners' individual concept of light (Bell, 1997; 2002).
There are no clear effects of instructional support methods on task solutions. On top of this, there is no evident effect
that the frequency of mentioning certain topics manifests itself in the collaborative task solution. For example, in a
study   by Andriessen,   Erkens,  Van  de   Laak,  Peters,   and Coirier (2003),    learners  who    discussed   a topic  more

                                                             384                                                     CSCL 2007
frequently did not necessarily repeat it in their task solution. Consequently, there are no explicit data of instructional
support methods that prove their effectiveness on justifications in task solution ­ neither on the collaborative nor on
the individual task solution. Therefore, this is an important further research question.

Research questions
        (1) How far do script and content scheme affect argumentation? Regarding argumentation as a twofold
ability including transactive and reasoning processes, the effects of the support methods must be divided into two
sub-questions:
        (1.1)     How far do script and content scheme affect transactivity in argumentation?
        (1.2)     How far do script and content scheme affect justifications of single arguments?

        (2)     How far do script and content scheme affect argumentation in task solution? There are two ways of
measuring the influence of instructional support methods on argumentative task solution: task solutions worked out
collaboratively and individually. Therefore, we need two separate questions:
        (2.1)   How     far do script and  content  scheme  affect   argumentation  in   the task solution worked    out
                collaboratively?
        (2.2)   How     far do script and  content  scheme  affect   argumentation  in   the task solution worked    out
                individually?

Method
Sample and design
        One hundred and fifty-six undergraduates of the University of Munich took part in this experiment. Most of
the undergraduates were in the second semester. 52 triads were randomly assigned to one of four conditions in a
2x2-factorial design. We varied the factors script (with/without) and content scheme (with/without). Therefore, there
were  four different  conditions:  condition  with  script (13  triads), condition  with  content   scheme (13   triads),
combination condition with script and content scheme (14 triads), and control condition (12 triads).

Learning task
        Learners   had   to  familiarize themselves with   Attribution   Theory in  an   individual learning  unit. In a
collaborative learning unit three participants had to solve a task together, which described the decrease in a student's
performance. Learners received general information that included the cover story and the plot. Furthermore, they got
specific information that focused on three perspectives relevant for solving the task ­ one divergent perspective for
every learner. This included the perspective of the student, of the student's mother and the student's teacher. With
the help of this specific information they were asked to find explanations and reasons for the student's decrease of
performance by applying Attribution Theory. Therefore, two kinds of explanations are relevant: on the one hand,
learners had to justify their task solution with theoretical classifications according to Attribution Theory and on the
other hand  with   relevant   information  of the  case. To    evoke argumentation,   some    information  in the   three
perspectives was oppositional.

Learning environment
        The     whole learning  unit  was  subdivided into  an  individual and  a   collaborative learning unit.  In the
individual learning unit, learners had to read the text about Attribution Theory in order to solve the task together and
in order to create a collaborative case solution in the form of a text document. In the collaborative learning unit,
learners were connected via a desktop videoconferencing system with audio- and video-connection and a shared
application to support the triads' task solution. The shared application functioned as external representation of the
joint solution.

Treatments
        Both treatments provided a pre-structure of relevant task aspects concerning collaborative task solving and
content-specific strategies.

        Script. The script structured the collaborative task solving unit into four phases alternating individual and
collaborative   phases. Each   phase  consisted of  special activities,  which  the learners  had   to follow  for  their
collaborative task solving (see figure 1). The first, individual phase consisted of text reading and excerption of the
relevant case information. In this first phase, the learners had to consider the main causes mentioned in the specific

                                                           385                                                 CSCL 2007
perspective they  worked   on    and had  to  write them   down.    In the  second,   collaborative  phase,   learners had    to
exchange their different information concerning the case. As the information of the perspectives differed in certain
ways, it was necessary to discuss the varying causes and possible solutions argumentatively. All issues which were
relevant for the solution of the case were to be transferred into the document template. After mentioning and noting
all main issues, the learners had to reflect on the appropriateness of the jointly developed notes in the third phase. In
the last, fourth phase learners had time to discuss special issues they reflected on in the third phase and had to work
out a final version of the task solution.

                        Phase I                     Phase II               Phase III                      Phase IV

                       Reading andextraction ofcase information(individually)Exchange ofinformation,clarifying,discussing,ReflectionDiscussion andabout the casefinal solutionsolution(cooperatively)(individually)
                                                   writing the
                                                  results in the
                                                    document
                                                 (cooperatively)

Figure 1: Script

         Content scheme. In the condition with content scheme, learners received a content-specific structure of the
relevant components concerning Attribution Theory (see table 1). This structure includes cause, information and
attribution. Depending on divergent case information, different causes had to be mentioned. To confirm the causes,
further information about consensus and consistency was necessary. According to Attribution Theory, consensus
and consistency must be classified as high or low and explained with case information. The last category includes
attribution according to Kelley (1973) and Heider (1958).

Table 1: Structure of the content scheme with an example

      Cause                            Information about                                 Attributions according to
                        Consensus                 Consistency                Kelley                    Heider
Laziness                Low    because    he  is  High because he has        Person                    Internal, variable
                        the only one in class     been lazy for a year
                        who is lazy               now

Data sources
         Argumentation. To investigate argumentation, the discourse was analyzed according to transactive actions
and reactions in argumentation and according to the justifications of arguments. In respect to this, a categorization
scheme was developed that classified every single turn of the learners' discussion. Ten per cent of these discourses
were rated independently by two evaluators.

         Transactivity comprised four categories: statement, confirmation, counterargument, and reply. A statement
was rated   when  a  learner  expressed   his point of  view    on  possible causes   for  the   decrease  in performance.    A
statement   always   included  new   information    and   was    never  related  to  previous    propositions.  Confirmation,
counterargument   and  reply   were  transactive  reactions. They    could  either  be   related to statements  or to  another
transactive reaction. Did  a   learner agree  with  a  point    of view of   his collaborating    partner, he  confirmed   this
statement.  If there was no    agreement,  but   an opposing     statement,  it  was  rated  as  counterargument.     All other
transactive reactions like evaluations,   integrations  or conclusions    were   in a  first step coded   separately  and  in a
second step put together as reply. The inter-rater reliability was Kappa .83.

         The   justifications of arguments    were  rated  according   to two    categories:  with  and without  justification
(Astleitner, 2003). Statements with justification were full arguments with premises and conclusions (e.g. "I think
because consensus and consistency is high, it must be an attribution on the object."), statements without justification

                                                             386                                                      CSCL 2007
were assumptions, claims or hypotheses (e.g. "This is an attribution on the person."). The inter-rater reliability for
this categorization was Kappa .90.

          Task  solution.   To  measure  whether  the   intervention  influenced   justifications in the task  solution,  two
different case solutions were analyzed: a case solution worked out collaboratively and individually. These cases
were rated according to reasoning processes which were manifested in justifications. Thus, all justifications in case
solution were rated. These justifications comprised theory and evidence which are necessary for solving scientific
tasks (Kuhn,   et  al., 1992),  respectively theoretical classifications  and  case information.   For   ensuring   inter-rater
reliability of data, two    evaluators analyzed  10  per  cent of case   solutions independently     according to   the rating
scheme. For the collaborative case the Kappa was .86 and for the individual case the Kappa was .92, which were
both  sufficient.  Due   to technical  problems,  two   collaborative  case solutions get  lost.   Therefore,  only  50  case
solutions instead of 52 entered the analyses.

          Statistical analyses. In the statistical analyses, we used as a unit of analyses the triad for our collaborative
measurements like argumentation and collaborative task solution and the individuals for the individual task solution.
We used multivariate ANOVAs with two between-subject factors to analyze the effects of both interventions as well
as  their interaction   on  the dependent    variables argumentation,  collaborative  and  individual    task  solution.  The
statistical tests underlie  an  alpha  level of .05. The   discourse  examples  of  argumentation    were   investigated  and
analyzed according to transactive reactions and justifications. Although the total time for collaboration was kept
constant, the four conditions differed in their collaborative time on task. Scripts reduced the time learners had to
collaborate with each other by 10 minutes (F(1,48)=195.7; p<.01; ²=.80). Therefore, we used time as covariate in
our data analyses concerning argumentation.

Results
Research question 1: Effects of script and content scheme on argumentation
          Taking a closer look at transactive reactions, the descriptive statistics shows most utterances concerning
the categories    statements,   counter-arguments    and replies  in the  condition with  content    scheme    (see table  2).
Regarding the effects of script and content scheme on transactive reactions, there was one effect of content scheme
on  statements:   Learners  with  content scheme   uttered 25  per   cent more  statements than    learners without  content
scheme (F(1,47)=5.83; p<.05; ²=.11). There were no further effects and there was no interaction either, even when
subdividing the category reply in its subcategories evaluation, integration, and conclusion.

Table 2: Means and SD's of transactive reactions in the learning discourse

                                 Statements            Confirmations        Counter-argument                Replies
                                 M        SD           M         SD           M          SD              M              SD
          Control               58.78     28.06      41.94     27.05        14.77      14.73             64.59       28.22
       With script              67.53     26.62      25.89       11.43      14.84        9.87            55.87       17.66
      With scheme               81.27     29.73      38.74       20.72      15.61        8.64            64.16       17.14
With script and scheme          82.46     27.00      40.06       10.36      20.55      10.46             67.41       14.81

          The justifications of arguments should be influenced by content scheme (see table 3). Learners with content
scheme used both categories ­ utterances with justification (F(1,45)=4.03; p<.05; ²=.08) and without justification
(F(1,47)=4.27; p<.05; ²=.08) ­ more often than learners without content scheme. Both effects reached the level of
significance.

Table 3: Mean and standard deviation of justifications in the learning discourse

                                                               Justifications
                                                without                               with
                                        M                   SD                  M                 SD
             Control                   53.47               33.04              20.08               12.74
            With script                65.45               31.03              16.93               9.89
          With scheme                  72.06               28.95              24.82               7.97
    With script and scheme             81.28               27.46              21.73               9.71

                                                             387                                                    CSCL 2007
Research     question      2:  Effects    of    script   and   content     scheme      on   argumentation           in task
solution
         The second question asks, whether script and content scheme had an influence on the justifications of the
learners' task solutions, collaboratively and individually. Regarding collaborative task solutions analysed on a group
level, learners in the condition with script and content scheme justified their task solution most often with relevant
case information (see table 4). The highest score of the combination group with script and content scheme was
confirmed by an ANOVA. There was a middle-sized effect of the script (F(1,46)=4.90; p<.05; ²=.10) and a main
effect of the content scheme (F(1,46) = 51.14; p < .01; ² = .53), but no interaction. Justifications with theoretical
classifications were fostered by content scheme: Learners with content scheme justified their task solution almost
twice as   often with   theoretical classifications than   learners  without content   scheme.   This   was   a main   effect
(F(1,46)=51.52; p<.01; ²=.53).

Table 4: Mean and standard deviation of justifications in the collaborative task solution

                                    Justification with theoretical              Justification with case information
                                           classifications
                               M (max. 20)                  SD                  M (max. 15)                     SD
Control group                       9.82                   4.69                      4.82                      1.54
With script                         7.38                   4.23                      5.69                      2.50
With scheme                         16.77                  3.32                      9.15                      3.13
With script and scheme              16.69                  3.73                     11.38                      2.33

         Examining individual task solutions, we found almost the same results (see table 5). Thus, learners with
script and content scheme showed the highest score in justifying their task solution by giving adequate information.
Both interventions had a beneficial effect on the justification with task information in the individual task solution.
This  showed  a  multivariate  ANCOVA     with    prior knowledge    (justification with  case information    and theoretical
classifications) as covariate. Script  (F(1,150)=7.98;   p<.01;    ²=.05)  and content    scheme  (F(1,150)=17.75;     p<.01;
²=.11) had   both   small effects.  In respect  of  justifications with theoretical  classifications, learners  with content
scheme justified  their task  solution twice   as often with adequate    theoretical classifications  than learners  without
content scheme (F(1,150)=38.78; p<.01; ²=.21).

Table 5: Mean and standard deviation of justifications in the individual task solution

                                    Justification with theoretical              Justification with case information
                                           classifications
                                M (max. 8)                  SD                  M (max. 6)                      SD
Control group                       2.67                   2.04                      1.86                      1.51
With script                         2.54                   1.90                      2.18                      1.57
With scheme                         4.60                   2.79                      2.55                      1.80
With script and scheme              5.33                   2.72                      3.87                      1.91

Summary and Discussion
         Results of the study showed some effects of the intervention on argumentation as well as on task solution.
Regarding argumentation, we analyzed transactivity as well as justifications in argumentation. Transactive reactions,
especially stating  opinions, were   mainly  fostered   by content  scheme.  In combination    with   script, the amount  of
statements, counter-arguments      and  replies   could be  improved    on a   descriptive  level of   analyses.   Justifying
argumentation was fostered by content scheme. In respect to task solution, both script and content scheme had a
positive influence: Script improved justifications with case information, content scheme justifications both with case
information and with theoretical classifications.

         By  structuring  the  collaboration   into four phases    and  providing   joint sub-tasks   for collaborative task
solution, the script supported learners in justifying their task solution, the collaborative as well as the individual task
solution. In previous studies, the script showed positive effects only on the learning discourse (Ertl, Reiserer, &
Mandl, 2002; Härder, 2004; Weinberger, 2003). On the individual task solution, however, the script did not have
any positive effects (Ertl, Reiserer, & Mandl, 2002; Reiserer, Ertl, & Mandl, 2002). The collaborative task strategy

                                                             388                                                   CSCL 2007
of focusing on the exchange and the discussion of relevant information proved sufficient for the learners considering
relevant information     in task solution.  This   manifested    itself in  the  learners justifying their    task solution    with
adequate case information. Both the collaborative and individual task solving strategy was supported by script. In
contrast to previous studies, learners internalized the task strategy of the script, so that they could apply it to their
own individual task solution (King, 2007). But the strategy had no effect on transactive reactions in the learning
discourse  as was   hypothesized    due  to the   sub-tasks   of the   script which  were    only  illustrated  in the    discourse
examples.  To    sum  it up,  the  collaboration    strategy  provided   by   script manifested    itself  in  collaborative    and
individual task   solution  by   justifications with   relevant  case   information.   It did  not manifest    itself, though,   in
transactivity. This last result can be due to the fact that the script did not force learners to react transactively to each
other according to a strictly limited structure of argumentative collaboration. Further on, the script probably reduced
the need for transactive reactions, because individuals were better prepared for collaboration due to the individual
reflection phase.  But   in  combination    with   a  content-specific   strategy  both   intervention methods      can   improve
transactivity in the learning discourse.

         The content scheme made the most important aspects of the content salient. Due to the representational
guidance of this table (Suthers, 2003; Suthers, & Hundhausen, 2003), learners got focused on the empty spaces they
had to fill in with task relevant aspects. Thus, the content scheme affected argumentative discourse as well as task
solutions. Concerning argumentation, the content scheme supported transactivity and justification in argumentation.
As important aspects of the task were permanently represented, learners got focused on their own perspective so that
they uttered more statements. Concerning the higher degree of counter-arguments and replies on a descriptive level,
eventually the same mode of action of the content scheme could be assumed for this result, even though there was
no significant   effect. As   learners  knew    which  aspects   they   should   focus on,   they  evaluated    arguments    more
adequately. This   in itself  lead to more  counter-arguments       as  discrepancies  were   discovered   and  to  more    replies
resulting from evaluating or concluding. Moreover, for solving the task adequately it was necessary to justify every
theoretical classification and case information that would be filled in the empty spaces of the content scheme. This
implicit demand    manifested    itself in the    argumentation     discourse  as more    arguments  with     justifications   were
constructed. These results are in line with other studies using content scheme as support method (Fischer, Bruhn,
Gräsel, & Mandl, 2000; Suthers, & Hundhausen, 2003). In these studies, learners with content scheme were able to
relate hypothesis to evidence, that is in our study theoretical classifications to case information. In addition, content
scheme   fostered  not   only argumentative       discourse, but also   justifications in    collaborative and  individual      task
solutions. So far, the content scheme had mostly positive effects on the collaborative task solution (Baker, & Lund,
1997; Kanselaar, et al., 2003; Suthers, 2003), but not on the individual task solution. Possibly, the previous content
schemes were too unspecific (De Jong, et al, 1998), so that learners could not acquire the content as well as an
implicit task solving strategy. This was possible in the study at hand. Thus, learners were able to justify their task
solution collaboratively and individually both with adequate theoretical classifications and with case information.

Conclusion
         Concluding,     both interventions    had  a  positive  influence    on argumentation     which   was  reflected   in  the
learning discourse and in the collaborative as well as the individual task solution. The script offered a collaborative
task strategy that fostered the argumentative exchange of information, while the content scheme made important
components    of  the task   solution  salient  which  particularly  supported    activities  of justification. Looking      at the
application scenario, we can see that indirect support methods directly implemented in the learning environment can
affect scientific  argumentation   activities   positively   by providing   both  a  collaborative   and   content-specific     task
solving  strategy. Since    argumentation  is   a very important    ability in  science,  it would be  interesting     to find  out,
whether these effects could be replicated in other domains and settings.

         In contrast to previous studies both support methods had an effect not only on argumentative collaboration
and task solution, but also on the individual task solution. This means that learners were able to acquire not only the
content, but also strategies for the application of their argumentative knowledge for task solutions. This effect can be
due to the specificity of the instructional support (De Jong, et al., 1998). To sustain this assumption, further analyses
concerning this aspect would be helpful.

                                                                389                                                       CSCL 2007
References
Andriessen, J., Baker, M., & Suthers, D. (2003). Argumentation, computer support, and the educational context of
          confronting  cognition.   In  J. Andriessen,   M.    Baker,   &  D. Suthers  (Eds.), Arguing   to learn:  Confronting
          cognitions in computer-supported collaborative learning environments (pp. 1-25). Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Andriessen,   J., Erkens,   G., Van    de  Laak, C., Peters,   N.,    & Coirier, P. (2003). Argumentation     as  negotiation   in
          electronic  collaborative    writing.  In J. Andriessen,      M. Baker,   &  D.   Suthers (Eds.), Arguing      to learn:
          Confronting    cognitions     in  computer-supported        collaborative   learning    environments    (pp.   79-115).
          Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Astleitner, H. (2003). Conditions of learning how to argue. Salzburger Beiträge zur Erziehungswissenschaft, 1, 15-
          25.
Baker,  M.,   &  Lund,   K. (1997).    Promoting    reflective interactions   in a CSCL   environment.   Journal   of  Computer
          Assisted Learning, 13(3), 175-193.
Bell, P. (1997). Using argument representations to make thinking visible for individuals and groups. In R. Hall, N.
          Miyake,    &   N.  Enyedy    (Eds.),  Proceedings       of  CSCL  '97:   The Second   International  Conference       on
          Computer Support for Collaborative Learning (pp. 10-19). Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
Bell, P.  (2002).  Using   argument    map   representations   to    make thinking  visible for individuals   and groups.    In T.
          Koschmann, R. Hall, & N. Miyake (Eds.), CSCL 2, Carrying Forward the Conversation (pp. 449-485).
          Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Berkowitz,    M.  W.,  &   Gibbs, J.   C.  (1983).  Measuring     the  developmental   features of  moral   discussion.  Merrill-
          Palmer Quarterly, 29(4), 399-410.
Brooks, L. W., & Dansereau, D. F. (1983). Effects of structural schema training and text organization on expository
          prose processing. Journal of Educational Psychology, 75(6), 811-820.
Dansereau, D. F. (1988). Cooperative learning strategies. In C. E. Weinstein (Ed.), Learning and study strategies:
          Issues in assessment, instruction, and evaluation (pp. 103-120). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
De Jong, T., Ainsworth, S., Dobson, M., van der Hulst, A., Levonen, J., Reimann, P., Sime, J., van Someren, M. W.,
          Spada,  H.,  &   Swaak,   J. (1998).  Acquiring   knowledge      in science  and  mathematics:  The  use    of multiple
          representations in technology-based learning environments. In M. W. v. Someren, P. Reimann, H. P. A.
          Boshuizen, & T. D. Jong (Eds.), Learning with multiple representations (pp. 9-40). Amsterdam: Pergamon.
Ertl, B., Reiserer,  M.,   & Mandl,    H.  (2002).  Kooperatives      Lernen  in Videokonferenzen.     Unterrichtswissenschaft,
          30(4), 339-356.
Ertl, B., Kopp, B., & Mandl, H. (2007). Supporting collaborative learning in videoconferencing using collaboration
          scripts and content schemes. In F. Fischer, H. Mandl, J. M. Haake, & I. Kollar (Eds.), Scripting computer-
          supported communication of knowledge ­ cognitive, computational and educational perspectives (pp. 213-
          236). Berlin: Springer.
Fischer, F., Bruhn, J., Gräsel, C., & Mandl, H. (2000). Kooperatives Lernen mit Videokonferenzen: Gemeinsame
          Wissenskonstruktion und individueller Lernerfolg. Kognitionswissenschaft, 9(1), 5-16.
Fischer,  F., Bruhn,   J.,  Gräsel,  C.,   & Mandl,    H.  (2002).    Fostering  collaborative  knowledge     construction   with
          visualization tools. Learning and Instruction, 12, 213-232.
Fischer, F., Kollar, I., Mandl, H., & Haake, J. M. (Eds.). (2007). Scripting computer-supported communication of
          knowledge - Cognitive, computational, and educational perspectives. Berlin: Springer.
Fisher, A. (1988). The logic of real arguments. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Härder,   J. (2004).  Wissenskommunikation       mit Desktop-Videokonferenzsystemen:         Strukturierungsangebote     für  den
          Wissensaustausch      und    gemeinsame    Inferenzen.      Unpublished   Dissertation,  Albert-Ludwigs-Universität,
          Freiburg.
Heider, F. (1958). The psychology of interpersonal relations. New York: Wiley.
Jonassen,    D. H.   (2000). Toward     a  design   theory  of    problem  solving.  Educational    Technology    Research    and
          Development, 48(4), 63-85.
Kanselaar, G., Erkens, G., Andriessen, J., Veerman, A., & Jaspers, J. (2003). Designing argumentation tools for
          collaborative  learning.   In  P.  A.  Kirschner,    S. J.  Buckingham    Shum,   &   C. S.  Carr (Eds.),   Visualizing
          argumentation:     Software   tools   for collaborative     and  educational  sense-making     (pp. 51-73).    London:
          Springer.
Kelley, H. H. (1973). The processes of causal attribution. American Psychologist, 28, 107-128.
King,  A.    (2007). Scripting  collaborative   learning  process:    A   cognitive perspective.   In F. Fischer,  I. Kollar,   H.
          Mandl,   &  J. M.  Haake     (Eds.), Scripting  computer-supported       communication    of knowledge    -  Cognitive,
          computational, and educational perspectives (pp. 13-37). Berlin: Springer.

                                                                  390                                                  CSCL 2007
Kollar, I., Fischer, F., & Hesse, F.-W. (in press). Computer supported cooperation scripts. Educational Psychology
          Review.
Kuhn, D. (1991). The skills of argument. Cambridge, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Kuhn, D., Schauble, L., & Garcia-Mila, M. (1992). Cross-domain development of scientific reasoning. Cognition
          and Instruction, 9(4), 285-327.
Kuhn, D.,  Weinstock,     M., &  Flaton,   R. (1994).  Historical  reasoning  as  theory-evidence  coordination. In M.
          Carretero, & J. F. Voss (Eds.), Cognitive and Instructional Processes in History and the Social Sciences
          (pp. 377-401). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Leitao, S. (2000). The potential of argument in knowledge building. Human Development, 43, 332-360.
Leitao, S. (2001, September). Analyzing changes in view during argumentation: A quest for method (2(3)), [On-line
          Journal]. Forum:    Qualitative  Social  Research.    Available:  http://www.qualitative-research.net/fqs/fqs-
          eng.htm.
Munneke, L., van Amelsvoort, M., & Andriessen, J. (2003). The role of diagrams in collaborative argumentation-
          based learning. International Journal of Educational Research, 39, 113-131.
Reiserer,  M.      (2003).   Peer-Teaching     in  Videokonferenzen.      Effekte  niedrig-    und  hochstrukturierter
          Kooperationsskripte auf Lernprozess und Lernerfolg. Berlin: Logos.
Reiserer, M.,     Ertl, B., &   Mandl,  H.    (2002). Fostering    collaborative  knowledge   construction in  desktop
          videoconferencing. Effects of content schemes and cooperation scripts in peer-teaching settings. In G. Stahl
          (Ed.), Computer support for collaborative learning: Foundations for a CSCL community. Proceedings of
          CSCL 2002, Boulder, Colorado, USA. January 7-11, 2002 (pp. 379-388). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Salomon, G. (1992). Effects with and of computers and the study of computer-based learning environments. In E.
          De Corte, M. C. Linn, H. Mandl, & L. Verschaffel (Eds.), Computer-based learning environments and
          problem solving (pp. 249-263). Berlin: Springer.
Schank, R. C., & Abelson, R. P. (1977). Scripts, plans, goals and understanding. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Suthers, D. D. (2003). Representational guidance for collaborative inquiry. In J. Andriessen, M. Baker, & D. Suthers
          (Eds.),  Arguing   to  learn:   Confronting   cognitions    in  computer-supported   collaborative  learning
          environments (pp. 27-46). Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Suthers, D. D., & Hundhausen, C. D. (2001). Learning by constructing collaborative representations: An empirical
          comparison of three alternatives. In P. Dillenbourg, A. Eurelings, & K. Hakkarainen (Eds.), Proceedings of
          the First European    Conference  on  Computer-Supported     Collaborative Learning   (euroCSCL)   (pp. 577-
          584). Maastricht: McLuhan Institute.
Suthers, D. D., & Hundhausen, C. D. (2003). An experimental study of the effects of representational guidance on
          collaborative learning processes. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 12(2), 183-218.
Teasley, S. D. (1997). Talking about reasoning: How important is the peer in peer collaboration? In L. B. Resnick,
          R. Säljö, C. Pontecorvo, & B. Burge (Eds.), Discourse, tools, and reasoning: Essays on situated cognition
          (pp. 361-385). Berlin: Springer.
Van Bruggen,    J.  M.,  Boshuizen, H.  P. A., &   Kirschner,   P. A. (2002). A   cognitive framework  for cooperative
          problem solving with argument visualization. In M W. van Someren, P. Reimann, H. P. A. Boshuizen, & T.
          de Jong (Eds.), Learning with multiple representations (pp. 25-47). London: Springer.
Van Bruggen,    J.  M.,  &  Kirschner, P. A.  (2003). Designing    external representations to support solving   wicked
          problems. In J. Andriessen, M. Baker, & D. Suthers (Eds.), Arguing to learn: Confronting cognitions in
          computer-supported collaborative learning environments (pp. 177-203). Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Van Eemeren, F. H., Grootendorst, R., & Henkemans, F. S. (1996) (Eds.). Fundamentals of argumentation theory -
          A handbook of historical backgrounds and contemporary developments. Mahawa, NJ: Erlbaum.
Weinberger, A. (2003). Scripts for computer-supported collaborative learning. [Dissertation, Ludwig-Maximilian-
          University Munich]. Online: http://edoc.ub.uni-muenchen.de/archive/00001120/01/Weinberger_Armin.pdf.
Weinberger, A., Stegmann, K., Fischer, F., & Mandl, H. (2007). Scripting argumentative knowledge construction in
          computer-supported learning environments. In F. Fischer, I. Kollar, H. Mandl, & J. Haake (Eds.), Scripting
          computer-supported collaborative learning. Cognitive, computational and educational perspectives (pp.
          191-211). Berlin: Springer.

Acknowledgements
This work was funded by Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (German science foundation, DFG), Grant Nos. MA
978/13-3.

                                                            391                                                CSCL 2007
