From Theory of Mind to a Theory of Distributed Shared Sense-Making

Barbara G. Ladewski, School of Education, University of Michigan, ladewski@umich.edu
Annemarie S. Palincsar, School of Education, University of Michigan, annemari@umich.edu
Joseph S. Krajcik, School of Education, University of Michigan, krajcik@umich.edu

         Abstract.    The   current  study  proposes    conceptualizing  human    intellectual  activity  in
         terms of mutually constitutive interactions among a distributed network of sense-making
         systems, rather than as individual cognition/learning situated in sociocultural context or
         as individual   participation/apprenticeship    in  collective social  practice.  The    model   of
         distributed  shared  sense-making    incorporates   mutually   constitutive  interactions among
         sense-making    systems,    among  mental   models    of  sense-making   systems,    and between
         sense-making     systems  and  their mental    models.     The  model    provides   an  integrated
         theoretical framework to support empirical examination of interactions among humans,
         and among humans and their cultural tools--in particular, their technological tools.          The
         study  uses  the  proposed   theoretical framework     to  interpret teacher-student   developing
         interactions in a technology-rich middle-school science classroom over the course of a
         year of scaffolded introduction to inquiry-based science instruction.

Theoretical Framework
         Recent debate in the educational literature has focused on two foundational questions of human
cognition/learning:   Where    is the  mind   (Cobb,    1994a,  b),  and how    should  learning  be   characterized
(Anderson, Reder, & Simon, 1996, 1997; Greeno, 1997).           The discussion has focused on teasing apart the
subtle  distinctions  between    dichotomous   perspectives--social      constructivism    versus  socioculturalism
(Cobb,  1994a,b;   Driver,   Asoko,  Leach,   Mortimer,   &   Scott,  1994),  cognitive   versus  situative  learning
(Anderson, Reder & Simon, 1996; Greeno, 1997), acquisition versus participation metaphors for learning
(Sfard, 1998),  and   interaction  versus   intersubjectivity  (Kieren,  2000;    Lerman,   1996,  2000;    Steffe &
Thompson,     2000)--in    order  to  engage  in  a  meaningful     discussion    of human    intellectual   activity/
development.
         A number of researchers have suggested that neither half of these various dichotomies provides an
adequate picture of human intellectual activity/development (Cobb, 1994a,b; Driver et al., 1994; Greeno,
1997; Kieren, 2000).    Greeno (1997) proposed that what is needed is a synthesis of the separate lines of
cognitive and situative research into one coherent theory of social interaction and cognitive processes.

Human Systems of Distributed Shared Sense-making
         The current study follows the direction proposed by Greeno (and Vygotsky (1978)) and attempts
to contribute   to efforts synthesizing   a coherent    theory  of   social interaction   and cognitive   processes.
Toward   that end,   we  conceptualize  human     intellectual  activity/development    in terms  of   shared sense-
making   rather than  as   individual  cognition/learning    situated in sociocultural    context  or  as individual
participation/apprenticeship in collective social practice.    We develop a model of distributed shared sense-
making   through   integration of  the  following  key   ideas:   (a) elaboration of  Vygotsky's   (1978)    zone  of
proximal development (ZPD); (b) elaboration of a construct termed the interaction space (or I-space), an
extension of the n-dimensional space describing development of psychosocial entities originally proposed
by Harré  (1984);    (c) elaboration of Tomasello's     ideas  of  perspectival shift, joint  attentional/referential
fields, and shared intentional agent (Tomasello, 1999; Tomasello, Carpenter, Call, Behne & Moll, 2005);
(d) elaboration of  a broad  definition of  theory   of mind   (Astington   &  Olson,  1995;  Hatano,  2002,   2005;
Lagattuta & Wellman, 2001); and (e) cohesive tools (Halliday & Hasan, 1976).
         We   propose   that Vygotsky's    construct  of the   zone  of  proximal   development   can  be   fruitfully
extended to designate a human system of shared sense-making, and human cognition can thus be fruitfully
conceptualized as distributed across a network of mutually constitutive sense-making systems and mental
representations of those systems.    We propose conceptualizing an interaction space or I-space (as extended
from Harré  (1984))   to  characterize  sense-making    interactions  among    sense-making    systems   and  mental
models.   Interactions   can  be  characterized   in terms   of the   three   major  dimensions   that describe    the

                                                         392                                                    CSCL 2007
I-space--realization, definition/ideas,  and   convergence/control.    Movement       within the  I-space--that    is,
changing   interactions--can  be characterized   in  terms   of   perspectival  shifts,  shifts  across   dimensions
(realizationdefinition/ideasconvergence/control)         or  shifts   in  perspective    from    one   sense-making
system to another along the same dimension.      The interaction space can also be characterized in terms of
the components that comprise the space--the network of sense-making systems, mental models of those
systems, and the processes that function to develop coherence among the systems and mental models.

Coherence Processes:            Inquiry and Reflection
        We   conceive    sense-making    systems to  be mutually    constitutive  with   mental   models   of    those
systems  and  to  include processes   for  developing  coherence    among     sense-making    systems     and mental
models.  In  particular, we   conceive  of  inquiry and    reflection  as two  mutually     constitutive  coherence
processes,  through  which  humans    systematically   "open" to   consider   multiple   possible interconnections
among actions/ideas and then "close" to a single "best fit" option based on culturally developed criteria of
consistency, repeatability, fruitfulness, and/or robustness.
        Tomasello (1999) proposed that what may be unique about human cognition is not our ability to
innovate, but rather our ability to ratchet; that is, our ability to distribute innovations among other humans
in order to form a new basis for further innovation/ratcheting.        Tomasello and colleagues (2005) further
proposed   that an important  aspect  of  human  cognition   may   be  our    ability to act as  shared   intentional
agents--constructing     dynamic interactive   models    of  our   own    and   others'   minds   to    enable   such
ratcheting/shared sense-making.     Conceiving   of  inquiry  and  reflection  as coherence      processes within   a
network  of  distributed shared  sense-making    suggests  a potentially   powerful    role  for such   processes  in
developing   complex  networks   of   minds--multiplying     human    mental   processing    capacity   by enabling
integration of experiences and perspectives from multiple minds--a process that may be unique to human
mental processing.

Methods
        To demonstrate the utility of the proposed theoretical framework to describe important aspects of
teacher-student  shared  intellectual work,   we used   the  above    framework   and    methods   of   conversation
analysis (Psathas, 1995) to characterize developing teacher-student interactions in a technology-enriched
middle school science classroom over the course of a year-long scaffolded introduction to inquiry-based
science instruction (see Ladewski (2006) for a more complete description of the study methods).
        An interpretive case study comprised of "telling" mini-cases (Knobel, 1996) was developed to
capture both the subtle nuances of teacher-student interaction as they unfolded over the course of a lesson
and also as they changed over extended time.     Primary data sources used in developing the case study
included videotaped and transcribed recordings of nine key lessons--four 45-minute lessons from each of
two project-based units that spanned a year of instruction, as well as a culminating end-of-year student-
designed investigation.  Other data sources--including teacher semi-structured interviews, teacher-written
case reports, and videotapes of teacher professional development worksessions--provided additional data
to corroborate the story told by the mini cases.
        We characterized sense-making interactions in terms of the following constructs of shared sense-
making: (a) joint attentional field--on what object was joint attention focused and by whom; (b) referential
field--what  ideas/links  were  added  to  the referential field  and  by  whom;      (c) perspectival  shifts--what
shifts in perspective were initiated and by whom, and what corroborating or conflicting ideas/experiences
were added to the referential field as a result of the shift; (d) inquiry and reflection--what processes were
carried out to develop coherence among experiences and ideas within/among sense-making systems, and
who initiated/participated in those processes; and (e) cohesive tools--what cohesive elements were added to
link elements within the referential field and by whom.

Conclusions/Implications
        Empirical    findings indicate that perspectival   shifts became   increasingly   frequent   in number    and
increasingly diverse  in  terms of type   during teacher-student    interactions  across    the  year  of scaffolded
introduction to  inquiry-based  science   instruction.  Initially  the most   common      perspectival    shifts were
collectiveindividual     realization, as  the  teacher  modeled    and    her students   then   enacted   prescribed
experimental procedures in the classroom. Over time, teacher and students began to orchestrate additional
perspectival shifts, including  realizationdefinition    (description),   actiondefinition       (explanation),   and

                                                       393                                                       CSCL 2007
closedopen control (nascent inquiry/reflection); students also began to initiate perspectival shifts.       Thus,
experiences  with  inquiry-based  instruction   seemed   to provide  templates  of  sense-making    that began  to
change the shape of sense-making itself.     However, few cohesive tools linking or synthesizing ideas and/or
experiences over extended time were contributed by either teacher or students.
         The  theory  development  adds   to  an emerging    cross-disciplinary  area  of research  exploring  the
integration of the psychological and the social.     A   model of distributed   shared sense-making    provides a
potentially fruitful theoretical framework for characterizing human sense-making systems and developing
interactions among such systems--and thus for examining the role of technological tools (and perhaps also
the unique role of humans) in such sense-making systems.

References
Anderson,   J.R., Reder,  L.M., &  Simon,    H.A.   (1996).    Situated learning   and   education.  Educational
         Researcher, 25(4), 5-11.
Anderson, J.R., Reder, L.M., & Simon, H.A.       (1997).  Situative versus cognitive perspectives: Form versus
         substance.  Educational Researcher, 26(1), 18-21.
Astington, J.W., & Olson, D.R.     (1995).    The cognitive   revolution   in children's  understanding  of mind.
         Human Development, 38: 179-189.
Cobb, P.  (1994a).   Constructivism in mathematics and science education.       Educational Researcher, 23(7),
         4.
Cobb, P.    (1994b).  Where is the mind?      Constructivist  and  sociocultural   perspectives on  mathematical
         development.    Educational Researcher, 23(7), 13-20.
Driver, R., Asoko, H., Leach, J., Mortimer, E., & Scott, P.    (1994).  Constructing science knowledge in the
         classroom.   Educational Researcher, 23(7), 5-12.
Greeno, J.G.  (1997).  On claims that answer the wrong questions.      Educational Researcher, 26(1), 5-17.
Halliday, M.A.K., & Hasan, R.     (1976). Cohesion in English.    London: Longman Group Ltd.
Harré, R.    (1984).   Personal  being:  A   theory  for individual   psychology.     Cambridge,    MA:   Harvard
         University Press.
Hatano,  G.   (2002).  Book   review:   The   theory and    practice of cultural-historical psychology.     Mind,
         Culture, and Activity, 9(3), 238-240.
Hatano, G.   (2005).  Sociocultural psychology is now in maturity.      Mind, Culture, and Activity, 12(2), 152-
         156.
Kieren, T.E.  (2000).  Dichotomies or binoculars: Reflections on the papers by Steffe and Thompson and by
         Lerman.   Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 31(2), 228-233.
Ladewski,   B.G.   (2006).  Making  sense    of shared sense-making     in an  inquiry-based   science classroom:
         Toward a sociocultural theory of mind. University of Michigan: Unpublished doctoral dissertation.
Lagattuta, K.H., & Wellman, H.M.    (2001).     Thinking about the past: Early knowledge about links between
         prior experience, thinking, and emotion.    Child Development, 72(1), 82-102.
Lerman,  S.  (1996).   Intersubjectivity  in mathematics    learning: A  challenge  to the  radical constructivist
         paradigm?   Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 27, 133-150.
Lerman, S.   (2000).  A case of interpretations of social: A response to Steffe and Thompson.          Journal for
         Research in Mathematics Education, 31(2), 210-227.
Psathas, G.  (1995).   Conversation analysis: The study of talk-in-interaction.      Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage
         Publications.
Sfard, A.   (1998).  On   two metaphors   for   learning and  the dangers   of choosing   just one.  Educational
         Researcher, 27(2), 4-13.
Steffe, L.P., & Thompson, P.W.     (2000).   Interaction or intersubjectivity? A reply to Lerman.      Journal for
         Research in Mathematics Education, 31(2), 191-209.
Tomasello, M.     (1999).  The cultural origins of human cognition.        Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
         Press.
Tomasello,   M.,  Carpenter,  M., Call,  J., Behne,  T.,  &  Moll,   H.    (2005).  Understanding    and  sharing
         intentions: The origins of cultural cognition.  Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 28, 675-735.
Vygotsky, L.S.    (1978).  Mind in society: The development of higher psychological processes (M. Cole, V.
         John-Steiner, `S. Scribner, & E. Souberman, Eds.).     Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

                                                       394                                                   CSCL 2007
