      The role of problematizing moves in online knowledge building
                                                      activities
                           Ming LAI, The University of Hong Kong, minglai@hkucc.hku.hk

         Abstract: This paper employed the method of problematizing moves (Koschmann et al., 2005) to
         study the online discussion of two groups of fifth grade students with one group more experienced
         in knowledge building (Bereiter, 2002; Scardamalia, 2002) than the other. Productive discussions
         could be resulted even without the assistance of teachers, through the problematizing moves made
         by the students themselves. Students having more experience in knowledge building seemed to be
         better at initiating the problematizing moves. However, the initiation also requires the uptakes of
         other learners so that the inquiry could be sustained. There was evidence that the novice group
         learned to ask more questions in the discussions, but their questions could still not be qualified as
         problematizing    moves,  suggesting   further guidance  might  be needed.  Relevant   issues such  as
         culture, gender, and the concept of "group" in a CSCL context were also discussed in this paper.

Introduction
         In the paper that put forward a thematic agenda for the next decade of computer-supported collaborative
learning (CSCL),    Suthers    (2005)   argued  that  what   makes  this field  unique  is  the  computer   support   for
"intersubjective meaning making", which implies learning is not only accomplished through interactions but also
composed of those interactions (Koschmann, Zemel, Conlee-Stevens, Young, Robbs, & Barnhart, 2005, cited in
Suthers, 2005). As CSCL environments can turn communication into substance (Dillenbourg, 2005: p.260), the joint
meaning making process among participants is made visible and could be studied. Although there are studies that
examined social interactions through "coding and counting", the study of joint meaning making is still not prominent
in the field of CSCL (Stahl, Koschmann, & Suthers, 2006). Aligned with this new research focus, Stahl (2006)
proposed    small groups   as the primary  unit that  mediates  between  individual learning  and community     learning.
Within small groups, through the discourse displayed by the members, their meaning making process could be
observed. Koschmann et al. (2005) proposed the method of "problematizing moves" to investigate how groups of
learners identify a situation as problematic and requiring further inquiry. This type of research is at the beginning
stage (Suthers,   2005). This   paper  attempts to use   the method  of  problematizing    moves  to look at the  online
discussion of two groups of fifth grade students with one group having much more experience in CSCL activities
combined with the knowledge building approach (Bereiter, 2002; Scardamalia, 2002) than the other. Two episodes
are selected to see what factors might contribute to the successfulness or unsuccessfulness of problematizing moves.
The relationship of knowledge building and problematizing will also be explored.

Knowledge building as a learning goal for CSCL
         According to Bereiter (2002) and Scardamalia (2002), knowledge building is the process through which
knowledge advances in human societies, and that learning can also take place as a process of knowledge building.
The theory of knowledge building can become a theoretical rationale and pedagogical basis for CSCL. In a shared
network space provided in a CSCL setting, students could make their ideas explicit and share with others with a goal
to advance the knowledge of the collective to become a knowledge building community. The knowledge building
approach emphasizes the importance of collective cognitive responsibility and communal efforts to improve ideas
and to advance the knowledge of the collective (Scardamalia, 2002). A total of 12 knowledge building principles
were  elaborated   by Scardamalia     (2002) to distinguish  a  knowledge  building classroom    from  even  the best of
traditional and   modern   classrooms.  These   12 principles   include  "idea diversity", "democratizing   knowledge",
"community knowledge, collective responsibility", "improvable ideas", "epistemic agency", "knowledge building
discourse",  "real  ideas, authentic   problems",  "rise  above",   "symmetric  knowledge    advancement",   "pervasive
knowledge   building",   "constructive  uses of authority  sources", and  "embedded    and  transformative  assessment"
(Scardamalia, 2002). Based on these 12 knowledge building principles, Law & Wong (2003) studied a number of
CSCL groups and found consistent patterns of development across groups in that characteristics described by some
of the principles were exhibited before the others, while the characteristics of some of the principles were much more
difficult to be observed. They reported on their findings in the form of a developmental trajectory in knowledge
building. This developmental trajectory broadly paralleled Gunawardena, Lowe, & Anderson (1997)'s five phases of
knowledge construction (see Law, 2005): (1) sharing/comparing of information, (2) discovery and exploration of
dissonance   or   disagreement,   (3) negotiation  of   meaning  or knowledge    co-construction, (4)  testing  tentative

                                                            395                                                CSCL 2007
constructions, and (5) application of newly constructed knowledge. In other words, for students to become more
advanced in knowledge building, they need to move from sharing or comparing information to the discovery of
disagreement, negotiation of meaning and beyond. Other researchers employed the depth of explanation, that is,
whether the discourse is fact-oriented or explanation-oriented, to differentiate students' levels of knowledge building
(e.g., Lipponen, 2000; Hakkarainen, Lipponen & Jarvela, 2002). However, the method of problematizing moves has
not yet been applied in the context of knowledge building.

Problematizing and knowledge building
         To better understand how learning takes place in interactional contexts, Koschmann et al. (2005) proposed
the concept of "problematizing moves", which        is "a form of social action that has the effect of calling something
previously held to be so into doubt" (p. 265). The concept of problematizing moves draws on Dewey (1938/1991)'s
idea of inquiry that "a problem is not a task to be performed which a person puts upon himself or that is placed upon
him by others" (p. 111). To problematize learners have to discover something which is potentially problematic. In
Koschmann et al. (2005)'s terminology, a problematizing move serves the functions of directing attention to some
potentially problematic    matter, as  well as  projecting some  form   of  collective action   with regard to  that matter.
Koschmann et al. (2005) illustrated with two examples, one face-to-face and the other online, that the strategy of
problematizing    moves  could  be    applied to  analyze  how  learning  takes  place  in interactional  settings.  In both
examples, the analysis began with a prelude to problematizing, followed by the problematizing moves initiated by
the learners, and   the uptakes    of other members.   Koschmann     et al. (2005)  concluded    that even  there might   be
communication constraints in online settings, the methods employed by learners to problematize a problem are
similar to those in face-to-face contexts.

         As   one   characteristic of knowledge    building is  the focus   on problems    that learners really care    about
(Scardamalia, 2002), it could be seen that the concepts of knowledge building and problematizing are closely related.
Knowledge building emphasizes on learners' "epistemic agency"; problematizing also requires the moves to be
initiated by learners themselves. Calling something previously held to be so into doubt requires putting forward ideas
that are different from those shared by the majority and moving beyond current levels of community knowledge;
these could be represented by the knowledge building principles of "idea diversity", "democratizing knowledge" and
"rise above". The collective action towards the problematic matters and the uptakes of other members are closely
related to the principles of "community knowledge, collective responsibility", "improvable ideas", and "knowledge
building discourse". In the literature of knowledge building, teachers are found to be a critical factor to engage
students in deeper levels of knowledge building. In Koschmann et al. (2005)'s paper, although the authors did not
make it clear whether the presence of a facilitating tutor is necessary in problematizing moves, the tutor played a
significant role in helping the learners to direct their attention towards the potentially problematic matter in both the
face-to-face and online examples. This paper does not attempt to address the issues related to teachers or tutors, but
focus on the interaction between two groups of same-grade students with one group having much more experience in
knowledge building than the other.

Peer scaffolding in a CSCL environment
         Generally    speaking, in  a  CSCL   environment,   scaffolding  could  be provided    by   human  agents   such as
teachers and peers or by the artifacts embedded in software designs (e.g., Brush & Saye, 2002; Lajoie, 2005). In a
recent overview, Reiser (2004) summarized two major and complementary mechanisms that educational software
tools could provide scaffolding. Firstly, software tools could help structure the task to guide students through key
components as well as support their planning and performance. Secondly, the tools could problematize important
contents so that students would devote resources to issues they might not otherwise attend to. It should be noted that
both Reiser (2004) and Koschmann et al. (2005) used the term "problematizing" and their meanings are in fact quite
similar; the focus of the former is on how software tools could provide this function while the latter on how people
actually do   it in social settings,  including  both online and    face-to-face contexts.  However,   Reiser   (2004)  also
mentioned that "the social context of collaborative problem solving is often integral to the problematizing nature of
the tool" (p. 289), suggesting that for the problematizing function to be effective, human involvements such as peer
collaboration have to be included. The concept of peer scaffolding founded on the theories of Vygotsky and Piaget.
With his notion of zone of proximal development, Vygotsky (1978) mentioned the benefits of interacting with a
more capable peer. Piaget did not consider inequality in competence to be necessary (see e.g. Tudge & Rogoff,
1989) and focused more on peer interactions through which children with differing perspectives could create socio-
cognitive conflicts that result in construction of new conceptual structures and understanding (see also Doise &
Mugny, 1984). From the perspective of knowledge building, the focus is not on how individual learners could be
benefited from    the interactions  or  how   the cognitive process  of  an  individual  operates,   but on extending    the

                                                            396                                                   CSCL 2007
knowledge   and understanding  of the  whole community   beyond    the    initial state of  knowledge  of the collective
community through intentional social interactions. The concept of problematizing moves is considered in this paper
as a key to understand how the community knowledge could be advanced.

Issues of methodology in CSCL
         In the field of CSCL, there are basically three major methodological approaches: experimental, descriptive,
and iterative design, as summarized in Suthers (2005)'s paper. The experimental approach usually involves the
comparison of an intervention to a control condition and the data are analyzed through the method of "coding and
counting". The descriptive or ethnomethodological approach is usually microanalytic and involves the examination
of some episodes in greater detail; the method proposed by Koschmann et al. (2005) is an example of this approach.
The iterative design approach involves the continuous improvement of software and pedagogical designs which is
driven by the dialectic between theory and implementation. Suthers (2005) did not argue the importance of one
approach over the others, but rather called for a methodological fusion that combines the strengths of different
approaches. In the area of research design, "triangulation" is often used to refer to the condition that multiple or
mixed methods are being employed. Triangulation is a metaphor borrowed from land surveying, which states that if
we know the exact positions of two points, we can locate an unknown third point by projecting an angle from each of
the two known points. When this metaphor is applied to the setting of research design, it is not clear what exactly
each of the points mean and what different methods or combinations of methods should be employed in a study (for
more on triangulation, see e.g., Erzberger & Kelle, 2003; Gorard & Taylor, 2004). In Chinese characters, there are
three words constructed with the same component mu. As shown in figure 1, the single-component word mu means a
tree; while the combinations  of  this component   will become     the  words     lin and  sen, both  meaning a forest.
Interestingly, the word sen has the shape of a triangle, with its upper part meaning a tree and lower part a forest. This
triangular-shaped word might provide a new metaphor for triangulation, which implies "seeing the tree as well as the
forest". In other words, in choosing those multiple analytic methods, there should be some focusing on the detail,
that is seeing the tree, while others focusing on the overall picture, that is seeing the forest. To triangulate is to
supplement a detailed analysis with a whole-picture one, or a whole-picture analysis with a detailed one. The method
of problematizing moves attempts to study human interacting episodes in great detail, in order to look at the whole
picture, especially on the changes in discourse patterns over different stages of collaboration between the two groups
of students, the detailed analysis in this paper is "triangulated" with a "coding and counting" method based on the
five phases in knowledge construction proposed by Gunawardena et al. (1997). The coding scheme of Gunawardena
et al. (1997) was chosen because it is one of the methods that can reflect the levels of knowledge building (Law,
2005); and compared to other coding methods, such as those distinguishing between fact-oriented and explanation-
oriented discourse (e.g., Lipponen, 2000), Gunawardena et al. (1997)'s coding scheme included the category of
"discovery of dissonance or disagreement", which is closely related to the concept of problematizing, as they both
require the learners to discover something to be potentially problematic.

                      Figure 1. The three Chinese words with the meanings of tree and forest.

Research Design and Methods
         This current study was based on the collaboration between two primary school teachers, one in Hong
Kong and the other in Toronto, Canada. The Canadian teacher is teaching at a laboratory school of the University
of Toronto and has more than four years of experience in facilitating students to engage in online knowledge
building activities while the Hong  Kong   teacher and   his   students   were    new   to this novel approach. The
international collaboration was set up when the two teachers met at an international conference. The Hong Kong
teacher was interested in trying out this new pedagogical approach and the Canadian teacher wanted to scaffold
the Hong Kong collaborators, both the teacher and his students, through online collaborative knowledge building
of the two classrooms. As a result, the two teachers agreed that their students, 22 from Hong Kong and 22 from
Toronto, all at grade five, would collaborate through the online platform Knowledge Forum® during the school
year 2004-2005.

The online platform

                                                          397                                                  CSCL 2007
          Knowledge Forum® (KF), the online discussion platform used in this study, was developed by Marlene
Scardamalia and Carl Bereiter's team at the University of Toronto to support asynchronous collaborative knowledge
building activities (Scardamalia & Bereiter, 1992). KF creates a shared network space for students to write new
notes, read other's notes and respond by writing build-on notes. Notes related to the same topic could be arranged in
the same   view.  KF   has  a number    of specific features to  support knowledge   building activities. First of  all, its
graphical display helps users to visualize their interactions with one another as each build-on note is linked to the
note it responds   to. KF     also provides  the function  of    "scaffolds" in the form of word  cues    such  as   "New
information", "New idea", "I need to understand", and "My theory" so that students could better organize their note
contents.

Participants' backgrounds
          All the 22 Canadian students were from the same grade-five class in the laboratory school described above.
These students had used KF as a learning environment fully integrated into their school learning experience since
grade one. In fact, teachers in this school adopted not only the technology platform, but also the knowledge building
approach in their pedagogical practices. While the Canadian students were experienced in knowledge building and
the use of the technology platform KF, the 22 Hong Kong students were totally new to this online environment or the
knowledge building approach. Although they were familiar with face-to-face discussions in class, they have never
engaged in online knowledge building activities approach which emphasizes the continual improvement of ideas
through intentional interactions with one another.

The collaboration process
          Stage one: The current study began in the autumn term of 2004. As the Hong Kong (HK) students had no
experience in online knowledge building activities, the two teachers agreed to start their collaboration only after the
HK students had a chance to familiarize with working in KF. In Nov 2004, the 22 HK students formed five groups
among themselves to work collaboratively on the online platform KF for two months to work on topics of bacteria,
computer, dress-up, electric boat, and electricity. This two month period could be considered as stage one of this
study in which HK students discussed among themselves on KF. At the same time, the Canadian (CA) students used
KF to work on topics related to ancient civilizations which was one of their curriculum themes for the school year.
No interaction of the two classes occurred during this stage.

          Stage two: Beginning at the end of Jan 2005, HK and CA students started their online collaboration. During
the first week, an "Introduction" view was set up for the two classes of students to introduce themselves to each other
and to articulate which topics they were interested in. Since the HK students and their teacher were also interested in
ancient civilizations, the CA students extended their exploration by one and a half months to collaborate with their
peers in HK on eight topics related to ancient civilizations that were found to be of interest to both classes of
students. The topics included building, clothing, Egypt, food, language, life style, religion, and weapon. During this
period  of international   collaboration,  HK students  formed    eight groups  each responsible for one   of   the topics,
although they were encouraged to join in the discussions of other topics. While on the CA side, students were
allowed to freely join in the discussions of any topic they were interested. This period of time could be regarded as
the stage two of this study.

          Stage three: The joint-collaboration ended when the CA school closed for their term-break. When school
resumed    in the spring    term,  the CA  class moved   on   to  other topics  and no longer  appeared    on   the online
collaboration space with the HK students. On the other hand, the latter class of students did not have a term-break at
the same time and they continued to work on the eight ancient civilization topics till June. Thus although it was not
planned intentionally, the end of joint-collaboration signified the start of stage three, which could be regarded as a
"fading"   stage  (Collins, Brown,     & Newman,    1989),   as  the more experienced  group  had withdrawn     from     the
collaboration, leaving the novice group to continue the discussions by themselves.

Results and Discussion
          To apply the method of problematizing moves proposed by Koschmann et al. (2005), two episodes each
within a discussion thread were selected and analyzed. They were both created within stage two, in which the CA
and HK students participated jointly in the discussion. The analysis was then "triangulated" with the findings based
on Gunawardena et al. (1997)'s coding scheme. The results of two focus group interviews with the HK students after
the collaboration were also presented and the corresponding issues were discussed.

                                                             398                                                CSCL 2007
Episode 1: Did most civilizations hunt?
        The  first episode  was   related to  the topic of  "food". Before   the problematizing  move,   students were
discussing  when   ancient people  changed     from hunting  to  trading for food.  Thus   an assumption   beneath  the
discussion is that ancient civilizations usually hunted. A CA student posed the first problematizing move, questioning
whether all ancient civilizations hunted for food. The following excerpts were extracted from the online discourse
triggered by this problematizing move. The text inside brackets at the beginning of each entry denotes the scaffold
selected by the student in that note.

CA student #1: [My theory]: Is that most civilizations hunted for food? It would be interesting if a civilization did
                        not hunt.
HK student #1:          [I need to understand]: Unless you count the tribes in Africa or India, I'm not really sure that
                        people nowadays hunt for food. But people long time ago either hunted or farmed or even
                        fished. But I don't know whether the people hunted more or farmed or fished more.
CA student #2: [Further explanation]: Most civilizations found that hunting was much harder to use to get food and
                        most civilizations were agricultural societies (farmers) and hunted only a tiny bit.
HK student #2:          I think Chinese hunted for food .Then they fished for food. Lastly they planted.
HK student #1:          [New information]: The Chinese mainly farmed for food. They think that wheat is the most
                        important food, that's why they had so many farms in a village. The season for them to plant
                        is  spring and   they  harvest the food  in autumn,  they   do not work in winter.   And  when
                        sometimes they can't grow any wheat, they hunt instead.

        The first problematizing move received the uptakes of other students to further inquire on other means of
getting food in ancient times. As the HK students are all Chinese, they quickly associated the discussion with their
knowledge that ancient China was a farming society. When the students came to a shared understanding that ancient
civilizations could also farm for food, the CA student posed another problematizing move, questioning how ancient
people who farmed could have meat to eat. The second problematizing move again drew the attention of other
students and they came to a new shared understanding that agricultural civilizations could raise animals to get meat,
as indicated by the following excerpts that followed the above ones.

CA student #1: [I need to understand]: How did they get their needed meat?
CA student #2: [New idea]: The civilizations would probably only hunt when they needed the meat and be farmers
                        for more of the time. Maybe they even just raised their own animals like chickens and cattle.
HK student #1:          Yes, that's a good suggestion, I think it's right. I once read a book and the people usually
                        slaughtered their own animals, they rarely hunted. That's why some people have to take care
                        of the animals and the other are doing the farming.

        With the two problematizing moves, the understanding of students became more and more complete, from
recognizing that most ancient civilizations hunted, to some of them farmed, to those farming civilizations could also
raise animals to get meet. From the perspective of knowledge building, it could be said that the collective knowledge
has been advanced. Both problematizing moves were generated by the same CA student, while HK and other CA
students participated in the discourse through their uptakes of the problematic matters. It should also be noted that
the teachers did not involve in the discussions, the problematizing moves were initiated and up-taken by the students
themselves.

Episode 2: Why some civilizations were more peaceful than others?
        The first episode demonstrated how problematizing moves could lead to the sustained inquiry over the
problematic matters  so that  the  collective  knowledge   could be  advanced;   in the second  episode, however,   the
initiation of a problematizing move did not result in sustained uptakes of other students. The episode is related to the
topic of "weapon". A group of three HK boys was responsible for this topic. Before the problematizing move, they
were gathering the information on weapons used in the past, such as the darts used by Japanese ninjas, and the
swords used  by    ancient Romans.     Then  a CA   student posed   a problematizing    move,  questioning   why  some
civilizations were more peaceful than the others.

CA student #3:   [I need to understand]: I wonder why some civilizations were more peaceful than others? For
                           instance the Mayans barely fought at all compared to the Romans who fought a lot.
CA student #4:   May be the civilizations fought a lot depended on where they lived.

                                                           399                                                CSCL 2007
CA student #3:     [Further explanation]: I think this might be true because the Mayans lived in a pretty remote part of
                            the world (ancient Mexico).
HK student #3:     [Further explanation]: It's the problem of the ruler or leader of the place. If the ruler likes to fight,
                            then the place and all its people aren't peaceful at all.

          The discussion thread ended with the note posted by HK student #3, who is not one of the three boys.
Although there was a small degree of uptakes in this episode and ideas like whether the civilization lived in a remote
place or whether the ruler loved to fight came out, the problematizing move did not trigger the sustained inquiry over
the matter of why some civilizations were more peaceful than the others, which might turn out to be a productive
discussion. The three HK boys did not participated in the discussion at all; they were still more interested in finding
information about weapons and how ancient people fought and killed. One of the knowledge building principles,
"symmetric knowledge advancement" (Scardamalia, 2002), articulates the importance of balancing the inquiries on
different knowledge    aspects.  The   three boys   seemed   to be   too focused   on  their  knowledge     advancement     in
"weapons", while the discussion about peaceful matters was beyond their agenda.

Triangulation with Gunawardena et al. (1997)'s coding scheme
          With the concept of problematizing moves, students' discussions could be studied in great detail. The two
episodes seemed to suggest that CA students, who were more experienced in knowledge building activities, were
better at initiating problematizing moves than their HK counterparts. However, to draw a more concrete conclusion,
the results have to be "triangulated" with an analytic method that could look at the whole picture. In another study,
Lai &   Law   (in press) coded   the same    set of data with   Gunawardena    et al.  (1997)'s   model    of  five  phases in
knowledge construction. Each discussion note was classified into one of the five phases based on the coding scheme
proposed   by  Gunawardena    et al. (1997).    Phase 1  is called  "sharing/comparing     of information",    including    the
statement of observation, opinion, or agreement. Phase 2 is called "discovery and exploration of dissonance or
disagreement     among ideas, concepts,  or   statements",  including  the identification   of   areas  of disagreement,    or
clarification of  the  source and    extent  of  disagreement;  this phase    could   be   regarded  as  closely    related to
problematizing as they both require the learners to discover some matters that are potentially problematic. Phase 3 is
called  "negotiation  of meaning/co-construction    of  knowledge",    including  the negotiation    or clarification   of  the
meaning   of  terms, identification of areas  of  agreement  or  overlap  among   conflicting    concepts,  or proposal    and
negotiation   of new  statements embodying      compromise   and  co-construction;    this phase  is closely   related  to  the
uptakes of other learners, as after the problematizing move, learners will devote their efforts in further inquiring on
the problematic matters. Phase 4 is called "testing tentative constructions", including testing the proposed synthesis
against received   fact, or testing  against  contradictory   testimony   in  the literature.  Finally,  phase   5   is called
"application  of  newly-constructed  knowledge",    including   the application   of new   knowledge.   The    first phase  of
sharing or   comparing   information   could  be  considered  as the   lowest level   in   terms of  a  knowledge    building
discourse, while the second to fifth phases denote more advanced levels (Law, 2005). As the current study did not
require students to come up with some knowledge constructions for testing or applying, Lai & Law (in press) did not
find any note belonging to either phase 4 or phase 5. Table 1 summarized the coding results over the three stages of
collaboration between the two groups of students; only the findings within the first three phases were presented.

Table 1: Classification of the students' note contents in each of the three stages using Gunawardena et al. 's (1997)
coding scheme on phases of knowledge construction.

                                                                 Stage 1              Stage 2              Stage 3
                                                                    HK            HK          CA            HK
          Phase 1: Sharing/comparing information                  91%           67%           60%          81%
          Phase 2: Discovery of dissonance                          6%          13%           18%           5%
          Phase 3: Negotiation of meaning                           3%          21%           22%          14%

          It could be seen that over the three stages, the majority of notes belonged to the first phase of "sharing
information", especially during stage one when HK students discussed among themselves. With the joining in of CA
students in stage two, more notes related to the "discovery of dissonance" were added by CA students, which in turns
triggered the discourse of HK students towards "negotiation of meaning". When CA students no longer appeared in
the discussion, HK students continued to discuss on the topics of ancient civilization, but their discourse was not
characterized by the "discovery of dissonance". A possible reason could be that the discovery of dissonance, or the
initiation of problematizing moves is more likely to appear in the earlier stage of inquiry. However, it is also likely

                                                            400                                                      CSCL 2007
that the CA students, at least some of them, with more experience in participating in knowledge building activities,
were better at discovering dissonances, or problematizing the discourse than HK students.

Are students equally good at problematizing?
         Although the results suggested that CA   students   were better at initiating the problematizing   moves or
discovering dissonances than   HK  students,  it does  not    mean  that all  CA  students    were  equally good  at
problematizing. Of the 22 CA students, only ten of them created notes which belonged to the second phase of
Gunawardena et al. (1997)'s coding scheme, while the others only brought in discussion notes that were related to
information sharing. Among the ten CA students, one created three second-phase notes, the other two each produced
two second-phase notes, while the remaining seven each created only one second-phase note.     The results suggested
that those problematizing moves were initiated by a few students, though it is likely that owing to the limit of time
for the stage of joint-discussion, other CA students did not have the opportunities to initiate problematizing moves.
The CA student who question "why some civilizations were more peaceful than the others" also created a similar
note in the topic of language, asking "why some languages are still around and others are not". It could be seen that
the wording pattern used by this student was, "why some...and others..." The tactic used by the student who initiated
the problematizing move in "food" was to question whether hunting as the major means of getting food could be
applied to all ancient civilizations. It was also found that the CA students usually initiated a problematizing move
with the scaffold of "I need to understand" or "My theory".

Did HK students notice any differences?
         After HK students had finished the online discussions, two focus group interviews were conducted with six
HK girls and seven HK boys respectively. They were asked with the question whether they noticed any differences
between the notes written by them and by CA students. Both boys and girls mentioned the English of CA students
was more fluent, but the girls also noticed that CA students asked more questions in their notes. To triangulate the
interview results with the whole picture, the types of scaffolds used by students throughout the three stages were
counted. As shown in table 2, the patterns of scaffold usage by HK students were quite consistent in stages one and
two: about half of them were "New information", about 30% were "New idea", and about 10% were "I need to
understand". The corresponding pattern for CA students was somewhat different: although half of the scaffolds used
were also "New information", they tended to use more "I need to understand" (27%) and less "New idea" (13%).
The results might reflect why the problematizing moves were mainly produced in stage two by CA students as the
question-asking scaffold, "I need to understand", is more related to problematizing than other types of scaffold. It is
noteworthy that in stage three, when the CA students withdrew, the HK students increased their usage of the scaffold
"I need to understand" to 22%, suggesting that they might model their CA counterparts to ask more questions in their
notes in the final stage. However, a closer look at the note contents will discover the questions asked by some HK
students tended to be  more   information-oriented, suggesting   that they  might not   fully grasp the meaning   of
"understand" in the scaffold, "I need to understand". For example, some HK students used this scaffold to ask
questions such as "do you agree?" or in conjunction with the statement of "please tell me more what you mean".
They might simply use it as "I need to know" instead of focusing on deepening their understanding. It should also be
noted that HK students increased their usage of "New information" to 61% in stage three; this might be due to the
fact that at the end of stage three, each group had to conduct a presentation on the topic of ancient civilization one
was responsible for, so the HK students might try to look for information that were presentable; the results were in
fact consistent with the analysis using Gunawardena et al. (1997)'s coding scheme as shown in table 1.

Table 2: Kinds of scaffold used in Hong Kong and Canadian students' notes during the three stages

                                             Stage 1                  Stage 2               Stage 3
             Scaffolds used                      HK             HK            CA              HK
             New information                   49%              48%           49%             61%
             New idea                          27%              32%           13%             15%
             I need to understand              13%              12%           27%             22%
             Others                            11%              8%            11%             2%

Issues related to grouping
         During the international collaboration, CA students were free to join in the discussion of any topics they
were interested, while groups were formed among HK students with each group responsible for one topic related to
ancient civilization, though they were encouraged to join in the discussions of other topics as well. The participation

                                                         401                                                CSCL 2007
statistics suggested that CA and HK students did not vary much on the numbers of topics they worked onto. In stage
two, averagely speaking, each CA student participated in the discussion of 2.36 topics, while HK students worked
onto 2.05 topics. In the focus group interviews, HK students were asked whether they preferred to participate in the
discussion as group members or as individuals. The boys mentioned it was important to belong to a group so as to
indicate one's devotedness to the topic, and it was not possible to have a deeper level of discussion if one belonged
to many different groups. While for the girls, some preferred to work in groups while others said it was not important
whether one belonged to a group, the concept of group identity could be flexible in the current context, as indicated
by the following interview excerpt:

          When you are building on the notes in other topics, you will feel that you belong to a large group.
          If you simply look for the information of one topic, you will feel that you are a member of that
          group. So the membership changes in different times. (Interview transcript of a Hong Kong girl)

          Recently,  Stahl (2006)   put forward the notion  of  "group  cognition" to  understand   the importance  of
discourse  in  small groups  in a   CSCL  context. Stahl  (2006)  spent several chapters to clarify concepts   such as
mediation by small groups, and whether collaborative groups could think. The concept of "group", however, seemed
to be treated as unproblematic and not much words were spent on it in the book; it was used to contrast with
individual learning (p. 5) and its size could vary from three to five (p. 19). In a face-to-face project-work setting, the
concept of "group" or "group boundary" is more concrete. In a CSCL context, group boundaries are more blurred.
Students can still form groups to carry out the discussion or inquiry, but their discourse is visible to other students
who can join in the discussion at any time. The results of this study suggested that problematizing moves might not
be easily initiated by all learners, so the flexibility of crossing group boundaries is important, or otherwise some
groups may end up with only information-sharing discourse without any problematizing movements. The flexibility
requires both the willingness to join in others' discussion and the welcome-ness of others to join in one's discussion.
It is related to the knowledge building principle of "symmetric knowledge advancement" and further studies are
needed on this issue.

Issues related to culture and gender
          The two groups of students were from two different cultures, one Eastern and the other Western. There have
been findings that people from Eastern cultures, which are more collectivist, tend to conform and agree more while
people from Western cultures, which are more individualistic, tend to deviate and disagree more (see e.g., Nisbett,
2003). However, it should be noted that to disagree is not equivalent to problematizing or discovering disagreements
or dissonances. In this study, the factor of culture is confounded with the experience in knowledge building. In future
studies, they should be separated to see whether culture alone could make any significant difference on the discourse
patterns.

          The focus group interviews of HK students suggested that girls might be more flexible in crossing the group
boundaries than boys. The participation statistics also indicated in stage two, HK girls tended to work onto more
topics  (2.64) than  boys  (1.45)  and  the difference was significant  (F(1,20)=6.86, p<.05);  though   there was  no
significant gender difference on the number of notes created or number of notes read. Gender is thus a factor that
worth further inquiry. If boys are really less likely to cross the group or topic boundary, intervention might be needed
to help them appreciate the importance of the knowledge building principle of "symmetric knowledge advancement".

Conclusion
          This paper demonstrates that problematizing moves could lead to productive discussions among fifth-grade
students in a CSCL context. It was also found that students having more experience in knowledge building are better
at initiating the problematizing moves. However, the initiation also requires the uptakes of other learners so that the
inquiry could   be  sustained;  it involves the issues of  how   to cross the group or   topic boundaries,  and  more
fundamentally how "group" should be conceptualized in the setting of CSCL. Although there was evidence that after
the collaboration, the novice group tended to ask more questions, which might be the result of modeling from the
more experienced group, the questions they asked could still not be counted as problematizing moves. It suggests
that some more guidance might be needed; for example, the teacher could clarify with them the difference between "I
need to know" and "I need to understand". This paper presents an international collaboration between two groups of
fifth-grade students through an online discussion forum. As the whole world is increasingly connected, this type of
international collaborative offers a promising way for future pedagogical designs in which productive discussions

                                                           402                                                CSCL 2007
could be resulted even without the assistance of teachers, through the problematizing moves made by the students
themselves.

Reference
Bereiter, C. (2002). Education and mind in the knowledge age. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Brush, T. A., & Saye, J. W. (2002). A summary of research exploring hard and soft scaffolding for teachers and
       students using a multimedia supported learning environment. The Journal of Interactive Online Learning, 1
       (2), 1-12.
Collins, A., Brown, J. S., & Newman, S. E. (1989). Cognitive apprenticeship: Teaching the craft of reading, writing,
       and mathematics. In L. B. Resnick (Ed.), Knowing, learning, and instruction: Essays in honor of Robert
       Glaser (pp. 453-494). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Dewey, J. (1938/1991). Logic: The theory of inquiry. In J. A. Boydston (Ed.), John Dewey: The later works, 1925-
       1953, Vol. 12. Carbondale, IL: SIU Press.
Dillenbourg, P. (2005). Designing biases that augment socio-cognitive interactions. In R. Bromme, F. W. Hesse, &
       H. Spada (Eds.), Barriers and biases in computer-mediated knowledge communication ­ and how they may
       be overcome (pp. 243-264). NY: Springer.
Doise, W., & Mugny, G. (1984). The social development of the intellect. Oxford, UK: Pergamon.
Erzberger, C., & Kelle, U. (2003). Making inferences in mixed methods: The rules of integration. In A. Tashakkori
       & C. Teddlie (Eds.), Handbook of mixed methods in social and behavioral research (pp. 457-488). Thousand
       Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Gorard, S. (2004). Combining methods in education and social research. Maidenhead: Open University Press.
Gunawardena, C. N., Lowe, C. A., & Anderson, T. (1997). Analysis of global online debate and the development of
       an interaction analysis model  for examining  social   construction of knowledge  in computer  conferencing.
       Journal of Educational Computing Research, 17(4), 397-431.
Hakkarainen, K., Lipponen, L., & Jarvela, S. (2002). Epistemology of inquiry and computer-supported collaborative
       learning. In N. Miyake, R. Hall, & T. Koschmann (Eds.), CSCL2: Carrying forward the conversation (pp.
       129-156). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Koschmann, T., Zemel, A., Conlee-Stevens, M., Young, N., Robbs, J., & Barnhart, A. (2005). How do people learn?
       Members' methods and communicative mediation. In R. Bromme, F. W. Hesse, & H. Spada (Eds.), Barriers
       and biases in computer-mediated knowledge communication ­ and how they may be overcome (pp. 265-294).
       NY: Springer.
Lai, M., & Law, N. (in press). Peer scaffolding of knowledge building through collaborative groups with differential
       learning experiences. Journal of Educational Computing Research.
Lajoie, S. P. (2005). Extending the scaffolding metaphor. Instructional Science, 33, 541-557.
Law, N. (2005). Assessing learning outcomes in CSCL settings. A paper presented at the CSCL conference 2005.
       May 30-Jun 4, Taiwan.
Law, N., & Wong, E. (2003). Developmental trajectory in knowledge building: An investigation. In B. Wasson, S.
       Ludvigsen,   & U.  Hoppe  (Eds.), Designing  for change   in  networked  learning environments  (pp. 47-56).
       Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Lipponen,  L.  (2000). Towards   knowledge   building:  From   facts to explanations in  primary students' computer
       mediated discourse. Learning Environments Research, 3, 179-199.
Nisbett, R. E. (2003). The geography of thought: How Asians and Westerners think differently and why. New York:
       Free Press.
Piaget, J. (1928). The judgment and reasoning in children. London: Routledge and Kegan.
Reiser, B. J. (2004). Scaffolding complex learning: The mechanisms of structuring and problematizing student work.
       The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 13(3), 273-304.
Scardamalia, M. (2002). Collective cognitive responsibility for the advancement of knowledge. In B. Smith (Ed.),
       Liberal education in a knowledge society (pp. 67-98). Chicago: Open Court.
Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (1992). An architecture for collaborative knowledge building. In E. De Corte (Ed.),
       Computer-based learning environments and problem solving (Vol. 84, pp. 41-66). Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
Stahl, G. (2006). Group cognition: Computer support for building collaborative knowledge. Cambridge, Mass: MIT
       Press.
Stahl, G.,  Koschmann,    T.,  & Suthers,  D. (2006).   Computer-supported    collaborative learning: An   historical
       perspective. In R. K.   Sawyer (Ed.),  The Cambridge     handbook   of the learning  sciences (pp.  409-426).
       Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Suthers, D. D. (2005). Technology affordances for intersubjective learning: A thematic agenda for CSCL. A paper
       presented at the CSCL conference 2005. May 30-Jun 4, Taiwan.

                                                          403                                               CSCL 2007
Tudge, J. R. H., &  Rogoff, B. (1989). Peer influences      on cognitive development: Piagetian and Vygotskian
     perspectives. In M. H. Bornstein & J. Bruner (Eds.), Interaction in human development (pp. 17-40). Hillsdale,
     NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind and society: The development of higher mental processes. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
     University Press.

                                                        404                                                CSCL 2007
