           Let's Read Together: An Evaluation of a computer Assisted
                         Reciprocal Early English Reading System

                           Yu-Ju Lan, Department of Information and Computer Education
                       Yao-Ting Sung, Department of Educational Psychology and Counseling
                         Kuo-En Chang, Department of Information and Computer Education
                                        National Taiwan Normal University
                         yujulan@gmail.com, sungtc@cc.ntnu.edu.tw, kchang@ice.ntnu.edu.tw

           Abstract. The purposes of this study were to evaluate the effect of a computer assisted reciprocal
           early English reading (CAREER) system. The results showed that these components were unable
           to guarantee the students to collaborate well when they lacked for the abilities to accomplish the
           assigned tasks. Nevertheless, with the support of the proposed mobile reading system the students
           were benefited by collaborating with each other.

Introduction
           Students' reading abilities play an important role in their academic achievement. Research evidence shows
that training in early linguistic skills improved children's reading performance, especially for those learners who are
at-risk for reading difficulties (Lovett, Warren-Chaplin, Ransby, & Borden, 1990). In the field of EFL teaching,
collaborative  learning  (CL) has  been widely  used  in reading   programs    to implement   the required intensity   for
mastery of early reading skills and provide students with learning support because of their sophisticated features such
as small group, pair-work, and peer-assisted learning. In CL model learners are put at the center of learning process,
and guidance and concrete teaching are provided whenever necessary. In a review of the literature on collaborative
learning also affirmed its effect upon students' reading skills, such as promoting students' motivation (Ushioda,
1996), increasing reading outcomes (Slavin, 1988), pursuing group goal (Nichols & Miller, 1994), and decreasing
EFL students' feeling of school alienation (Ghaith, 2003).

           Even though collaborative learning has been known as an effective teaching method in EFL reading, few
studies had    focused on  early EFL  reading. The   pedagogical   challenges  (such as   students' diversity in reading
abilities, the social-economic   gap between   rural and    country, class size,  limited teaching  time, and  available
resources)  becomes    a problem  when  EFL  teachers  try  to adopt  collaborative  learning  in reading  instruction in
traditional EFL classes (Lan, Chang, & Sung, 2004).

           Mobile technology is currently a feasible approach to overcoming many of the obstacles in current methods
of EFL reading instruction. Standing on the shoulder of giant CALL (computer assisted language learning, e.g.,
Sung, Huang, & Chang, under review), MALL (mobile assisted language learning) has the capabilities of providing
EFL learners with the same opportunities for independent and targeted reading practice and immediate corrective
feedback as CALL. Considering the limited number of MALL studies focusing on early EFL reading skill training
and fewer studies using elementary EFL learners as participants, the purpose of this research was to investigate how
mobile technology benefits to elementary EFL learners' collaboration. Rather than measuring specific learning gains,
this research   focused   on comparing  students'    collaborative   behaviors found  in   two different  EFL    learning
environments (without and with mobile device supports), and investigated that whether mobile learning could benefit
students' collaboration. The following sections will give a brief description of methodology, results, and finally a
discussion and conclusion.

Method
           In order to understand elementary EFL learners' collaboration, we collected the video data from the two
classes and then watched the vide data repeatedly. The video watch was focused on the how the groups behaved
during the reading activities described in Procedure Section.

Subjects

                                                           405                                                 CSCL 2007
The participants of this experiment were 52 forth graders in 2 classes from an elementary school of Taipei, Taiwan.
Each class was first randomly assigned into an experimental group and a control group. Then the students were
grouped into heterogeneous reading groups based on their level of English achievement in the third grade.

CAREER System
         This study  proposed  a  reading  system  called   Computer    Assisted Reciprocal  Early English Reading
(CAREER).     CAREER    consists of three modules:  a sight   word module,   a   phonetic word module,  and  a peer
assessment module. The design strategy of the sight word module and the phonetic word module is based on a
scaffolding foundation. When students are practicing and taking the test, CAREER provides them with the necessary
scaffoldings. Students can hear and repeat after CAREER to say the sound of a sight word or a single phoneme. In
contrast to the learning activities of word learning, the strategy used in the peer assessment module is collaborative
learning. In the peer assessment module, CAREER first assigns each student a paragraph randomly drawn from the
text. Next, CAREER asks the whole group to organize the complete story by sharing and discussing. Then, CAREER
shows some comprehension questions on the screen and asks students to answer the questions by group discussion.

Procedure
         Five teaching packages were taught in this study. A teaching package consisted of two two-lesson activities
and was over a period of 2 weeks, two lessons per week, with a total of 160 minutes for each teaching package. In
the first two-lesson activities, each student was assigned a randomly chosen subset of the teaching materials which
focused on the training of sight words or phonetic words. Next, students were asked to read out the assigned subset
of words individually. Then, they were asked to teach the other groupmates the subset of words which were assigned
to them and also learn the other subsets of words from others. Finally, one student from each group was picked, by
drawing of lots, to represent their group and attend the speed reading contest. If the attendant won then her/his team
won.

         In the second two-lesson activity, six steps were carried out step by step. Firstly, students reviewed the
materials. Secondly, a randomly chosen paragraph of a written text was assigned to each student, and they were
asked to read out the paragraph individually. Thirdly, they were asked to tell the meaning of the paragraph to their
group. Fourth, students were asked to collaboratively organize the different paragraphs into a complete story and
answer the comprehension questions together. Fifthly, they were asked to do intra-group reading assessments. Each
group member read out a paragraph in turn to their group and each group member would assess her/his oral reading.
And finally, one student from each group was picked, by drawing of lots, to represent their groups to attend the oral
reading contest.

         The teaching activity flow and materials used in the experimental group and the control group are identical
except that the materials were built as e-version for the former. Each student in the experimental group was provided
with a Tablet PC with a stylus and a headset, and the students of the control group were given identical printed
reading materials to do the same activities as the experimental group.

Results
         After the treatment finished, two respective observers first recorded the time spent on each target behavior.
Then the Pearson product-moment correlation of the time proportion of the observed behaviors from the two copies
of the recorded results was computed, and it was 0.908. The results of the in-class observation are shown in Table 1.

         The  numbers in Table   1  stand for the average   time proportion which   students spent on the  following
activities: (a) SWI (individual learning of sight word) and SWG (group learning of sight word); (b) PWI (individual
learning of phonetic word) and PWG (group learning of phonetic word); (c) VR (vocabulary reviewing); (d) PR
(paragraph reading); (e) ST (story telling); (f) SM (story map); (g) RC (reading comprehension); (h) IntraGPA (intra-
group peer-assessment); and (i) InterGPA (inter-group peer-assessment). We found that there existed some problems
that the control  group had in   group reading  activities:  teacher-dependant,   weak interdependent  relationship,
inefficient social interaction, inefficient peer-assessment, and absent-minded trait. From the data shown in the lower
part of Table 1, the reading behaviors of the experimental group contrast sharply with that of the control group. With
the support of CAREER, the five problems found in the control group were significantly reduced. In comparison the
time proportions used in learning-related and learning-unrelated behaviors, the chi-square analysis results show that

                                                         406                                                 CSCL 2007
the differences between the two groups are significant. It shows that in all the reading activities the frequencies of
learning-related behaviors found in the experimental group are significantly higher than that in the control group.
This obviously revealed that CAREER reduced the problems that the students of the control group had when doing
individual or collaborative EFL reading activities and consequently benefited elementary EFL learners' collaborative
learning with their peers.

Table 1: The reading behaviors of elementary EFL students and chi-square analysis results.

                                              Word Learning (%)                                Text Reading (%)
   Group        Observed behaviors &Chi-squareSWISWG     PWI    PWG       VR     PR       ST     SM&RC      Intra GPA   Inter GPA

                  Learning-related      62.4    46.1     59.4     50.8    62.4   72.2     77.2    59.6        30.6         75.5
   Control
                 Learning-unrelated     37.6    53.9     40.6     49.2    37.6   27.8     22.8    40.4        69.4         24.5
                  Learning-related      95.3    100.0    90.2     91.2    99.6   85.8     98.2    100.0       99.1        100.0
Experimental
                 Learning-unrelated      4.7     0.0     9.8      8.8     0.4    14.2     1.8      0.0        0.9          0.0
                2(1,1)                 32.26*  73.97*  25.29*   38.85*   46.91*  5.91* 20.16*     57.00*    101.63*       28.27*
  *p < .05.

Conclusion
        It is supported by numerous researches that collaborative learning and peer-assisted learning are effective
approaches  to early   reading  instruction  and learning.    However,    because      of the   reality  of the  elementary     EFL
environment there remains much to be explored about the possibility of mobile technology used in elementary EFL
reading teaching and learning.

        According  to   the results of observation,    with   the  support    of CAREER,        elementary   EFL    learners   were
responsible for their reading tasks and actively involved in collaborative learning activities. Furthermore, because of
the lack of basic abilities to accomplish the assigned missions, without the support of technology the students were
unable to collaborate with their peers effectively. An opposite phenomenon was found when the mobile devices were
involved in collaborative EFL reading activities. The use of mobile devices in collaborative EFL reading activities
strengthened the low- and medium-ability students' essential abilities to do individual learning and consequently
accomplished their assigned task. This successful opportunity of being responsible was led to the positive peer
assisted and collaborative learning behaviors of the students. We can conclude that the proposed mobile reading
system reduced the problems that the students had in a conventional collaborative learning environment, and the
students were benefited by collaborating with each other with the support of mobile technology.

References
Ghaith, G. (2003). Effects of the learning together model of cooperative learning on English as a foreign language
      reading achievement, academic self-esteem, and feelings of school alienation. Bilingual Research Journal,
      27(3), 451-474.
Lan, Y. J., Chang, K. E., & Sung, Y. T. (2004).      DIAMOND hunt: A reading teaching approach for EFL beginners'
      reading   skills development.  Proceedings      of the  International     Conference     on Education     and   Information
      Systems: Technologies and Applications, 3, 92-96.
Lovett, M., Warren-Chaplin, P., Ransby, M., & Borden, S. (1990). Training the word recognition skills of reading
      disabled children: Treatment and transfer effects. Journal of Educational Psychology, 82(4), 769-780.
Nichols, J. P., & Miller, R. B. (1994). Cooperative learning and student motivation. Contemporary Educational
      Psychology, 19, 167-178.
Slavin, R. E. (1988). Cooperative learning and student achievement. In School and Classroom Organization. NJ:
      Lawrence Erlbaum.
Sung, Y.   T., Huang,   J.  S., &   Chang,   K.  E.   (under  review).   Enhancing        students' strategy    use   and reading
      comprehension through a computer assisted strategies teaching and learning environment. Paper submitted to
      Journal of Experimental Education.
Ushilda, E. (1996). Learner autonomy 5: The role of motivation. Dublin, Ireland: Authentik.

                                                              407                                                        CSCL 2007
