        Promoting Collaborative Learning in Higher Education:
                        Design Principles for Hybrid Courses
                             Rachel Levin-Peled, Yael Kali and Yehudit Judy Dori,
                                      Technion, Israel Institute of Technology
           rlevinp@techunix.technion.ac.il       yaelk@techunix.technion.ac.il yjdori@technion.ac.il

        Abstract:     This research explores the learning that took place in three hybrid university-
        level   courses   in education,    which   were    designed  according  to   three  main   design-
        principles:   (a)engage   learners   in  peer instruction,   (b)involve learners    in assessment
        processes,    and    (c)reuse student    artifacts as  resource   for  further   learning.    These
        principles were employed in the courses in different manners according to the goals,
        contents,  and    target audience    in  each of   the courses.   About  40   graduate,   and   260
        undergraduate     students   participated  in the  study. Data-sources   included    collaborative
        and personal artifacts in the courses' sites (wikis, forums, and documents created by
        teams or individuals), researchers' reflective journal, surveys and interviews. We focus
        on the first design-principle, and show how learning was promoted by features designed
        according to this principle in each of the courses. We recommend course-designers and
        instructors in higher-education to use the design-principles identified and developed in
        this research to foster meaningful learning in other web-based courses.

Introduction
         Many    higher education     institutions  and  especially  teacher  education  departments      offer hybrid
courses, which combine face-to-face with online teaching. Research shows that the combination of face to
face with online instruction offers added value in supporting learner-centered and collaborative learning
(e.g., Dean, Stahl, Sylwester, & Peat, 2001; Singh, 2003; Frank & Barzilai, 2004). Many of these studies
indicate that in order for a hybrid course to encourage meaningful learning, it should be designed to support
collaborative,  learner-centered    instruction, as well   as  embedded   assessment   for   learning.  The  literature
refers to learner centered teaching as one that supports learner knowledge-building              by promoting higher
order thinking skills, collaboration, product-construction, and reflection (Birenbaum, 2003; Cobb, 1996;
Collison,  Elbaum,    Haavind,   &   Tinker  2000;  Ewing    & Miller,  2002; Mcloughlin       &  Luca,  2001;  Rovai,
2000; Resnick, 1996). Embedded assessment refers to an ongoing process that emphasizes the integration
of assessment    into the  instruction  in  order  to support  learning   (Birenbaum,    2003;    Birenbaum,    Breuer,
Cascallar,  Dochy,  Dori,  Ridgway,    &   Wiesemes      2005; Dori,   2003; Mcloughlin     &  Luca,  2001;  Liang  &
Kim, 2004).

         In spite of the potential benefits in using hybrid courses for fostering meaningful learning, many
professors use their course websites mainly for administration, for student accessibility to course materials,
and for online   submission   of  course-products.    Learning    in most cases  remains    traditional. The  learners
usually remain   inactive;   social  interaction is usually   limited,  and learners typically    are not involved  in
designing   and  carrying  out   the assessment.    Consequently,    most   students are not   provided   with  CSCL
features that have been shown to encourage ownership on their own learning, foster their motivation, and
improve their learning outcomes (Birenbaum, 2003; Dehoney & Reeves, 1999; Frank & Barzilai, 2004;
Liang & Kim, 2004; Herrington, Reeves, & Oliver, 2005).

         For   pedagogy   to be  a   leading factor   in the  use of  technology   (Salomon    &   Ben-Zvi,  in  press;
Salomon & Perkins, 1996) instructors are required to do more than simply upload learning materials to the
course website (Pea, 1994). They should carefully design features that engage learners in active learning,
and that   build on   peer   learning ­ a    huge   resource,  usually  neglected  in  traditional    higher-education
instruction (Herrington,   Reeves,    & Oliver,    2005).  It is  therefore  important   to formulate,   via research,
design  principles  for hybrid   courses    that support   meaningful    learning,   and to  provide    examples  that
illustrate how these principles can be expressed as features in the design of hybrid courses. Defining such
principles  is especially  important   for   guiding  the  design    of university   courses   in field  of education.

                                                          418                                                     CSCL 2007
Students who experience these pedagogies in their own learning are most likely to use them in their future
practice as instructors (Ewing & Miller, 2002).

         In order for design principles to be accessible to instructors and course designers, Kali (Kali, 2006;
Kali &   Linn, in  press) developed   the  Design  Principles  Database,   as a public infrastructure    to  publish,
connect, discuss, and review design ideas. The database is intended to bridge research and design in the
area of educational technologies in a communicable and systematic manner, in order to enable designers to
build on the successes and failures of others, rather than reinventing solutions that others have struggled to
develop (Kali, 2006).

         To  respond  to  the  challenges  described   above,  the objectives  of this research   are   to formulate
design-principles  that translate  knowledge     about constructivist and   socio-cultural  learning    into general
guidelines, design  hybrid  courses   according   to these   principles, explore  the effect  of these  courses   on
student learning, refine the principles, and contribute them to the Design Principles Database.

Context
         Three hybrid courses that took place at the Department of Education in Technology and Science at
the Technion were studied. The courses were designed and taught by the authors of this paper. A brief
description of each course follows.

Course 1: Educational Philosophy
         The objective of this course is to help undergraduate students construct an educational philosophy
that would lead them as educators or as educational researchers. All the course meetings are conducted
face-to-face.  The  course  website   guides   students  through   group-activities,   some   conducted     at class-
meetings and some, designed to take place in between the meetings. Course activities are built around three
dimensions: (1) A theoretical dimension, in which learners study relevant literature and discuss ideas in the
area of educational philosophy, (2) a "school inquiry" dimension, in which learners      analyze and assess one
school they select from a given list of "interesting schools", and (3) the "ideal school" dimension, in which
learners apply knowledge gained through the other dimensions by designing and presenting a conceptual
model of a school that represents their own educational perspectives.

Course 2: Learning and instruction in online environments
         The course, designed for undergraduate and graduate students, focuses on theoretical and practical
aspects  in online learning    and instruction.  The   first few weeks   take  place  online  and  are  devoted   to
community-building and discussion on students' initial perceptions about online learning. In the second
part of the course, students work in groups to build their own online "mini-course", which focuses on one
issue about online learning and instruction which they specialize in (e.g., creating a sense of a community,
the role of the teacher, supporting metacognitive processes, etc.). In the final part of the course students
study each others' mini-courses, taught by their peers, provide feedback to each other, and reflect on the
whole process.

Course 3: Assessment of educational projects
         The objective of the course is to provide graduate students with tools that will endow them with
initial preparation as future assessment experts in science and technology education. The course includes
face-to-face meetings and online forum discussions. The students read a diverse collection of articles on
assessment, and each week a team of two students is in charge of posing questions and leading the online
discussion. Each student is assessed via multidimensional assessment based on her/his contribution to the
online  forum  discussion  both   as  leader  and participant,   presenting the  summary     in  class, including  a
comparison    with two   other  articles, and  a final project.  The  students  are  involved   in developing    the
assessment criteria and their implementation in the course.

Methods
         This  study is   part of  a  larger ongoing   design-based   research  that  studies the  iterative   design
process of the three courses between the years 2004 to 2007.          It explores how refinement of the various
features comprising   each     course affected   student learning  in several   enactments    of these   courses:  6

                                                         419                                                    CSCL 2007
enactments of course 1, 2 enactments of course 2, and 3 enactments of course 3. A feature in this study
refers to  the design  of   any element    that supports  learning    (e.g., an  assignment      that guides  students    in
creating presentations of "a day in a student's life" in their ideal school, in course 1; guidelines for using
appropriate "voice and tone" when instructing an online course, in course 2; an assignment that scaffolds
students  in  self-assessment,   in  course   3). The   study  reported   here,    is a  snapshot  of   the  larger study,
focusing   on  the   learning that  took  place   in the  current   state of design      of each  of  the  courses. More
specifically,  we    study how  different  features   in each    of the  courses,  which     employ   a common      design
principle affected student learning.

Unit of analysis and sample
          The unit of analysis in this study is a feature; meaning the effect of a single feature in a single
course on   student   learning. Since   features  in the  courses   were  refined     at various stages   of the iterative
design process, the sample-size used to collect data varies for each feature. The total number of students in
all enactments    of  all  courses  is 312 (Educational    philosophy,    229;   Learning     and  instruction  in  online
environments,     48; Assessment     of   educational   projects,   35).  However,      the sample-size    used  to study
features that were redesigned in the last enactment of a course, includes only students who learned the
course in  that  specific  run. Sample-size     used to  study   other   features, which    stayed constant   for   several
enactment   of  a course,   and when    no significant   difference  was   found   between      student performances      in
these  enactments,    includes  the total  number    of students  who    studied   the   course in these   iterations. The
sample-size for each piece of evidence is mentioned in the description of each outcome below.

Data sources
          The main data source was the rich set of group and individual artifacts created by students in each
of the courses. Some were created on the course site, using tools such as Wikis and forums, and others,
such   as Office   documents    were   uploaded   to  the courses'   sites.  Another     important    data  source  was   a
researchers' reflective journal, in which we documented, after each lesson important events, discussions,
and issues that came up in the enactments. The journal was written by one of the researchers and sent to the
other researchers for adding comments and negotiating interpretations. To support our analysis of student
learning from these two resources, we also conducted Lykert-type and open-ended surveys in each of the
courses, which required student to reflect about their learning, using various features in the courses.

Data analysis
          Using our "feature" unit of analysis, we sought to triangulate different types of evidence to support
any  claim  we   make  about    the effect of   a feature in   a course   on student     learning. For  each  feature   we
initially analyzed   students'  understanding-performances        (Gardner,   1991;     Perkins, 1992)  as   expressed    in
artifacts they created when using this feature. We then came up with an assumption about the learning that
took place using this feature. Finally, we sought corroborations to this assumption from other sources such
as the journal and the surveys.

Findings
          We   first describe  three   of the major   design   principles   that   this  study  formalized   (based    on a
literature review), refined, and contributed to the Design Principles Database. We then focus on the first
principle, and show how learning was promoted by features designed according to this principle in each of
the courses.

Principle 1: Engage learners in instruction of their peers
          This principle calls for creating opportunities for students to serve as instructors of their peers.
Playing the role of the instructor, whether the learners are a small group, or the whole class, and whether
the instruction is done individually or in peer-teaching, has many advantages. Peer-instruction activities,
when designed appropriately, can encourage students to deepen their understanding of contents, become
more   attentive  to  ideas   brought   up by   peers,   take  responsibility   about    their  own   learning,  enhance
metacognitive skills, and increase motivation (Topping, 1996). Students who can reflect on their way of
thinking and learning can set up learning goals and carry them out, choose appropriate learning strategies,
and supervise their advancement towards achieving these goals (Linn & Hsi; 2000).

                                                           420                                                       CSCL 2007
                                Assessment ofeducationalprojectsLearning andinstruction inonlineenvironmentsEducationalPhilosophy
                                                             FeaturesPrinciples
Principle 2: Reuse student artifacts as resource for learning
                   This                       principle                  advocates the  use  of     artifacts developed     by  learners, as resources    for   further
learning of their peers (Dillenbourg, 2002; Ronen et al., 2005). In this manner, the artifacts, created by
individuals, or in groups, can support the learning of those who struggled to interpret and process a certain
body of knowledge, as well as others, who can benefit from the products of this process (Bransford, Brown
& Cocking, 1999). Scardamalia & Berieter (1994) argue that environments that support the development of
a knowledge-building community, enable learners to share knowledge and artifacts, so that this knowledge
becomes part of the environment, and other learners can build on and further advance this knowledge. They
refer to such supports, in which the classroom community works to produce a collective product as second-
order environments.                                           They          distinguish these     environments     from  first order   environments,   in   which    the
knowledge produced by learners is "merely a summary report of what is in individual minds".

Principle 3: Involve learners in assessment processes
                   This principle calls for involving learners in forming assessment criteria and in carrying out the
embedded assessment in a course. Involving the learners in the objectives, design, and execution of the
assessment                      encourages                               taking responsibility     on  the learning    and  improving   student    learning outcomes
(Birenbaum, 2003; Dori, 2003; Mcloughlin & Luca, 2001). There are many ways to involve learners in
assessment                      processes.                               These  include designing       activities  in which    students  take  part  in  developing
assessment                      criteria,                     providing          feedback to      each   other's   artifacts, and    participating in peer   and     self
assessment. Many studies have shown that involving students in assessment is a powerful approach for
leveraging learning processes in a variety of contexts (e.g., Falchikov, 2003; McConnell, 2002; Suthers,
Toth, & Weiner, 1997; Topping, 1998; 2003). Learning outcomes from involving students in assessment
processes are related to: (a) leveraging student understanding of assessment criteria, and thus supporting
students in creating improved artifacts, (b) learning by reviewing peers' work, (c) consideration of a wide
range of feedback, and (d) development of assessment skills (Ronen and Langley, 2004; Zariski, 1996;
Dominick et al., 1997; Miller, 2003).

                                                                           Engage learners in                 Reuse student               Involve learners in
       Course      Name                                                    instruction of their            artifacts as resource               assessment
                                                                                   peers                       for learning                    processes

                                                                           Whole-class collaboratively         Table summarizing            Students develop criteria
                                                                            constructed Wiki table to      philosophical approaches,         and participate in peer
                                                                            summarize jigsaw activity         constructed earlier by         assessment of "ideal
                                                                               about philosophical            students, used for an        school" projects presented
                                                                                  approaches                    analysis activity                by their peers

                                                                              Mini-course designed,developed & instructedonline by studentsStudent participation inonline mini coursesdeveloped and instructed bypeersStudents evaluate thefunctioning of their peers asinstructors of mini-courses

                                                                              Theoretical topics inassessment taught bystudents via online and faceto face discussionsFinalprojects based oncontents gained in lessonsinstructed by peersMultidimensionalassessmentof performance andassessors

       Figure 1- Application of the three design principles via features in the three courses

                                                                                                         421                                                      CSCL 2007
The three design principles described above were the major principles that guided the design of the three
courses in this study. Figure 1 illustrates how these principles were applied via different features in each of
the courses. The features marked by the bold rectangle represent features that employ the design principle
"Engage learners in instruction of their peers". We describe these features in detail and provide evidence
of their effect on learning below.

Feature 1: Whole-class collaboratively constructed Wiki table (Course 1)
         This feature  was introduced   after  the first enactment of  the Educational  Philosophy   course, in
which students claimed that they had difficulties in understanding three philosophical approaches that were
studied in a Jigsaw activity. As a response, we supported learning from the this activity by designing this
feature in three successive stages: (a) In the first stage students acquire knowledge in specialization groups
­ each individual takes part in a specialization group, which studies, via literature reading and discussion in
a forum, one philosophical perspective (as in the original Jigsaw activity). (b) In the second stage all the
students in the class collaboratively create a Wiki table from contributions of individuals and groups ­ at
this stage the individuals return to their home-groups as experts in one perspective, and are responsible to
teach this perspective to other members of their group. Each group is now responsible to fill the contents of
one row in the Wiki table, which synthesizes one aspect in each of the perspectives. As a result, a whole
class knowledge table, exemplified in Figure 2, is obtained. (c) In the third stage, students are invited to edit
and refine contributions of their peers in the Wiki table. The Wiki table created in this feature serves as a
resource for further learning (see Figure1: principle "Reuse student artifacts as resource for learning" as
applied in Course 1).

                        Philosophical           Philosophical          Philosophical
                        Perspective 1:          Perspective 2:         Perspective 3:
                         Essentialism           Progressivism          Existentialism
    Aspect 1 (of 6):    Contribution of        Contribution of      Contribution ofTeacher's roleexpert studenttoexpert studenttoexpert studenttoAspect 1Aspect 1Aspect 1Contribution ofgroup A to theclass Product

    Aspect 2 (of 6):    Contribution of        Contribution of      Contribution ofLearner's roleexpert studenttoexpert studenttoexpert studenttoAspect 2Aspect 2Aspect 2Contribution ofgroup B to theclass Product

    Aspect 3 (of 6):    Contribution of        Contribution of      Contribution of           Contribution of
     The School        expert student  to      expert student to    expert student to         group C to the
       System               Aspect 3               Aspect 3              Aspect 3             class Product

                           Figure 2:  Schematic representation of feature 1 -
                         Whole-class collaboratively constructed Wiki table

         In order to examine the effect of this feature on student understanding of the three philosophical
perspectives, we analyzed the quality of the collaborative Wiki tables created by students.     The quality of
the table  represents  students'   ability to  distinguish  between    nuances in  each  of the philosophical
perspectives  according  to the    various   aspects,   and  therefore depicts  their understanding   of  these
perspectives. This was assessed by comparing the information in each of the table cells to a reference table
created by the instructors. Since the collaborative table was a feature introduced at the second enactment of
the Educational Philosophy course, and since no significant differences were found in the quality of these
tables in the further  enactments,   we    use here   a  sample of N=149   comprised    of  students from five
enactments of the course. The analysis indicated that the information constructed collaboratively in each of
these enactments was very similar to the reference table, leading to a mean value 95% (SD = 1.2%) for the

                                                        422                                               CSCL 2007
five tables.   This  finding   indicates   that  the process  of   learning a  philosophical perspective                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               in a
specialization group, then having    to   teach this knowledge   to peers  in the home  group, and  having                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              the
responsibility of creating knowledge for the whole class in the collaborative Wiki table, supported student
understanding of the contents.

         Another outcome that indicates that the collaborative table was a productive support for student
learning was received from the survey. A question about the collaborative Wiki table, which was added to
the survey at the 6th enactment of the course, indicated that students (N=25) valued the use of this feature
as one which contributed very much to their learning (4.0 in a scale of 1 to 5) (Figure 3). Interestingly,
although this feature is comprised of literature reading, and online discussion of literature, these aspects,
when examined individually, were rated lower (literature reading 3.8; online discussion of literature 3.5).

                     5
                    4.5
                     4
                    3.5
                     3
                    2.5
                     2
                    1.5
                     1
     Gather & anHaoFlmyozeremsdacahlitzaoeoalribenosguevtaisdrccehhooq&ouledLsiestaicournnsssaiaboSbnououmuttmsscachrhoizooeol lpschhiloosool pvCihsoyitlfBlaroubmioldraWidtieevebalWscikhCioToomalbpplraeerseebnetatwtPioelnaenn isdLceihtaeolroasltcsuhreoorDWleiainsadctWicunhigsksaiinogndrospuaepbesori-utreet vlitieewraptur(reeNsen=ta2tio5ns)

             Figure 3: Average student rating of various course aspects in a scale of 1-5

Feature 2: Students design, develop, and instruct an online mini-course(Course 2)
         This feature scaffolds students (working in groups) to design and develop their own two-week
mini-course.   Each group  first   learns the contents  for  their mini-course  (issues in online learning                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             and
instruction) by reading and discussing relevant literature, then they design activities that implement these
contents, and finally they teach (online) their mini-course to the rest of the class. The mini-courses created
in this feature serve as a resource for further learning (see Figure1: principle "Reuse student artifacts as
resource for learning" as applied in Course 2).

         To  evaluate the  effect  of the  process   of designing   and teaching  the mini-courses  on student
learning about theoretical and practical aspects in online instruction, we analyzed the process of designing
the mini-courses and the final artifacts in three aspects: (a) students' understanding of the contents (as
reflected in online discussion students participated in during the process of designing their mini-courses),
(b)  the design of  activities (to what   extent activities supported  the  contents and a  socio-constructivist

                                                        423                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           CSCL 2007
approach, were clear, and inviting, and (c) the quality of instruction of the courses (the extent to which
instructors  were  attentive to  their  learners' emerging     needs,   in terms   of  understanding   procedures,
comprehension of contents, and collaboration with other learners).

        Since    the feature   only changed    slightly  in  the second    enactment,   and  since no     significant
difference was found between the two enactments regarding the quality of mini-courses, we merged data
from the two enactments of the course (total of N=48, number of groups = 15). Outcomes indicate that the
mean values for the three aspects were as follows: Understanding of contents ­ 84% (SD=16%), Design of
activities ­ 90% (SD=12%), and Quality of instruction ­ 88% (SD= 14%). The rather high variance can be
explained by the fact that participants were a mix of undergraduate and graduate students. However, the
high mean value, indicates that the quality of the mini-courses were high for the analyzed aspects. This
indicates that the feature supported students' learning, especially of practical aspects in online learning and
instruction.

        These    findings  were strengthened   by    the analysis   of the survey  (N=48),   which   revealed   that
students perceived the mini-courses as a great contribution to their learning. In a scale of 1-5, the construct
"Reading and discussing the literature in preparation for designing the mini-course" received a score of 4.8
(SD=0.4),   "Design   and  development   of  the  mini-course"    4.8  (SD=0.5),   and  "Instruction   of the mini-
course" 4.7 (SD=0.6).

        Evidence to the type of learning that took place in this process can be found in responses to an
general open-ended question in the survey. In these responses students explained in which manners the
design of   the mini-courses   contributed to  their learning.   For instance, one   student said  "It was  a great
experience to instruct the mini-courses, we had to deal with many issues such as, what to do when the
learning takes different directions than we planed,      how do we support participation, how do we refer to
posts in the forum which we don't agree with"

Feature 3: Theoretical topics in assessment taught by students (Course 3)
        In this feature pairs of students are responsible to teach a topic about assessment to the rest of the
class. They first study the topic, as the rest of the class does, from a pre-assigned list of articles. Then they
lead an online discussion; they pose introductory questions in the forum, and are responsible for facilitating
the discussion. Finally, they present a summary of the online discussion during a face to face meeting, and
using additional references they find, they deepen the dialogue. Artifacts created in this activity (the online
discussion, and the summary) serve as a resource for further learning by peers in final projects (see figure1:
principle "Reuse student artifacts as resource for learning" as applied in Course 3) and for multidimensional
assessment of performance (figure 1: principle "Involve learners in assessment processes" as applied in
course 3).

        To assess the impact of this feature on student learning, we examined the grades that were given
by the instructors specifically for this feature. Two rubrics were used to provide these scores. The criteria
for leading the online discussion included: (a) Posing questions that require higher order thinking skills; (b)
Attentiveness   to peers;  (c) Processing   and   elaboration    of  the discussion   by providing     intermediate
summaries; and d) Voice and tone that invite collaboration and foster a good atmosphere in the discussion.
The criteria  for  leading the face  to face  discussion     included: (a) The  quality  of the online    discussion
summary;    (b) Oral presentation   of discussion  and   of  further reading   in an  academic  standard;   and (c)
Clarity, flow and originality in presentation.

We refer to the sample as N=35, comprised of graduate students in three enactments of the course (no
significant  differences were   found   between   student    performances   in those  enactments).   The   analysis
indicates that grades for this specific feature were extremely high; Using the rubrics described above, the
mean score for leading the online discussion was 98% (SD=3%), and 93% (SD=4.3%) for leading the face
to face discussions. The score for the online component was provided by the instructor (10% of the final
score in the course) and the score for the face to face component was provided by peer assessment (10% of
the final grade). In order to express such high performances, students had to gain deep understanding and
knowledge in the area assessment, and acquire leadership skills that are highly important for their careers.

                                                         424                                                   CSCL 2007
         Retrospective interviews, which were conducted about one to three years after the course, with
students from all 3 iterations, indicate that students perceived the fact that they were required to take the
role of an instructor in the course as a highly enriching learning experience. In many of the interviews the
issue of  responsibility   and    motivation,  which   were    fostered by   playing  the  instructor's  role, were
mentioned. For instance one student says "I new that in the moment of truth I will need to instruct part of
the course. It gave me a great motivation... I felt that the challenge is greater than understanding; I also had
to think how to make the contents interesting for others. Our responsibility for the success of the course
was   one that  is  higher    than  usually given   in  other  graduate   courses".     The   high  motivation   and
responsibility brought students to become more critical and thus deepen their understanding of the contents.
For instance, another student says "Serving as an instructor forced me to think deeper about the article, to
ask myself questions and to find unresolved issues", or "Playing the role of the instructor is the thing I
remember most from the course. I remember very well all the nuances of the contents that I was responsible
for teaching. This is knowledge that I can retrieve from my mind at any relevant time".             Another student
noted that "the course provided me with inspiration and guidance about how to construct a new course for
my high-school students in industry and management department".             It is also important to note that having
students play the role of the instructor involved putting them in a certain degree of anxiety, but that students
saw this stress eventually as positive.   For instance, a student says "This was a difficult period for me due to
the high  pressure   I was in.  I  almost left  the course,  but  was encouraged   to   stay,  and today  I am   very
thankful for that!"

Conclusions
         The   three   design principles, articulated  in this  study i.e., Engage   learners  in  peer  instruction,
Involve learners in assessment processes, and Reuse student artifacts as resource for further learning, were
derived from known socio-constructivist approaches for instruction. Nonetheless, the large gap between the
body of knowledge in the CSCL field, and the practices in higher education instruction requires that this
knowledge would be articulated and published in a useful way for instructors, with examples of features
that have been successful in several settings. The strength of the design principles described in this research
is that although each principle was applied using different features in each course, one can see their major
impact on the learning following the objectives set for each course: developing an educational perception
(Educational   philosophy),    coping  with    challenges   in online   learning  and   instruction  (Learning   and
instruction in  online    environment),     and preparation    of  the  learners  as    future assessment    experts
(Assessment of educational projects). It is important to note that the features described in this study are a
consequence of an iterative design process, in which features were refined in several cycles in the larger
research  this study   is part  of. For   instance, the idea   to design    the collaborative  table using   a Wiki
technology emerged from findings showing that students did not feel ownership of the collaborative table.
We assumed that enabling students to edit each other's cells would increase their ownership, an assumption
which was later confirmed. It is our belief that the collection of design principles identified in this work and
their publication in the Design Principles Database, along with links to the detailed examples of the features
in the three courses, will constitute a resource that would enable instructors, and other course developers to
apply these ideas in other hybrid courses. Yet, it is important to note that these principles cannot be used as
recipes for designing courses. They gain their strength in being part of the Design Principles Database, in
which  design   principles    derived from    other  design-based   research    studies are   contributed   from the
community.

References
Birenbaum, M. (2003). New insights into learning and teaching and their implications for assessment. In
    Segers, M., Dochy, F. & Cascallar, E. (Eds.). Optimizing New Modes of Assessment: In Search of
    Qualities and Standards (pp. 13-36). Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Birenbaum,   M.,   Breuer   K.,   Cascallar E.,  Dochy    F.,  Dori   Y., Ridgway    J.  &    Wiesemes   R.  (2006
    March/April.). A Learning Integrated Assessment System. In: EARLI Series of Position Papers. R.
    Wiesemes, G. Nickmans A. (Eds.) To appear in Educational Research Review.
Bransford, J., Brown, A. L., & Cocking, R. R. (1999). How people learn: Brain, mind, experience, and
    school. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.

                                                         425                                                   CSCL 2007
Cobb,  P. (1996).   Where      is the  mind?   A  coordination  of  socio-cultural  and  cognitive constructivist
   perspectives. In C. W. Fosnot (Ed.), Constructivism: Theory, perspectives and practice (pp. 34 - 52).
   New York: Teachers College Press.
Collison, G.,  Elbaum,      B., Haavind,   S., &  Tinker   R.  (2000).  Facilitating online learning:   Effective
   strategies for moderators. Atwood Publishing.
Dean. P., Stahl, M., Sylwester, D., & Peat J. (2001). Effectiveness of combined delivery modalities for
   distance learning and resident learning; Quarterly Review of Distance Education.
Dehoney, J., & Reeves, T. (1999). Instructional and social dimensions of class web pages.             Journal of
   Computing in Higher Education, 10 (2), 19
Dillenbourg,  P.   (2002).    Over-scripting   CSCL:   The    risks of   blending   collaborative  learning with
   instructional design. In P. A. Kirschner (Ed.), Three worlds of CSCL: Can we support CSCL? (pp.
   61- 91). Heerlen: Open University of the Netherlands.
Dominick   P. G.,  Reilly,   R.   R., & McGourty   J. (1997).  The  effects of peer  feedback   on team member
   behavior. Group and Organization Management, 22, 508-520.
Dori,  Y.  J. (2003).   From      nationwide   standardized    testing to   school-based  alternative embedded
   assessment in Israel: Students' performance in the "Matriculation 2000" Project. Journal of Research
   In Science Teaching, 40(1), 34-52.
Ewing, J., & Miller, D. (2002). A framework for evaluating computer supported collaborative learning.
   Educational         Technology            &        Society       5       (1).     [On-line].       Available:
   http://ifets.ieee.org/periodical/vol_1_2002/ewing.html
Falchikov, N. (2003). Involving student in assessment. Psychology Learning and Teaching, 3(2), 102-108
Frank, M.,  &     Barzilai, A.  (2004).  Designing course  web   sites  for supporting  lecture-based courses in
   higher   education  -    some   pedagogical  aspects. International  Journal  of Instructional  Technology &
   Distance          Learning.           Vol.       1,         No.        12.        [On-line].       Available:
   http://www.itdl.org/Journal/Dec_04/index.htm
Gardner, H. (1991). The unschooled mind: How children think and how schools should teach. New York:
   Basic Books.
Herrington,   J., Reeves,   T.C.,  &   Oliver, R. (2005).  Online   learning and   information  delivery: Digital
   myopia. Journal of Interactive Learning Research, 16 (4), p. 353-367.
Hoadley, C. M. (2004). Methodological Alignment in Design-Based Research. Educational Psychologist,
   39(4), 203­212     http://www.tophe.net/papers/Hoadley-EdPsychol-2004.pdf
Kali, Y. (2006). Collaborative knowledge-building using the Design Principles Database. International
   Journal of Computer Support for Collaborative Learning.
Kali, Y., & Linn, M.C. (in press). Technology enhanced support strategies for inquiry learning, in Spector,
   J. M., Merrill, M. D., van Merriënboer J. J. G., & Driscoll, M. P. (Eds.) (in progress). Handbook of
   Research on Educational Communications and Technology (3rd ed.). Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Liang, X., & Kim, C. (2004). Classroom assessment in web-based instructional environment: instructors
   experience.      Practical     Assessment,     Research    &    Evaluation,    9(7).  [On-line].   Available:
   http://pareonline.net/getvn.asp?v=9&n=7
Linn M., & Hsi, S. (2000). Computers, Teachers, Peers. Science Learning Partners. Lawrence Erlbaum
   Associated, Publishers, Mahwah, New Jersey, London.
McLoughlin, C., & Luca, J. (2001). Assessment methodologies in transition: Changing practices in web-
   based learning. In L. Richardson and J. Lidstone (Eds), Flexible Learning for a Flexible Society, 516-
   526. Proceedings of ASET-HERDSA 2000 Conference, Toowoomba, Qld, 2-5 July 2000. ASET and
   HERDSA.            [On-line].         Available:       http://www.aset.org.au/confs/aset-herdsa2000/procs/
   mcloughlin1.html

                                                          426                                                CSCL 2007
McConnell, D. (2002). Collaborative assessment as a learning event in E-learning environments. In
     543 G. Stahl (Ed.), Proceedings of CSCL 2002.Computer support for collaborative learning:
     544 Foundations for a CSCL community (pp. 566­567). Mahwah, New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Miller, P. J. (2003) The effect of scoring criteria specificity on peer and self-assessment. Assessment &
     Evaluation in Higher Education, 28(4), 383 - 394
Pea, R.   (1994). Seeing   what   we   build together: Distributed   multimedia learning   environments    for
     transformative communications. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 3 (3), 285 ­ 299
Perkins, D.N. (1992). Smart schools: From training memories to educating minds: New York: The Free
     Press.
Resnick, M. (1996). "Distributed Constructionism" Proceedings of the International Conference on the
     Learning  Sciences   Association   for  the Advancement   of  Computing     in Education   Northwestern
     University
Ronen,   M.,  & Langley,  D.   (2004).  Scaffolding  complex   tasks by  open   online submission:   emerging
     patterns and  profiles    Journal  of  Asynchronous    Learning    Networks JALN    8, (   4). [On-line].
     Available: http://www.aln.org/publications/jaln/v8n4/index.asp
Ronen,   M.,  Kohen-Vacs,     D., &    Raz-Fogel,   N.     Structuring, sharing  and   reusing  asynchronous
     collaborative pedagogy.   Submitted to ICLS 2006.
Rovai, A.P. (2000). Online and traditional assessment: what is the difference? The Internet and Higher
     Education, 3, 141-151
Salomon, G., & Ben- Zvi, D. (in press). The difficult marriage between education and technology: Is the
     marriage  doomed?    In: L. Verschaffel, F.  Dochy,   M. Boekaerts   &  S. Vosniadou   (Eds.)  (in press).
     Instructional psychology: Past, present and future trends: Fifteen essays in honour of Erik De Corte.
     A book in the "Advances in Learning and Instruction Series" of Elsevier.
Salomon, G., & Perkins, D. N. (1996). Learning in wonderland: What computers really offer to education.
     In S. Kerr (ED.). Technology and the future of education. (pp. 111-130). NSSE Yearbook. Chicago:
     University of Chicago Press.
Scardamalia,  M., &  Bereiter,   C. (1994).  Computer  support  for  knowledge-building   communities.    The
     Journal of the Learning Sciences, 3(3), 265-283.
Singh, H. (2003) Building Effective Blended Learning Programs. Educational Technology, 43( 6), 51
Suthers. D.D., Toth, E.E., & Weiner, A. (1997). An integrated approach to implementing collaborative
     inquiry in the Classroom. Proceedings of CSCL 1997 (Toronto, Ontario). In Hall, R., Miyake, N., &
     Enydey,  N.  (Eds.), The    second international  conference on    Computer  Support   for Collaborative
     learning (pp. 272-279).
Topping, K.J. (1996). The Effectiveness of Peer Tutoring in Higher and Further Education: A typology
     and review of the literature. Higher Education 32 (3) 321-345
Topping, K.J. (1998) Peer assessment between students in college and university. Review of Educational
     Research 68 (3) 249-276
Topping, , K.J. (2003). Self and peer assessment in school and university: reliability, validity and utility.
     In Segers, M., Dochy, F. & Cascallar, E. (Eds.). Optimizing New Modes of Assessment: In Search of
     Qualities and Standards (pp. 55-87). Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Zariski, A. (1996). Student peer assessment in tertiary education: Promise, perils and practice. In Abbott,
     J. and  Willcoxson,  L.  (Eds), Teaching    and  Learning Within    and Across    Disciplines, p189-200.
     Proceedings of the 5th Annual Teaching Learning Forum, Murdoch University, February 1996. Perth:
     Murdoch University.

                                                       427                                                 CSCL 2007
