       CSCL Interaction Analysis for Assessing Knowledge Building
                                    Outcomes: Method and Tool
                                  Yanyan Li, Jian Liao, Jing Wang, Ronghuai Huang,
                    Knowledge Science & Engineering Institute, School of Education Technology,
                                    Beijing Normal University, 100875, Beijing, China
           Email: liyy1114@gmail.com, leojames@126.com, wangj19@gmail.com, huangrh@bnu.edu.cn

         Abstract  Interaction      analysis  plays  an   important  role  in computer-supported     collaborative
         learning. This paper proposes a multidimensional analysis framework to study the interaction and
         makes    use of  the quantitative  analysis method   to   assess the collaborative   knowledge   building
         (CKB) outcomes at individual and group levels. A tool is developed that can support interaction
         analysis, text   analysis, social  network  analysis  and   a combination   of  the   above to  show  the
         differences  of  cognitive  content   and   constructive  level  in  terms of   collaborative  knowledge
         building. A case study of the interaction analysis via using the tool is presented.

Introduction
         Computer-supported collaborative learning (CSCL) environments have been argued to foster collaborative
knowledge construction. The process of collaborative learning can also be considered as a process of Collaborative
Knowledge    Building   (CKB)   (Stahl,G.,  2003).  In  this process,  learners construct    shared understanding    through
collaborative  interaction,   and they  are   regarded  as  knowledge     constructors  rather than  knowledge    receivers.
Therefore,  analyzing    the  collaborative  interaction  between    members   can  facilitate finding   out  the nature  of
knowledge building mechanism, which provides foundation for designing and developing CSCL environments.

         So  far, interaction  analysis has   draw  close  attention from  many   researchers.   Generally,  the  interaction
analysis methods usually fall into three levels. The first level takes the interaction as the communication to form
relationship network, which emphasizes the relationship between members (Haythornthwaite, C., 1999; Nurmela,
K.et al, 1999; Maarten ,L., 2002; Albrecht T.L.& Hall,B., 1991). The second level considers the interaction as the
sequence  combination     of different  speech acts, which   pays  more   attention to   the time structure  relationship of
communication information or activities. Hee-Jeon(2001)defines three categories (nine sub-categories) of interaction
process  and  uses  the   sequence   of speech  acts   to  briefly describe   the interaction.  Harrer(2000)describes     the
interaction as a two-level conversational network. While Avouris(2003) proposes an Object-Oriented Collaboration
Analysis Framework. A finer level of granularity than the speech act is focused on the ideational content. Porayska
Pomsta analyzes the content based on categories of question. Clark(2005)assesses the interaction content by coding
the conceptual    quality of  comment    in  Collaborative   Learning   (CL).  By   this way   researchers   can  find  more
characteristics of CL at semantic level. However, there still lack an integrated method and tool to analyze CKB in
CL synthetically. Furthermore, most of the researches usually use manual coding to conduct qualitative analysis of
interaction content.  However,    qualitative  manual    coding  involves    subjective  judgement   and  the reliability of
dialogue analysis schemes remains a contentious issue (Pilkington,R., 2001).

A Multidimensional Analysis Framework to Study Interaction for Collaborative
Knowledge Building
         From  the    pedagogical   viewpoint,  collaborative    learning  should   be   assessed from    multi-dimensions.
Henri(1991), Newman(1995) analyze the performance of CSCL from group level. Stahl(2005) points out, group
cognition should be centrally concerned by computer support for CKB. So it is important to regard group knowledge
building level as  the dimension    of  interaction analysis. On   the other  hand,  according   to the definition   of basic
elements of CL proposed by Johnson,D.W.& Johnson,R.T, (1989), individual duty is one of important factors that
influence CL. This perspective shows that it is necessary to analyze group members' individual contributions in CL.
Furthermore,  many    researches  show   that the relationship   between  group   members    has  a great effect  in CL.  As
Cartwright(1968)and Festinger (1950) presented, compared with the groups with loose cohesion, the members in the
groups  with  intense  cohesion   have  more   satisfaction  and  happiness,  and   they are  more  inclined  to  participate
actively, communicate frequently and seldom absent. Johnson(1989)even consider the positive interdependence as
the first representative element of collaborative learning.

                                                             428                                                   CSCL 2007
         Therefore, by incorporating existing interaction analysis methods, we propose a multidimensional analysis
framework to study interaction in terms of collaborative knowledge building (see Figure 1). The shadow ellipse
represents the interaction analysis methods, which comprises three perspectives: Speech topics (i.e. the mentioned
topics involved in the discussion), speech intention (i.e. the intention of speech act), and social network (i.e. member
relationship and  the  degree of   mutual support  in a discussion  group   or             community).    The  multi-method     research
framework    lays the   foundation  to assess   knowledge    building outcomes                 with three    criteria including "Group
Knowledge Building Level", "Member Contribution" and "Member Mutual Support", shown as the ellipse nodes on
outer triangle in Figure 1. The "Group Knowledge Building Level" indicates the collective knowledge building level
of a group, and the "Member Contribution" reflects the individual performance in the collaborative learning process,
while "Member Mutual Support" indicates the relationship between members as well as their speech similarities.

                         Figure 1. The Model of Integrated Interaction Analysis for CKB.

Computational Methods to Assess the Knowledge Building Outcomes
Group Knowledge Building Performance
         Scardamalia&Bereiter(1994) propose there are three characteristics of the knowledge building community:
"discussion related to the question promotes deeper understanding","non-intensive and opening discussion"and
" effective   interaction " .    Fisher(1993)  Mercer(1995)  Coelho(1994)consider                            effective   interaction   as
"exploratory talk",    whose characteristics is that participants  communicate               in a   critical but constructive   way.  To
summarize,   "relevance    to topic",   "positive  negotiation"   and   "common                 participation"   are    three important
characteristics of knowledge building level of a group. So, we adopt "Group Topic Relevance", "Group Interactive
Intention Level"  and    "Group Equilibrium"    to evaluate  group  knowledge               building  level.  Group    Topic  Relevance
indicates the relevance of whole group's speeches to the discussion topic. Group interactive-intention level reflects
the degree of positive argument or negotiation that are regarded as have higher interactive level to resolve cognitive
conflict in a group. Group Equilibrium represent the consistency of member participation which can reveal whether
every member participate in the group interaction positively. Based on the coding schema developed by Veldhuis-
Diermanse (2002), with combination of the interaction analysis model (Gunawardena,L.&Anderson, 1997) and the
model of collaborative knowledge building (Stahl,G., 2003), we bring forward a coding schema focusing on the
learning  processes.   The coding   schema   includes   five categories "sharing",                "argument",    "negotiation",   "meta-
cognitive",  and  "social greeting", in which   there are nineteen    speech              acts in total. Taken   the   categories  as the
assessment   criteria, a synthetic method    based on Analytic    Hierarchy               Process (AHP)   theory   is  applied  to make
quantitative analysis and evaluation of the individual contribution and group performance.

                                                                                      n
                                                                        Wk M k
Definition 1: Group Interactive Intention Level              GI  = Wmax              k =1 M

                                                             429                                                               CSCL 2007
         Where n is the number of the code of speech intention, Wk represents the weight assigned to each speech
intention based on Analytic Hierarchy Process (AHP) theory, Wmax equals to the maximum of Wk. Mk             is the number
of speeches of kth intention. M is the total number of speeches.

Definition 2: Group Topic Relevance         GR    =  GT
                                                      T
         Where T represents the total number of words in the domain vocabulary, GT represents how many words
appeared in the groups' discourse are included in the domain vocabulary.

Definition 3: Group Equilibrium       GE   =1-      D    =1-     D .S        S -1
                                                  D max            N (S      - 1)
         Where D is the standard deviation of the speech numbers in a group, Dmax is the max value of D. S is the
number of members, N is the number of speeches.

Definition 4: Group Knowledge Building Level            GKBL = 1GR + 2  GI + 3  GE
         Where 1 ,2 ,3     are the adjustment factors used to scale the importance of GR, GI and GE, respectively.
It can be proved that the values of each factor are all between [0, 1].

Member Contributions to Collaborative Knowledge Building
         Newman(1995) and Liu(2005) both consider the novelty of members' speeches and the extension of the
topic to be discussed  as the  important   criteria of  evaluating      the    quality of interactive texts. Additionally,
Albrecht&Hall(1991), Baldwin, Bedell & Johnson (1997), Haythornthwaite (1999) all think the centralization of
members  in a social network  will influence  the   member's     performance      in a  group. So we  adopt  "Relevance",
"Novelty", "Extension", "Interactive Intention Level" and "Member Centralization" to assess member contributions.
Definition 5: Relevance            Ri =  MiM
         Where Mi represents the number of topic words which are talked in the speeches of the ith member. M
represents the total number of words in the topic vocabulary.
Definition 6: Novelty          Vi  = Vmax  PiN
         Where Pi represents the number of keywords mentioned for the first time by group member i. N represents
the total number of keywords.

Definition 7: Extension          Ei = Emax    NiN
         Where Ni represents the number of keywords in each member's speeches. N represents the total number of
keywords in the whole discussion speeches.
Definition 8: Interactive Intention Level     Ii    = Wmax n k=1 ( M ik M i ×Wk )
         Where n is the number of the code of speech intention. Wk is the weight assigned to the kth speech act by
using AHP approach. Wmax equals to the maximum of Wk. Mik indicates the number of ith member's speeches that
are coded as kth speech act, Mi indicates the total number of speeches of ith member.
Definition 9: Member Centralization        Ci = IDi + ODi 2S - 2
         Where S is the number of student. IDi indicates the number of ith member's in-degree of social network,
ODi indicates the number of ith member's out-degree of social network.
Definition 10: Member's Contribution          MCi    =  1Ri   +   2Vi       +   3 Ei + 4Ii +   5Ci
         Where i (i=1, 2, 3, 4, 5) is the adjustment factor that represents the importance degree of each factor.

                                                         430                                                      CSCL 2007
Group Member Mutual Support
        Social Network Analysis (SNA) is usually used to find the relationship between members by counting the
number of reply-messages between members, which doesn't consider the content of the speeches. However, we
believe that the more similar of two members' speeches, the mutual support will be greater. As a complement, we
take into account the content and intention of speech to augment the SNA. The algorithm of similarity is the same as
the vector cosine method which is frequently used in calculating the document similarity in text mining technology.

Definition 11: Member's Speech Content Support
                                                                                     N
                                  CS ij =   Fi · F j| Fi | × | F j|=                     Fik × F jkk =1NN( Fik2 )(  F 2jk )
                                                                                   k =1         k =1

        Where Fi represents the vector of word frequency in member i's speeches in the vector space model (VSM).
Fj represents the vector of word frequency of keywords in member j's speeches. Fik represents the word frequency of
the kth keyword in the speeches of the ith user. Fjk represents the word frequency of the kth keyword in the speeches
of the jth user. N represents the total number of keywords. Therefore, we can obtain the matrix of the degree of
member's support CS, which represents the degree of mutual support among group members.
                                                                                                          n
                                                                                                      Wk M ijk
Definition 12: Member's Speech Intention Support                                      ISij = Wmax       k =1 M ij

        Where n is the number of the code of speech intention. Wk is the weight assigned to the kth speech act by
using AHP approach, Wmax equals to the maximum of Wk. Mijk indicates the number of ith member's speeches which
reply the jth member and are coded as kth speech intention. Mij indicates the total number of speeches of ith member
who reply to the jth member. Above factors can be proved that their values are between [0, 1].

Implementing a Tool to Support Interaction Analysis
        We have developed a tool VINCA (Visual Intelligent Content Analyzer) with C# language to support
interaction analysis. It is implemented by using C/S architecture and can be installed stand-alone or support the
online  downloading    of   the  forum    text    from   CSCL     platform                           (currently   support  WebCL    platform
http://www.webcl.netc.cn) to conduct analysis. The tool provides a plug-in interface allowing for flexible addition of
more modules. VINCA can support coding analysis, text analysis, social network analysis and a combination of the
above to assess the CKB outcomes for showing the differences of cognitive content and constructive level in terms
of collaborative knowledge building. It is worth to note that VINCA distinguishes from other similar tools with three
features: 1) Learnable semi-automatic coding support; 2) Text Analysis for traditional and simplified Chinese; 3)
Compute content similarity of user speech. Herein we give several snapshots of the VINCA interface (see Figure 2,
3, 4). In brief, VINCA mainly has the following functions.

 z     Flexible data source selecting. VINCA can automatically parse the discourse data in the HTML format and
       then  store  in  the  database.    Currently    it    supports                      the       data    format  of   Knowledge  Forum
       (http://www.knowledgeforum.com/)   and     WebCL    (http://www.webcl.net.cn)                           platform. Users can select the
       specific data sources according to his specified filtering variables, such as speakers, keywords, time, coding,
       or the combination of the above variables.
 z     Semi-automatic coding aids. Besides supporting the users to manually code, VINCA can learn the coding hint
       by using machine learning method. In this way, VINCA can automatically discover the code hint, highlight it
       and associate it with recommended codes.
 z     Keywords extraction & frequency counting. VINCA fulfills the task of extracting meaningful keywords and
       counting their frequency. As complement, uses can specify domain lexicon or exclusive keywords list to focus
       on some specific keywords or exclude some useless keywords.
 z     Concordance (keywords in context). Users can click the keywords to view the context in which they appear.
 z     Group & individual performance analysis. By means of the above methods, VINCA computes the assessment

                                                           431                                                                        CSCL 2007
   indicators for evaluating the group and members' contribution and performance.
z  Data export for SNA. VINCA provides several output data sets for augmented social network analysis, such
   as export relation matrix, export coding result, export coding matrix, content similarity matrix, etc.

                                                                 Coded messages
                                                                 are marked blue

                                             Auto highlighting
                                                   the hint

                                                                        Allow users to segment one
                                                                        message into multiple
                                 Tree-structure                         segments and vise versa
                                coding schema

                                 Figure 2. Semi-automatic Coding

      Extracted
    Keywords list

                                                                         Import user's
                                                                            lexicon

                             Select keywords
                            with specified tags                        Select exclusive
                                                                          word list

                                                                                                   Concordance

                Figure 3. The interface to view the keyword extraction and concordance.

                                                             432                                                     CSCL 2007
                                                                                                   Group Knowledge
                                                                                                     Building Level

                           Import Domain
                            Vocabulary

                                            Member Mutual                  Member contribution
                                                Support

         Figure 4. The interface displaying the computerized group and individual performance.

A Case Study of Interaction Analysis
        We have developed an e-learning platform WebCL (available at http://www.webcl.net.cn/) that has been
used in more than twenty universities and high schools, and the total number of registered users exceeds 10000.
VINCA can be installed stand-alone and support the online downloading of the forum text from WebCL to conduct
analysis. We chose two sets of CSCL discourse data of two classes of graduate students enrolled in the same course
"Information Technology and Educational Application". The two classes are respectively taken as group A (number
of total students is 47) and group B (number of total students is 87). With the assistance of VINCA, we followed a
four-step process to conduct the comparison analysis in terms of collaborative knowledge building, including group
knowledge building level, member contribution and member mutual support. The process comprises: 1) Import the
data in HTML    format into VINCA.     2) With  the semi-auto   coding support  of  VINCA,      coded all the discussion
messages of the two groups. 3) VINCA was used to generate the frequencies of meaningful keywords found in the
discussion discourse, and extraction of text in close proximity to selected keywords using concordance technique. 4)
Use VINCA to export the data for SNA.

Table 1: Code scheme and weight.

     Code      Weight           Sub-code          Weight          Code        Weight   Sub-code               Weight
                        Organization(OR)          0.017                                Objection(OB)           0.030
     SocialInteraction0.040Others(OT)EmotionalCommunication(EC)Viewpoint(VP)0.002      Rebutment(RB)           0.0770.005Compromise(CO)0.1440.048Negotiation0.544Conclusion(CL)0.237
     Sharing    0.109   Suggestion(SU)            0.048                                Agreement(AG)           0.033
                        Share Information(SI)     0.024                                Proof(PR)               0.077

                        Question(QU)              0.030                                Review(RE)              0.033

                        Ask forArgument0.231Explaination(AE)0.012Reflection   0.077    Self-evaluation(SE)     0.007
                        Explaination(EX)          0.063                                EvaluateOthers(EO)      0.013
                        Exemplification(EF)       0.100

                                                           433                                                  CSCL 2007
Group Knowledge Building Level
         The teacher constructed a domain vocabulary of the course that contains 35 words, such as "information
technology", "educational technology", etc. As the above-mentioned method explained, this domain vocabulary is
used to compute the relevance of members' speeches. To determine our inter-coder reliability we firstly, for each
coded message, checked to see if the codes assigned by the two coders referred to the same parts of the message (i.e.
the same units of meaning). Secondly, we checked to see if the two coders had assigned the same codes to each unit.
Based on a 10% sample of all the messages coded by the two researchers, the value of Cohen's Kappa exceeds 0.7
for 16 categories. Afterwards, based on    the AHP  method,   we   assigned the weights   to each  code indicating the
importance of each code in terms of cooperative knowledge building (C.I.<0.1)(see Table 1). According to above
methods, all the messages of two groups (Group A: 237 messages; Group B: 577 messages) are coded. Figure 5, 6, 7
show the coding results in detail, which show that most of the Group B's messages are coded as "sharing"(48%) and
the percentage of messages coded as argument and negotiation are 22% and 10%. In contrast, 29% messages of
Group A are coded as "argument" and 21% messages of Group A are coded as "negotiation". This suggests the
speeches of Group A reflect more cognitive conflicts that can foster the collaborative knowledge advance. Based on
the statistical result, Figure 8 shows the computerized indictors of group knowledge building level.

Figure 5. Coding result of Group A.                          Figure 6. Coding result of Group B.

                                                                    1
                                                                 0.9
                                                                 0.8
                                                                 0.7
                                                                 0.60.50.4                                   Group   AGroupB
                                                                 0.3
                                                                 0.2
                                                                 0.1
                                                                    0
                                                                          GR      GI       GE     GBKL

Figure 7. Coding result comparison of group A and group B.            Figure 8. Group knowledge building

Member Contribution
         Based on the above methods, we compute the member contribution in terms of five dimensions (Relevance,
Novelty, Extension,  Centric,  Interactive intention). Figure    9 gives an  illustrative sample   of  two   members'
contribution in the same class. From the figure, we can see that the extension level of two members is approximate,
but  member  one    (Student  Number:    50280280203)    performs    better than   member    two   (Student  Number:
50280280153)  in   terms of  relevance, novelty,  centralization and  interactive intention.  This indicates the total
contribution of member one is higher than member two.

                                                         434                                                 CSCL 2007
                             Figure 9. Illustrative sample of member contribution.

Member Mutual Support
        By analyzing the reply-to relationship of messages and coding results, we drew the social network and
interactive intention network  of twenty   members  selected    at random,  as  shown in the figure   10  and figure 11,
respectively. Figure  10  illustrates the usual reply-to relationship  between   members.  Figure 11   is an  interaction
intention network figure where the edge means the members' interaction intention. The wider the edge is, the higher
interaction intention of the member is. For example, we discovered that the member (SN: 50280280203) not only
plays a centric role, but his level of interaction intention is higher. In contrast, the level of interaction intention of
member (SN: 50280280273) is lower. It suggests that this member provides more information for sharing rather than
argue or negotiate with other members.

              Figure 10. Social network                     Figure 11. Interactive intention network

Figure 12. Grid-mode Social Network                     Figure 13. Asterisk-mode social network

        Moreover,     the members'    speech similarity  matrix was    exported with VINCA    and we   drew   two-mode
figures to intuitively show the members' mutual support in terms of content similarity. In the figure, the edge means
the degree  of speech  similarity of  two  members. The   wider    the edge is, the higher similarity of  two members'
speeches is. Figure 12 is the grid-mode social network that gives an illustrative example of five members' mutual
support. As the figure shows, the edges pointing to the member (SN: 50280280203) are wider than that of other
members. It suggests that his speech drew extensive attention. Likewise, the member (SN: lixl) is another central
member in the group. However, the content similarity of the two members' speeches is relatively low. From this, we
can see that the different speeches presented by the two members both draw much attention from others. Figure 13 is

                                                           435                                                 CSCL 2007
the asterisk-mode social network that shows the content support between a member (SN: 50280280413) and other
19 members. From the figure, we can see that the speech content similarity between him and other members is high
except one member (SN: 50280280343).

Conclusion
         Qualitative analysis method is widely adopted to analyze collaborative interaction. By contrast, this paper
explores the quantitative method to analyze the collaborative interaction, attempting to calculate and summarize the
interaction characteristics for assessing the collaborative knowledge building outcomes. We have developed a multi-
method   research framework   to  study collaborative learning processes   by making   use of   social network   analysis
(SNA),   content  analysis (CA)  and text analysis technology    to assess  group  knowledge    building level, member
contribution and member mutual support.     We have developed a tool to assist the interaction analysis, and conducted
a case study with the tool on two sets of CSCL discourse data from two comparable classes. The results show the
differences of cognitive content and constructive level between two classes, and provide suggestive findings for
assessing the knowledge building outcomes at individual and group level.

         Further  investigations are needed to analyze  the   various roles the   participants play in the  collaborative
learning, and to examine how individual and collective knowledge advances intertwined. Meanwhile, apply the tool
in more practical education settings and to improve it according to the feedback from researchers and teachers.

References
Albrecht, T. L. & Hall, B. (1991). Relational and content differences between elites and outsiders in innovation
     networks, Human Communication Research, 17(4), 535-561.
Avouris, N.M., Dimtracopoulou, A., Komis, V., Fidas, V. (2003), OCAF: An object-oriented model of analysis of
     collaborative problem solving, Proceedings of CSCL 2003.
Baldwin, T.T., Bedell, M.D., & Johnson, J.L. (1997), The social fabric of a team-based MBA program: Network
     effects on student satisfaction and performance. Academy of Management Journal, 40, 1369-1397.
Black, P. & William, D. (1998). Assessment and classroom learning. Assessment in Educational Principles, Policy
     and Practice, 5, 7-74.
Bransford,  J.D., Brown,   A.L., & Cocking,  R.R.  (1999). How    people   learn: Brain, mind,  experience   and school.
     National Research Council.
Cartwright,  D.   (1968).  The   nature of  group  cohensivieness.    In D.   Cartwright   &    A.  Zander(Eds.),Group
     dynamics:Reserch and Theroy(3rd ed.,pp.91-109).New York: Harper & Row
Coelho, E. (1994), Learning Together in the Multicultural Classroom Markham, Ontario: Pippin Publishing Limited,
         ISBN 0-88751-064-7.
Douglas  B.C,    Victor D.S  (2005)  Analyzing   the  Quality  of   Argumentation   Supported    by  Personally-Seeded
     Discussions CSCL, the Proceedings of CSCL'2005
Feng, J., Li, C. (2005). Topic detection technology for Chinese text based on statistics and semantic information.
     Journal of Tsinghua University (Science and Technology) 2005,Vol. 45 ,No,S1 ,P1791.
Festinger ,L. (1950) Informal social communication. Psychological Review ,57,271-282
Fisher, E. (1993) Distinctive features of pupil-pupil classroom talk and their relationship to learning: How discursive
         exploration might be encouraged. Language and Education, 7/4: 239-257.
Fischer, F., Bruhn,J.,Grasel,    C., &    Mandl,  H.(1998).Collaborative    knowledge     construction   with   mapping
     tools,(Research Report No.97). Munich: Ludwig-Maximilians-University. Institute of Educational Psychology.
Gipps, C.V. (2002). Sociocultural perspectives on assessment. In G. Wells & G. Claxton (Eds.), Learning for life in
     the 21st century (pp. 73-83). Oxford, UK: Blackwell.
Gruber T. (1993). A translation approach to portable ontology specifications. Knowledge Acquisition 1993; 5:199-
     220.
Gunawardena, L., & Anderson (1997). Analysis of a global online debate and the development of an interaction
     analysis    model  for  examining  social construction   of knowledge    in  computer     conferencing. Journal   of
     Educational Computing Research, 17(4), 397-431
Harrer, A. (2000) Interaction Analysis at Coordination Level with Semi-structured Interfaces, ECAI2000,Germany
Haythornthwaite,   C.(1999).  Networks   of information  sharing    among   computer-supported     distance  learners. In
     C.Hoadley (Ed.), Proceedings of CSCL '99: The Third International Conference on Computer Support for
     Collaborative Learning (pp.218-222). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.

                                                          436                                                  CSCL 2007
Hee-Jeon,   S. (2001).  A Case     Study on Identifying    Group   Interaction Patterns of  Collaborative    Knowledge
        Construction Process, Available at http://www.icce2001.org/cd/pdf/P05/KR022.pdf.
Henri, P. (1991).Computer conferencing and content analysis .In      Kaye,A.R(Ed.), Collaborative Learning through
      Computer Conferencing: The Najaden Papers. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, p117-136.
Johnson, D.W. & Johnson,R.T.(1989), Toward A Cooperative Effort. Educational Leadership, 46(7).International
      Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education (2001), 12, 1-71.
Koschmann,      T.   (1996).    Paradigm    shifts     and    instructional    technology:   An     introduction   [A].
      Koschmann,T.(Ed.).CSCL:Theory and practice of an emerging paradigm[C].            Mahwah, NJ:Lawrence, 1996,
      1-23.
Liu, H., Zhu,L.,   Chen, Y.  &  Huang,   R.(2005).   A  Research   about Collaborative  Knowledge    Building  through
       Interaction Analysis,Open Education Research Vol.11, No.2, P31-37, 2005.
Maarten, L. (2002).Network and content analysis in an online community discourse,Proceedings of CSCL'2002
Mercer,  N.  (1995).The   guided   construction of   knowledge   (Talk   amongst  teachers  and   learners). Clevedon:
        Multilingual Matters Ltd.
Newman, D., Webb, B., & Cochrane, C.(1995).A content analysis method to measure critical thinking in face-to-
      face  and  computer   supported   group learning.  Interpersonal   Computing    and  Technology:    An Electronic
      Journal for the 21st Century, 3(2), pp. 56-77.
Nurmela, K., Lehtinen, E., & Palonen, T.(1999).Evaluating CSCL Log Files by Social Network Analysis. In C.
      Hoadley   (Ed.), Proceedings   of  CSCL   '99: The Third  International  Conference   on  Computer    Support  for
      Collaborative Learning (pp. 434-444). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum
Pena-Sha, J., Martin, W., & Gay, G.(2001). An epistemological framework for analyzing student interactions in
      computer-mediated communication environments. Journal of Interactive Learning Research,12, p41-68.6
Pilkington, R.  (2001),  Analysing   Educational Dialogue   Interaction:    Towards  Models  that   Support  Learning ,
      International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education(2001), 12,1-7
Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter.C.(1994).Computer support for knowledge-building communities. The Journal of the
      Learning Sciences.3(3) , 265-283
Shepard, L. (2000). The role of assessment in a learning culture. Educational Researcher, 29, 1-14.
Spada, H. ,Meier,A., Rummul,K. Hauser,S. (2005) A New Method of Access the Quality of Collaborative Process in
      CSCL , the Proceedings of CSCL'2005
Stahl, G. (2003). Building collaborative knowing: Elements of a social theory of learning. In J.-W. Strijbos,
      P.Kirschner & R. Martens (Eds.), What we know about CSCL in higher education. Amsterdam, NL: Kluwer.
Stahl, G. (2005).Group cognition, Proceedings of CSCL'2005.
Saaty, T.L. (1994). Fundamentals of Decision Making and Priority Theory with the Analytic Hierarchy Process [M].
      Pittsburgh PA: RWS Publications, 1994.
Veldhuis-Diermanse     (2002), CSCLearning?     Participation, learning   activities and   knowledge    construction  in
      computer-supported    collaborative  learning  in higher  education,   Unpublished   Ph.D.  thesis, Wageningen,
      Netherlands: University of Wageningen, 2002.
Vizcaíno, A. (2001). Negative situations in collaborative environments: Can a simulated student avoid them? In J. D.
      Moore, C. Redfield & W. L. Johnson (Eds.) Artificial Intelligence in Education: AI-Ed in the Wired and
      Wireless future (pp. 610-612). Amsterdam: IOS.
Zhu, E. (1996).Meaning negotiation, Knowledge construction, and mentoring in a distance learning course. Paper
      presented  at the  Proceedings  of  Selected   Research  and Development    Presentations  at the 1996  National
      Convention of the Association for Educational Communications and Technology, Indianapolis.

Acknowledgment
The research work was supported by the Cultivation Fund of the Key Scientific and Technical Innovation Project
"Research   on  the key  technology   of  National   Knowledge     Services Architecture",  Ministry of   Education  of
China(NO:705038).    Thanks    the Learning Community      Project Team  of  CITE,   Hong  Kong   University,  for their
cooperative work on the software developing and helpful suggestions. Thanks also go to CSCL team members of
Beijing Normal University, Dr. H. Liu, Ms. J. Leng and Mr. D. Zhao for their diligent works.
Corresponding author: huangrh@bnu.edu.cn.

                                                          437                                                 CSCL 2007
