     Implementation of the Scrabble Game on the Mobile Devices to
                        Increase English Vocabulary Acquisition

                                         Chiu-Pin. Lin*, robinlin@nhcue.edu.tw
                                    Shelley S.-C. Young**, scy@mx.nthu.edu.tw
                                  Hui-Chung Hung**, g9565526@oz.nthu.edu.tw
                                    Yi-Chen Lin*, g9425403@mail.nhcue.edu.tw
    *Institute of e-Learning Technology, National Hsinchu University of Education, 521, Nan-Da Road, Hsinchu,
                                                   Taiwan 30014, R.O.C.
**Institute of information systems and applications, National Tsing Hua University, 101, Section 2 Kuang Fu Road,
                                           Hsinchu, Taiwan 30013, R. O. C.

         Abstract: The Scrabble Game redesigned on the mobile devices has been implemented. through
         this game to facilitate English vocabulary acquisition of the elementary school students with group
         collaborative and competitive learning activities. We reviewed literature related to collaborative,
         competition and    language     learning. Moreover,      the concept    of  game   design  and  its system
         architecture have been presented. It is expected that research findings in actual English learning
         contexts will further share in the near future.

Introduction
         Collaborative learning (CL) focuses on active learners of knowledge, and emphasizes the learning process
(Slavin, 1990)  and  learning outcomes.       Students  will     enhance  cognitive    learning from  memory    through    the
interaction and coordination between groups (Zurita & Nussbaum, 2004). Face-to-face CL activities may probably
come  up   with disagreement   or   different    points of   view,    so group   members     need  to cultivate abilities   for
communication and negotiation. The clash and stimulation between the groups would encourage students to work
for good performances. In the process of CL, it can be more convenient by using mobile devices. Mobility has
increased  dramatically  with the     portability  which     conveniences     interactions  between   members   and   enables
immediately exchange of different thoughts with appropriate amendments and responses. In addition, a shared visual
space is essential for collaborative activities because it facilitates grounding and communication (Kraut, Gergle, &
Fussell, 2002). Studies  (Inkpen,     et al., 1995)   show    that   compared    with   single-operator  learning, the  group
collaboration learning  would  be   a    positive  influence     on performance     of  more effective  cooperation    for the
achievement   and joys. Good  competitive        interaction between     groups  is helpful  to challenge learning    task and
enhance the sense of solving problems and joy.

         Language  and  thinking  are    interrelated and    affect one  another.   Language    comprehension   is relevant to
vocabulary    development   abilities    (Robert,  2003).    The    emphasis    on   language   learning  is  meaningful    to
communication and applications (Carol, 2001). Accumulating vocabulary is one of the bases of language learning. It
strains to memorize words; the effect is not only less fun but reducing learning motions. Therefore, the goal of this
study is to take vocabulary learning by the group collaboration and competition model to inspire their motivation
and learning  achievement.  The  best    strategy  is discussing    collaboratively. Crossword    puzzle has  generally    been
assigned  for students' alternative   self-Access     activities and  instruments    by teachers  and   been considered    and
provided  have  appreciable potential.   (Wise,   2001;  Franklin    et  al., 2003; Jones,  2003). However,   the  traditional
crossword puzzle restricts students' answers with the only one correct solution and is lack of interactivity in the
class for group to discuss and learning collaboratively.

         Generally, competition has always been regarded as a contrast of collaboration. However, the concept we
propose in this game is to design a competition of the two group members which conducts them to correct, analyze,
study, discuss and doubt each other's answer. In a competitive game-learning environment, students are motivated
to make efforts to go for better performance (Chang, Yang, & Yu, 2003). This is the way we regard as an important
part in CL. In this paper, based on the idea to improve crossword puzzle, we redesign the Scrabble game, a popular
word game and board game in which 2 to 4 players score points by forming words from individual lettered tiles on a
15-by-15 game board. We redesigned the activity which students could build their own English vocabulary map
especially through a competition    model     to encourage   them   accomplishing    the   motivational CL   activity between
groups. Furthermore, we implemented the activity by applied to portable device (especially to PDA) in an online
collaborative learning environment based on Tuple Spaces system which was developed by SRI International. The

                                                              438                                                    CSCL 2007
motivation of the game is not only to encourage students to memory much more vocabularies, but also try to make
student analyze and doubt opponent's words through a competitive way. Students can view the other group's results
through the PDA and compare with each other to learn more vocabularies through the game. We expect this game to
raise students' motivation on English learning and discussion between groups.

Game Design
        In simple terms, the   Scrabble game   is an English  cooperative learning  game    and an activity  designed
through competition of building the vocabulary by two groups.

                              Figure 1. The Collaborative Mode of the Scrabble Game.

        To win the game, participants of each group must try to fill in the vocabulary map and cover the opponent's
letters with words separated by letters in each grid horizontally or vertically. Between group, students can analyze
words oblong  map  which  created  up   by the other  groups.  This game   inspires participants   to think, analyze,
generalize and draw a conclusion map collecting the thoughts and the other group in a systematic manner.

        The game is proceeding as following steps:
1.  Prior to the game, the teacher can assign the theme of each round (food, transportation, travel, etc.) and put one
    or more than one character. Each character should put in each grid.
2.  Students in the same group take turns to put word which related with the theme vertically or horizontally in the
    map to cover the exited letter or letters in the map. If you cover opponent's letter, you get the gird of letter.
3.  Students take turns to build up the map with word will be restricted in few seconds which controlled by teacher.
    Student not building in time will lose the opportunity to answer at once and be changed by opponent.
4.  Students criticize and doubt of the opponent's word if the word dose not fit the theme.
5.  In the limited time and range, the one who gets the more grids than the other wins the game.

System architecture and implementation
        The student client interface was divided into the map, letter area, input area and indication area. Students
can input word into the input area by hit the letters in the letter area. Then students can select the word direction
(vertical/horizontal) in the input area. The word can be drag to the suitable location on map areas. In indication area
will show information about the two sides scores, each of the remaining time. When feeling puzzle with opponent's
word, students can propose doubt by pressing the question button in the indication area.

                                   Figure 2. the Scrabble Game Client Interface

                                                         439                                                CSCL 2007
         Teacher client interface was divided into group area and data analysis area. In group area, teachers can
divide students into groups. In data analysis area, teacher can concern the situation and result of each group while
the activity is processing or over, and teacher can collect all the vocabulary results of all groups in a table and share
to each student's client screen to share the experience of the game to. The system also can track the progress of
participants and offer the data to teachers for use of students' vocabulary research.

Further Work
         In this paper, the new concept "collaboration" between members and groups has been introduced. Whereas
current system in progress is based on system and activity feedback, we believe that this concept will yield some
significant findings and well appreciated by the students.
         To be further explored, further and more particular investigation is needed to evaluate how the Scrabble
game changes affect students' learning process and how to achieve its anticipated capabilities and facilitate students'
learning effective compared with the other traditional English learning activity. Furthermore, this conception could
be implemented by more games and activities in collaborative learning to raise students' motivation to study English
and discussion between groups. Finally, through the Scrabble game to encourage students' motivation of learning,
we could implement more application focused on active learning and self-regulatory activity of group.

References
Chang, L. J., Yang, J. C., & Yu, F. Y. (2003). Development and evaluation of multiple competitive activities in a
         synchronous quiz game system. Innovations in Education and Teaching International, 40(1), 16­26.
Chapelle, C. A. (2001). Computer applications in second language acquisition: foundations for teaching, testing
         and research. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Franklin, S., Peat, M., & Lewis, A. (2003). Non-traditional interventions to stimulate discussion: the use of games
         and puzzles. Journal of Biological Education, 37 (2), 79 ­ 84.
Inkpen, K. M., Booth, K. S., Klawe, M., & Upitis, R. (1995). Playing together beats playing apart, especially for
         girls. Proceedings of Computer Supported Collaborative Learning. CSCL 1995, 177­181.
Jones, A. (2003). Let's make learning fun too: Using Crossword Compiler Version 6.0. Bioscience Education e-
         journal Bioscience Education e-journal, volume 1,1-R1.
Kraut, R. E., Gergle, D., & Fussell, S. R. (2002). The use of visual information in shared visual spaces: informing
         the development of visual co-presence. Proceedings of the 2002 ACM conference on Computer supported
         cooperative work. CSCW2002, pp. 31-40.
Slavin, R.E. (1990), "Cooperative Learning-Theory, Research and Practice", Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall
Sternberg, R. J. (2003). Cognitive psychology. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth/Thomson Learning.
Wise, A. (2001). Web-based crossword puzzles support revision. Active Learning in Education, 2 (2), 180 ­ 188.
Zurita, G., & Nussbaum, M. (2004). Computer supported          collaborative learning  using wirelessly interconnected
         hand-held computers. Computers & Education, 42(3), 289-314.

Acknowledgments
         This research project is jointly funded by the National Science Council in Taiwan, NSC 95-2520-S-134-
001. The authors would like to thank Tuple Spaces team of SRI International for their support. The Tuple Spaces
project at SRI International was supported by the US National Science Foundation under grant #0427783.

                                                           440                                                CSCL 2007
