                          Fostering collaborative problem solving
                               for pupils with cognitive disabilities

                                       Andreas Lingnau, Peter Zentel, Ulrike Cress
                             Knowledge Media Research Center, 72072 Tübingen, Germany
                                    Email: {a.lingnau, p.zentel, u.cress}@iwm-kmrc.de

        Abstract: Verbal communication, particularly the ability to give directions and understand them,
         is a key not only for learning but also for every day life. Since one main objective of schools for
         pupils with cognitive disability is to prepare them to manage their every day life on their own as
         much    as possible,  we   expect that teaching   pupils to learn  and  work collaboratively    by sharing
         tasks and give directions to each other will support this process and provide them in becoming
         more independent. In this paper we will present a short study and approaches we have elaborated
         to increase quality and quantity of users' contributions and foster verbal communication between
         pupils in collaborative problem solving tasks.

Introduction
         "Technology      as a teaching    tool immediately,     profoundly,  and  positively    impacted  the education     of
individuals with mental retardation ... The introduction of the computer as a teaching tool ... can be viewed as the
greatest agent of change ...for individuals with mental retardation." (Jeffs, et al., 2003). This euphoric description is
representative  for the   appraisal of the  use  of  computers    in schools  for students    with cognitive   disabilities. A
Computer   can   be used   as  an effective learning  tool   to  support the acquisition   of basic  learning  skills  (Zentel,
Opfermann,     & Krewinkel,    2006).   In  addition,    the work    with  this medium     supports   the  increase   of self-
determination, of independence, and integration skills (Wehmeyer, 1998) and allows for "positive changes in inter-
and   intrapersonal  relationships,    sensory   abilities   and  cognitive  capabilities,   communication     skills,   motor
performance, self-maintenance, leisure, and productively." (Parette, 1997).

         Whereas most of these positive effects are measured in the context of individual learning we would like to
enhance the focus on the potential of the computer to support processes of collaborative learning (CL) among pupils
with cognitive disabilities. As part of a project for the development of a software toolkit for pupils with cognitive
disabilities funded by the Federal Ministry of Education of Baden-Württemberg (Germany) we are conducting an
explorative study to receive a first impression whether CSCL can be beneficial for this target group or not.

         The software development within the project is done using the FreeStyler framework (Hoppe & Gassner,
2002)  developed    by COLLIDE      research  group   at University  Duisburg-Essen,   Germany.      Its capability has  been
proven in several projects with primary and secondary schools and in academic education (Lingnau et al., 2003b).

Collaborative learning & cognitive disabilities
         According     to Slavin  (1999),  CL   is one   of  the  greatest success  stories   in the history  of educational
innovation. The use of this instructional method has been proved in numerous studies in the traditional classroom as
well as in computer based settings. However, only a few efforts have been made regarding the research of CL and
CSCL on pupils with cognitive disabilities. Three research reviews (Tateyama-Sniezek, 1990; Stevens & Slavin,
1991; McMaster & Fuchs, 2002) stated mixed results in studies in which CL was used to improve the academic
achievement of students with cognitive disabilities. Stevens and Slavin (1991) suggested that the reasons for the
equivocal results can be seen in the variety of CL and the fact that some emphasise the academic achievement of
pupils with cognitive disabilities to a much greater extent than others. The main result of their review is that the
achievements of students with disabilities will be greater if CL includes individual accountability and group awards.

         Beyond     these methodological    difficulties   Cosden,   Goldman,   and Hine     (1990)  described   fundamental
problems of pupils with cognitive disabilities engaged in small group activities: pupils with cognitive disabilities are
less effective communicators than non-handicapped, they are less effective in expressing their own point of view as
well as in responding to the needs of the listener. They have problems taking over leadership during group activities
and demonstrate considerable inconsistency in level and appropriateness of their communicative skills. Cosden et al.
state that "it seemed     plausible to expect   that students   with learning   disabilities would   have  difficulty  making

                                                              447                                                   CSCL 2007
effective use  of     collaborative  groups  to  the extent     that   their communicative      problems    inhibit     effective group
participation." (ibid., p. 222). Although these global attributions may not apply to all individuals, they are describing
potential problems that might occur in CL settings for this target group.

Preliminary studies
          In our first study, we tried to explore which kind of setting might be reasonable for the target group of
pupils with cognitive disabilities. In Lingnau, Hoppe & Mannhaupt (2003a) a study is reported where two primary
school learners with heterogeneous ability solved a problem collaboratively in a jigsaw design. The study showed
that even two low attaining children produced better results when working together instead on their own. Beyond
they where stimulated to collaborate not only in the shared workspace but also by verbal communication discussing
their actions and contributions to the shared workspace.

          Coming from these results we analysed three different settings using the shared workspace of FreeStyler in
a face-to-face situation with 2 tablet pc's. The test persons were 8 adolescents aged 17 to 19 from a school for
students  with cognitive      disability   with different     aetiology.  The   speech    of    all of them   was       understandable.
Participation was voluntary. In the first setting pupils should solve a puzzle collaboratively using the standard puzzle
we implemented. The number of pieces can be varied and if a puzzle piece is dragged to the correct position on the
puzzle frame, it will snap into the frame and be fixed. In the second setting, we had a maze as a background image.
The pupils where asked to plot the way out of the maze in the shared workspace by using different colours. In the
last setting the pupils where asked to paint a picture in the shared workspace by choosing from a list of objects e.g. a
car, a house or a tree. We evaluated different pairs of pupils working on one or more of the three settings in an
informal way but using video recording and FreeStyler log files which can be replayed, parsed and analysed. As a
result, we concluded that the task description should provide a scaffold to guide the pupils through the task and that
the pupils must be encouraged to communicate and coordinate themselves.

Collaborative puzzle solving
          For the second study, we defined a setting following the idea of a jigsaw design i.e. one pupil cannot solve
the task without the other. Two pupils from the same school mentioned above had to solve a puzzle collaboratively
using 2 tablet pc's in a face-to-face situation. To measure their skills in this particular task in a short assessment the
two candidates  had       to solve four   puzzles with     increasing  difficulty   (from   12  to  24 pieces)  individually.     Their
performance   was     quite  different.  One of them      was three    times faster than    the other. Furthermore       he used   goal-
oriented  strategies.  The    slower one   had  problems     to find   a starting point.    After   finding some correct     pieces  he
continued solving the task by trial and error.

          In the study each pupil got half of the puzzle pieces in a private workspace while the target image was
presented as a preview icon in the shared workspace. The task was to bring together the puzzle pieces while taking
turns in adding pieces to the shared workspace or re-arrange them. We identified four main types of action:
                      (1) Adding a piece from private to shared workspace to a random/wrong position
                      (2) Adding a piece from private to shared workspace to the correct position
                      (3) Moving a piece within the shared workspace to a random/wrong position
                      (4) Moving a piece within the shared workspace to the correct position

Table 1: Evaluation result from the FreeStyler log file

        Task                              overall actions                           actions leading to correct solution
                                 pupil 1                   pupil 2                  pupil 1                   pupil 2
  12 pieces (6 each)            4 (28.6%)                 10 (71.4%)               2 (20.0%)                 8 (80.0%)
  12 pieces (6 each)            7 (35.0%)                 13 (65.0%)               4 (33.3%)                 8 (66.6%)
  16 pieces (8 each)           13 (32.5%)                 27 (67.5%)               0 (0.0%)                 14 (100.0%)
  20 pieces (10 each)          16 (26.2%)                 45 (73.8%)               3 (15.0%)                17 (85.0%)

          The analysis of the log files (see Table 1) provides evidence that the type of actions of the two pupils
differed significantly. The results show a ration of approx. 1:2 in the contributed actions of the two subjects, i.e. the
higher attaining pupil did two thirds of the overall actions. Although there were differences in their performance
during the initial assessment both pupils were able to solve the puzzles. In the collaborative setting, we observed that
not only the higher attaining pupil took the leadership but that also the lower attaining pupil backed off from being

                                                                   448                                                        CSCL 2007
an active and mindful contributor. Since he had to contribute at least one action in the shared workspace when it was
his turn he mostly just added one of his puzzle pieces to a random position or moved a piece to a random but wrong
position in the puzzle. The higher attaining pupil waited his turn and undid this action by moving the piece to either
the correct position or just back.

Conclusion and Outlook
         Since we observed indications for a more collaborative behaviour, we will modify the puzzle setting to
guide the pupils to problem solving through acting in shared workspaces and verbal communication. Margaritis,
Avouris & Kahrimanis (2006) and Vassileva (2004) showed that enabling learners to reflect on their participation in
collaboration through awareness mechanisms can change and increase the quantity and/or quality of contributions to
CL. Margaritis et al. found out that providing the user with a state of collaboration index "... is easy to interpret, not
requiring high cognitive load and focusing ability of the partners concerned ...". We assume that such awareness
information will stimulate and increase collaboration between pupils with cognitive disabilities too.

         Following the approach of scripting tasks for CL (Fischer, et. al., 2007), we will modify the setting using
different layers in the workspace. This mechanism is implemented in FreeStyler, i.e. the pupils are using a shared
workspace but each pupil is using his own transparent layer where objects can be manipulated only by him but
changes are visible to the other. In such a setting the puzzle task can be accomplished avoiding that one pupil can
solve the task without the others help when all pieces are in the workspace. Combining these two variations of our
setting we want to study whether we can stimulate collaboration and accomplish and foster verbal communication
between    the learners. Similar   to  examples   of collaborative  problem   solving  with   early learners described  by
Lingnau, et. al. (2003a) we expect that even learners with cognitive disabilities will benefit from collaboration.

References
Cosden,    M.  A., Goldman,    S. R.,  &  Hine,  M.  S.  (1990). Learning   handicapped  students'   interactions during a
         microcomputer-based group writing activity. Journal of Special Education Technology,10(4). pp. 220­232.
Fischer, F., Mandl, H., Haake, J., & Kollar, I. (Eds.). (2007). Scripting computer-supported colloaborative learning
         - cognitive, computational and educational perspektives. New York: Springer.
Hoppe,  H.,   &  Gassner,  K.  (2002). Integrating   Collaborative  Concept   Mapping   Tools  with  Group   Memory    and
         Retrieval Functions. G. Stahl (Ed.): Proceedings of CSCL 2002. Lawrence Erlenbaum Associates, Inc.
Jeffs, T., Morrison,   W.  F., Messenheimer,     T., Rizza,  M.  G. & Banister,   S.  (2003). A retrospective  analysis  of
         technical advancements in special education. Computers in Schools, 20(1/2), 129­152.
Lingnau, A., Hoppe, H.U., Mannhaupt, G. (2003a). Computer supported collaborative writing in an early learning
         classroom. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, Blackwell Science Ltd, 2003, 19, 186­194
Lingnau,   A., Kuhn,   M.,  Harrer,   A., Hofmann,   D.,  Fendrich, M.,    Hoppe, H.  U. (2003b).   Enriching  Traditional
         Classroom Scenarios by Seamless Integration of Interactive Media. V. Devedzic, J. Spector, D. Sampson
         and Kinshuk (Eds.), Proceedings of ICALT2003, Los Alamitos, CA: IEEE Computer Society.
Margaritis,   M.,  Avouris,   N., Kahrimanis,    G.  (2006).  On  Supporting   Users'  Reflection   during   Small Groups
         Synchronous Collaboration. 12th Intl.Workshop on Groupware, CRIWG 2006. LNCS 4154. Springer.
McMaster, K. N., & Fuchs, D. (2002). Effects of Cooperative learning on the academic achievement of students
         with   learning disabilities: an  update   of Tateyama-Sniezek's     review. Learning  Disability   and  Practice,
         17(2), pp. 107­117.
Parette, Jr., H. P. (1997). Assistive technology devices and services. Education and Training in Mental Retardation
         and Developmental Disabilities, 32, pp. 267­280.
Slavin, R. E. (1999). Comprehensive Approaches to Cooperative Learning Theory into Practice, Vol. 38, No. 2,
         Building Community through Cooperative Learning (Spring, 1999), 74­79.
Stevens, R. J., & Slavin, R. E. (1991). When cooperative learning improves the achievement of students with mild
         disabilities: a response to Tateyama_Sniezek. Exeptional Children, 57(3), 276­280.
Tateyama-Sniezek, K. M. (1990). Cooperative learning: does it improve the academic achievement of students with
         handicaps? Exceptional Children, 56(5), 426­437.
Vassileva, J. (2004). Harnessing P2P Power in the Classroom. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 3220, Springer.
Wehmeyer,     M.   L. (1998). National    survey of  the use of  assistive technology by adults  with  mental  retardation.
         Mental Retardation, 36, pp. 44-51.
Zentel, P., Opfermann, M., & Krewinkel, J. (2006). Multimedia learning and the World Wide Web: Considerations
         for learners with a mental retardation. Proceedings of ASCILITE, 3-6 December 2006, Sydney, Australia.

                                                             449                                                  CSCL 2007
