Computer-supported Collaborative Learning and Conceptual Change

                                             Lei Liu, Cindy E. Hmelo-Silver
                                        Rutgers, the State University of New Jersey
                                    leiliu@eden.rutgers.edu, chmelo@rci.rutgers.edu

         Abstract: Students often have difficulties achieving conceptual change in both individual learning
         and  collaborative    learning  environments.  Although     research  in  the fields of    both  conceptual
         change and collaborative learning are well documented, few studies examine the relations between
         computer    support   and collaborative   conceptual change.     This review     addresses  this issue   and
         considers   the potential of   CSCL   for promoting  conceptual    change.    We  first review   the   major
         findings in the fields of conceptual change and collaborative learning. We then review literature
         on CSCL and discuss why CSCL environments may help in overcoming barriers to collaborative
         conceptual change. Finally, implications are provided for future CSCL design.

Introduction
         There   is  broad  consensus   on the potential for  computer-supported       learning  environments,    particularly
computer-supported      collaborative learning (CSCL)    to improve    students   learning  (Goldman-Segall       & Maxwell,
2003; Suthers, 2006). Although much research has examined whether computer-supported activities or collaborative
activities are related to learning, less attention has been paid to the issue of whether computer-supported activities
can foster  collaborative   conceptual   change.  The  purpose    of this review   is  to explore   specific  ways  in  which
computers   may   offer powerful   support for collaborative  conceptual    change  in   scientific domains.   There   are  four
sections in this review with the major focus on the last two: conceptual change, collaborative conceptual change,
computer-supported      conceptual change,   and  computer-supported    collaborative     conceptual   change.  The   first two
sections briefly introduce some major findings regarding individual and collaborative conceptual change. The third
section will  discuss   the relationships  between   computer-supported     learning   and conceptual    change.  The   fourth
section is the core of this review: how collaborative conceptual change may occur with the support of computer-
based instruction.   We  will  use both  theoretical and empirical   evidence  to  consider   the   potential effectiveness    of
CSCL environments in fostering conceptual change.

Conceptual Change Theories
         Conceptual changes refer to a process by which learners build new ideas in the context of their existing
understanding (diSessa, 2006). In science education, the ideal conceptual change involves students' shift from their
initial preconceptions to scientific conceptions (i.e., scientific beliefs, ideas, or way of thinking). Conceptual change
is a difficult and complex process (Chinn & Malhotra, 2002). There is a huge diversity of perspectives about basic
issues in conceptual change. Posner and colleagues (Posner, Strike, Hewson, & Gertzog, 1982) proposed a highly
influential theory   of conceptual  change,  which   regarded conceptual    change     as linear and   radical. Alternatively,
diSessa (1993) believes learning is a gradual and evolutionary change in the way learners reconstruct their ideas and
conceptions. Carey (1991) considers conceptual change as a process of enrichment (a form of weak restructuring)
and revision   (a   form  of  strong  or  radical  restructuring) of  prior knowledge      and   interpretative   frameworks.
Regardless  of   the different theoretical perspectives  on  conceptual    change,  the   common     underlying   theme     is to
investigate ways to promote such change.

         There   are  two   major  categories  of  perspectives:  Piagetian    perspectives   and   the  social constructivist
perspectives. The    Piagetian perspectives  on   conceptual  change   stress  the importance    of  recognizing   knowledge
discrepancy   in learners'  prior  knowledge   and   dissatisfaction with  existing   knowledge.    In  addition, this line    of
research regards the conceptual change process as either knowledge assimilation or knowledge accommodation. The
cognitive conflict approach to achieve conceptual change typically involves evaluating learners' existing knowledge,
presenting  conflicting   information,   and re-evaluating,  leading   to  changes    in  learners'  conceptions.   Thus    one
essential strategy that Piagetian perspectives recommend to foster conceptual change is to confront students with
discrepant data or events (Chinn, & Brewer, 1993; Driver, Guesne, & Tiberghien, 1985). However, empirical studies
show that even cognitive discrepancies often do not lead to conceptual change. Nissani and Hoefler-Nissani (1992)
presented a study in which even natural scientists were surprisingly resistant to shifting their conceptions despite
contradictory data.

                                                            450                                                      CSCL 2007
         Alternatively, social constructivist theories view conceptual change via the lens of social contexts and take
into  account   the  distributed   nature   of   cognition.  They    follow   Vygotsky's    argument     (1978)     that all  higher
psychological   functions    (e.g. perception,   voluntary    attention) have    social origins.   This  line  of   research  views
conceptual   change   as  occurring  through     social interactions  such  as collaborative    learning.  Research    consistently
demonstrates    that tasks that   require learners   to engage    in active,  constructive  and  integrative   tasks   lead  to  best
understanding (e.g., Chi, de Leeuw, Chiu & LaVancher, 1994; Goldman, 1997). Collaborative learning can provide
affordances   for   such engagement      (O'Donnell  &   O'Kelly,    1994).   For example,    Chinn, Anderson,      and  Waggoner
(2000)   demonstrated     that   students  who   engaged    in  more     argumentation-related     behaviors     developed    better
understanding     from   peer   discussion    than  individual    learning.   Duschl    and   Osborne    (2002)     suggested    that
argumentation can be prompted by providing access to multiple accounts of phenomena and evidence and with a
context  to foster   dialogic  activity. Stressing  the  need  to consider    affective and   social factors,  Pintrich,   Marx,  &
Boyle (1993) challenged Posner et al's (1982 original conceptual change model), which they called "cold" change.
Instead, they   developed   the  notion  of "hot"   or  intentional  conceptual   change.   All in  all, the  social  constructivist
perspectives particularly point out the importance of social interactions in the process of conceptual change. In the
next section, we will elucidate how conceptual change takes place in the collaborative learning environment.

Collaborative Conceptual Change
         Social constructivists argue that knowledge develops through social negotiation. Their assumption is that
engagement in discourse promotes learning (Rogoff, 1990). First, peer interactions may lead students to restructure
their existing knowledge. Roschelle (1992) reports a study in which convergent conceptual change occurred when
students collaboratively used a computer simulation - the Envisioning Machine (EM) to learn about two physical
concepts:   velocity  and  acceleration.   In  the EM    study, students    restructured  their  commonsense        ideas, to make
meaning   of  a scientific concept.  Students    referred  to the concepts    of  velocity  and acceleration     as the  "thin"  and
"thick" arrows and successfully shared the meaning of these concepts by iterative cycles of displaying, confirming,
and   repairing meanings.    Secondly,   peer  interactions  may  stimulate    the need   for knowledge    revision.     Duschl  and
Osborne   (2002)    suggest   that opportunities   for  discussion   and   argumentation    aids   students   in  considering    and
evaluating other perspectives and thus may help learners revise their original ideas. Scientific argumentation usually
involves  proposing,     supporting, criticizing,   evaluating,   and   refining   ideas. Peer  collaboration     provides    a  rich
environment     for mutual  discovery,   reciprocal  feedback,    and   frequent  sharing  of ideas. Crook    (1994)     pointed out
three major cognitive benefits of peer collaboration: articulation, conflict, and co-construction. The discrepant ideas
from peers may require students to explain or reflect on and then compare their original ideas with alternatives from
their peers,  thus   leading  to  eventual  conceptual   change.     Finally, peer interactions    may   encourage     deep  mental
processing.   According     to   Chinn   and   Brewer    (1993),    deep  processing      includes   attending   to   contradictory
information, attempting to make meaning of alternative ideas, looking for evidence to support or dispute a theory,
establishing  causal    relations  between   the   evidence   and considering     the validity   of  evidence.    In   collaborative
learning, students have the tendency to convince others by providing evidence to support their own theories and ask
for evidence for alternative theories.

         In summary, peer interactions may contribute to conceptual change by arousing an awareness of the need
for knowledge revision, initiating knowledge reconstruction, and encouraging deep processing. However, there is no
guarantee that collaborative learning will be productive and successful (Dillenbourg, 1999; O'Donnell, & O'Kelly,
1994). Barron (2000) found that it is necessary to find ways to help students achieve common ground when facing
novel  problems     and  coordinate efforts   in collaborative  activities.   CSCL  environments     have    the potential   to help
make collaboration more effective.

Computer-supported Conceptual Change
         Research has shown computers are particularly effective in fostering conceptual change because in these
environments, students can engage with simulated phenomena and review their actions as they formulate and test
alternative hypotheses,    receive  feedback,    and reconcile  the  discrepancy   between    their  ideas   and  the  observations
(e.g. Beichner, 1996; White, 1993; Zietsman, & Hewson, 1986). Beichner (1996) proposed that technology-based
instructional   approaches    could allow   for  an  examination     of interactions  and   collisions   that is more    direct  and
obvious  than   with  traditional  laboratory  methods.   In  his study,  368  introductory   physics    students   in a  variety of
instructional settings used a video analysis software package - the VideoGraph, which allowed students to compare
videos directly with synchronized, animated graphs and to measure slopes and areas on the graphs. The outcome of

                                                                451                                                        CSCL 2007
the post-instruction assessment    of students'  ability to interpret kinematics     graphs  shows  that   students  using    this
software performed better than those taught via traditional instruction. Zietsman and Hewson (1986) investigated the
effects  of instruction  using computer     simulations  along   with conceptual     change    strategies. They   showed      that
computer    simulations  may   highlight  when   students'  current   conceptions    are   not adequate    and   thus    promote
conceptual change.

         Computer-supported      learning   environments    may   facilitate students   in developing      their metacognitive
capabilities. Computer    technologies   provide  explicit  cognitive   models    to help  students' planning,      monitoring,
revising and reflecting. For example, ThinkerTools promoted students' metacognitive ability to plan, monitor and
reflecting during scientific inquiry in addition to helping students learn physics concepts (White, 1993; White &
Frederiksen,  2000).  The    ThinkerTools   curriculum   focuses  on  the development     of metacognitive     knowledge      and
skills needed  to create  and revise  their theories through   an instructional   inquiry  cycle  consisting  of  a  motivation
phase, model evaluation phase, formalization phase, and transfer phase. It provides a set of interactive simulations
and modeling tools for middle school students to develop understanding of physical theories as they engaged in
conducting experiments, creating and evaluating models, and revising the theories. Once they finally select the best
theories and  causal models,   they  apply  them  to different real-world    situations by   predicting and  explaining    what
would happen. The results show that the alternative representations and models embodied in ThinkerTools helped
students develop conceptual models that they could apply to solve physics problems.

         In   summary,   empirical  evidence   shows   that computer-supported       learning  environments      may     promote
conceptual change in two ways: first, they can help students realize discrepancies between their original ideas and
alternative ideas; second,   they  may  provide   affordances    for developing   students'    metacognitive     skills, such  as
planning,   self-regulating, and monitoring.   The   research  reported   in this section  examined  individual      conceptual
change. In the next section, we discuss the role of computer-based learning environments in collaborative conceptual
change.

Computer-Supported Learning and Collaborative Conceptual Change
         Little  research has   attempted   to  examine   CSCL    environments     from    the perspective   of   collaborative
conceptual    change and  show    how  and   why  CSCL      may  foster   such change.    In this section   we    provide   both
theoretical and empirical evidence to address this issue. The framework of analysis in this section is based on the
obstacles that normally occur in the process of collaborative conceptual change and how computers may have the
potential to help students overcome these obstacles. The theoretical analysis may shed light on the implications of
future design of CSCL tools for the purpose of promoting conceptual change. To address this issue, we will first
present two empirical studies that aimed to directly examine the role that computer-supported instructions play in
collaborative learning. Then obstacles that occur in collaborative conceptual change will be discussed. Finally, we
will discuss the potentials of CSCL instruction in the process of conceptual change. In general, computers have been
used in two ways to promote collaborative learning (Hmelo, 2006).            First, simulation and modeling tools create a
context for students to test their conceptions and this context can provide a focus for negotiation.       Second, computer-
based discussion spaces can scaffold student reasoning and collaboration and provide opportunities for students to
students to articulate their thinking, compare perspectives, and reflect on their learning.

Empirical Evidence
         There   are some    empirical evidence   supporting   the   idea that CSCL     can  promote    student   learning    and
conceptual change, such as Roschelle's influential study of dyads working with the Envisioning Machine discussed
earlier (Roschelle, 1992). This use of computers falls into the first category: the EM provides a context for students
to negotiate meaning and test their conceptions. Recall that this study investigated a dyad's collaborative conceptual
change using a computer simulation. Based on these findings, Roschelle conceptualized collaboration as a process
that gradually leads dyads' individual understandings to converge. The computer served as a medium for the dyads
to establish the common understanding, which is critical for achieving collaborative conceptual change. However,
collaborative  conceptual    change should   go beyond   knowledge     convergence.     Another   example   is   the Force    and
Motion Microworld (FMM), a suite of computer simulation programs developed by Tao and Gunstone (1999). They
examined    high  school students'  collaborative conceptual    development    in  physics.  The  findings   showed      that the
FMM programs provided students with many opportunities for co-construction of shared knowledge through asking
students to carry out predict-observe-explain tasks. Although there was evidence that students built on each other's
ideas and reached shared understanding, not all students sustained their conceptual change after instruction. Only

                                                             452                                                      CSCL 2007
those  students who    were   cognitively   engaged    in  the  tasks  and    prepared  to reflect  on  and  reconstruct   their
conceptions did obtain eventual conceptual change

          Scardamalia,  Bereiter,   and  Lamon     (1994)  also  provided     empirical evidence    for the positive  relations
between CSCL and conceptual change while students worked with CSILE. The CSILE environment falls into the
second   category  of  tools that elicit articulation  of ideas   and  scaffold  building  collective   understanding. CSILE
provides  a networked    community     database   where  students  can   discuss  ideas and  build  knowledge.    The students
must label their discussion notes using prompts that describe the role of the note (e.g., I need to understand, My
theory).  A  series of  studies   indicated   that  students  gain    deeper  understanding    and  collaboratively   construct
knowledge while working in CSILE environments compared with traditional classrooms in the depth of learning and
reflection, awareness   of   what they   have  learned  or   need  to  learn. Moreover,    students also  achieved   individual
learning outcomes on standardized tests in reading, language, and vocabulary.

          Vosniadou    and   Kollias (2003)   used  a  computer-supported      environment,     the Web   Knowledge     Forum
(WebKF; a descendant of CSILE), in which dyads constructed a model of the internal heating system of an average
Greek  house   and  explored   how   such   a system   works.   Each   student   was   required to  keep  notes   of cognitive,
metacognitive, and communicative activities. The results showed significant pre-post differences in understanding
how a hot water heating system works but did not show gains in knowledge about heat and temperature in general.
Interestingly, they found considerable metacognitive activity in dyads' conversations. Therefore, they concluded that
CSCL environments can be helpful in developing metacognitive and intentional learning skills.

          These empirical    studies  point   out  the important   role  of   computer-supported    learning    environment  in
students' collaborative activities. However, they did not show how and why these CSCL environments can lead to
successful  conceptual   change.  Questions    like whether    and  how   computer-supported     learning   environments   can
foster collaborative learning remain unanswered. Therefore, we need to pay more attention to the specific roles that
computers   can   play  in   fostering   collaborative  conceptual     change.   Furthermore,   both    studies indicated  that
collaborative conceptual change is beyond convergence of knowledge. There are several conditions that need to be
met to achieve  collaborative    conceptual   change,  and   these are difficult  to achieve in  many   collaborative learning
environments with no computer support. In the following section, we will address these issues through a theoretical
analysis.

Theoretical Analysis
          To present a theoretical analysis on how computers may provide affordances for collaborative conceptual
change, we will first examine obstacles that normally occur in students' collaboration. We then consider evidence
that CSCL environments have the potential to overcome these obstacles to collaborative conceptual change.

Obstacles to Collaborative Conceptual Change
          Collaborative learning is not always successful (Dillenbourg, 1999; O'Donnell & O'Kelly, 1994). There
are several obstacles in collaborative learning that need to be overcome to achieve collaborative conceptual change.
Instructional  techniques    should  provide   affordances   for   overcoming     these obstacles   and  promoting    effective
collaboration.  First, the quality   of  dialogue  or  discussion   is always   a concern   in  collaborative   learning. Deep
processing is critical for conceptual change (Chinn & Brewer, 1993). If collaborative learning fails to involve deep
processing or higher order thinking, such as attending to contradictory information, attempting to make meaning of
alternative ideas,  looking  for  evidence  to support    or dispute   a theory,  establishing  causal  relations  between   the
evidence and considering the validity of evidence, the collaborative discourse may fail to promote deep processing.
Chinn and colleagues argued that students often fail to change their theories because they 1) hold beliefs that cannot
be integrated with the theory, 2) believe that some of the evidence can be explained by other implausible causes, or
3) cannot use the data presented to create a model of the phenomena (Chinn & Brewer, 2001; Chinn & Malhotra,
2002). Unfortunately,    these   same   problems    often occur    in  exchanges  between    students.   Without   scaffolding,
collaborative  discussions   may    remain  superficial.   Hence,   instructional    tools are  needed   to support   learner's
collaborative engagement in deep processing. More specifically, tools should support collaborative discussion that
leads to making arguments on the basis of evidence and establishing causal relations between the evidence and one's
perspective.

          Second,   according  to classical   conceptual  change    theory,   cognitive conflict is  regarded   as essential to
initiate conceptual change. One would expect that in collaborative discussions, there would be greater opportunities

                                                               453                                                    CSCL 2007
for  conflict.   Even though    conflicts between    individual ideas  do   not necessarily   arise in peer  collaboration,   it is
important     to help    arouse  the  within  individual  cognitive   conflict  by   engaging    students   into  reflection  and
accommodation of previous knowledge. Some research found that students seldom directly disagree with each other
when collaboratively working on a problem due to politeness. Often, students even resist collaborative learning to
avoid conflicts that might occur.         There  are two possible   reasons  for   why  students   ignore the  conflicts  in  their
collaborative    activity: either  they  may  not realize  the  existence   of  alternative   conceptions or   they  tend to  take
perspectives using different criteria to justify their ideas. If it is the first case, tools are needed to make the dynamic
nature of scientific concepts explicit to students; if it is the second case, then students need to learn how to take a
stance on the basis of experimental data or evidence. On the other hand, even if students clearly see the conflicts,
they may resist conceptual change because people have a strong tendency to keep their original ideas. For instance,
Chinn and Brewer (1993) proposed seven possible responses to anomalous data, only one of which is the adaptation
of the theory on the basis of observed data. This indicates that students make arbitrary decisions when accepting or
rejecting a theory. In accordance, Trumper (1997) also found that students reacted differently to conceptual conflicts
that  did  not   lead to  conceptual  change    when  learning  about  the  energy   concept.    Some   failed to  recognize   the
conflict;  some   recognized    but  avoided  solution  by  passively  relying  on   other  peers;  some  resolved    the conflict
partially; and   some    resolved  the  conflict using  alternative  conceptions.    Tao   and   Gunstone (1999)     asserted that
"conceptual conflicts did not always produce conceptual change. For conflicts to lead to change, students need to
reflect on and reconstruct their conceptions" (p.870). All these findings indicate that it is necessary to provide tools
to  help  students    realize the  existence of  alternative perspectives   or  even,  if  it is necessary,  deliberately  create
conflicts in students' discussion thus prompt conceptual change. As well, it is also essential to provide appropriate
scaffolding to facilitate student to learn how to make a decision on either accepting or rejecting theories on the basis
of evidence. Only by reflecting on evidence and accommodating one's original ideas can conceptual change occur.

           Third, the epistemic goals are rarely addressed in the collaborative learning (Duschl, & Osborne, 2002).
The   epistemic   goals   include  aspects   of what, how    and   why we   know.    These    goals are critical  for  intentional
conceptual change (Pintrich et al., 1993). Duschl and Osborne (2002) proposed that to enhance students' abilities to
set epistemic goals, the instructional tools should focus on "(1) how evidence is used in science for the construction
of explanation, and (2) on the criteria used in science to evaluate the selection of evidence and the construction of
explanations." (p. 40). In collaborative learning, the epistemic goals may prompt students to change their ideas in
response to evidence provided by others in the group.        In addition, without knowing how and why they are learning,
the students might just collaborate to memorize knowledge that remains encapsulated in a school context rather than
co-construct knowledge that can be transferred to other situations. Hence, the conceptual change does not really take
place for the purpose of conceptual change is to help students change their everyday life thinking by applying the
scientific knowledge to explain phenomena and understand the world.

           In  summary,    there  are three  major   obstacles  to achieving    collaborative  conceptual   change:    absence   of
epistemic  goals,   low   quality  of discussion, and   inadequate   skills to  deal with   competing   ideas, all  of which   are
essential  aspects    in the  process of  collaborative conceptual   change.    If the computer-supported      tools can  provide
affordances to deal with these obstacles, computers may contribute to fostering collaborative conceptual change.

How Computers Can Help Deal with These Obstacles
           Theoretically, appropriately designed CSCL environments can be powerful tools for overcoming obstacles
to collaborative conceptual change by improving the quality of discussion, and providing scaffolding to facilitate
student collaboration and working with alternative ideas, and making the epistemic goals explicit.

           Improve    the  quality of discussion.  Computers    can  mediate    the collaborative   discussion  by   focusing  the
discussion on the joint task and inspire deep processing. The computer screen offers highly shared focused objects
for reflection and discussion. Students can avoid ambiguous language through images on the screen and establish
common attention to referents within the discussion as occurred in Roschelle (1992) and Hmelo-Silver (2003). In
addition, they can also test out alternative views. Hmelo-Silver (2003) conducted a study to examine how students
constructed a joint problem-space. Groups of students were asked to design a clinical trial to test a cancer drug using
the computer-based modeling tool, the OncoTCAP clinical trial wizard. In accord to Roschelle's findings, she found
that even though direct conflicts rarely occurred in the group collaboration, students did tend to modify and refine
their knowledge       with the  facilitation of  the tools,  which   indicated  that   the  collaborative activities   within  the
computer-supported environment did help students realize the need to modify their knowledge base. Clements and

                                                                454                                                     CSCL 2007
Nastasi (1988) found significant group differences among groups of students using Logo for conflict resolution, rule
determination, and self-directed work. They suggested that it is the computer-assisted learning environments (e.g.,
simulation and word processing) that are likely to produce a greater frequency of quality interactions. However, it is
possible  that different software   encourages  different  types  of  interactions amongst    students  (Crook,  1990).   Wild
(1995) investigated the verbal interactions of 12 students (9-10 yrs old) in four collaborative groups using simulation
and word processing software. The simulation task involved the use of Terra Australis; students were given specific
roles, encouraged    to help each   other and  to  make  group   decisions.  The  word   processing    task was to  produce  a
combined    report of   the sailing adventure   experienced    while  using   Terra   Australis. The   results  indicated  that
students' talk was   more   cognitively   oriented when  working   with   simulation  software   than  when   using the word
processing.

          King (1991) observed verbal interaction and problem solving behavior of small collaborative peer groups
working on computer-based tasks. She found that successful groups engaged in more task talk than social talk. They
ask  more   task-related    questions, which    were  more     strategic, and  obtained    higher   elaboration  scores   than
unsuccessful   groups.   Her study  demonstrated    that  guided  peer    questioning in the  computer-supported     learning
environment promote high quality peer interactions. Kozma (2000) concluded that computer-based technology can
help   collaborative interactions by   providing   symbolic    elements   and engaging   students   in  focused  inquiry   that
involves authentic scientific tasks. The combination of symbolic representations and inquiry activities enables and
constrains the range of meanings by discourse, such that students can build on each other's ideas and intentions,
draw new ideas into a common frame of meaning, and repair discrepancies.

          In a follow-up to Roschelle's (1992) earlier study, Teasley and Roschelle (1993) examined how the EM
simulation supported collaborative learning and thinking. In particular, the simulation provided a context that helped
dyads successfully construct a joint problem space and share knowledge in the domain of Newtonian physics. They
argued that the EM activity drew the emphasis away from the computer software per se and on to the quality of the
dialogue. This study provided good evidence that dyads (15-year-olds) constructed a rich shared understanding of
velocity and acceleration during a 45 min session using the EM. During that time, the dyads produced a lot of deep
processing, such   as   exchanging  ideas  and  explaining  to  each  other,  testing one's   and each  other's  ideas  in the
simulation, making respectful changes judging by the validity of evidence.

          In addition to deep processing, the quality of collaborative discourse largely depends on how much valid
explanation, elaboration and argument is involved and how theories are evaluated. Webb (1989) conducted a meta-
analysis which showed that the success of collaborative problem solving and learning depends largely on the level of
elaboration of the information exchanged between the collaborating students. She concluded that group work with
computers was beneficial and it was possible to design group-learning settings that benefited most students. Because
computer-based    simulations  allow   students to  test their ideas, they   are likely to confront    with the discrepancies
between observations and their originally conceptions. Beyond that, it gives students a rich context for discussion in
which they can exchange and negotiate alternative perspectives (e.g., Hmelo-Silver, 2003). Computer-based learning
environments can provide opportunities for students to elaborate their ideas, provide explanations, gather evidence
to  support their  ideas  or reject other  alternative   ideas as well    as scaffolding   evidence-based    reasoning.   Such
opportunities may foster students' ability to use data to evaluate theories. In CSCL learning environments, students
may use computer-based tools to test alternative ideas and the collaborative discourse can help individuals deal with
the discrepancies between their conceptions and the available data. This affordance was illustrated in the example of
the EM   simulation   (Roschelle, 1992;   Teasley  &  Roschelle,  1993).   The   dyads  were  able  to test out whether   their
ideas were correct or need repair. It the result of the testing did not support, they needed to negotiate until there
understandings   converged.   Testing   ideas was   the  most  frequently  strategy used   to start  negotiation in the EM
simulation activity.

          Make metacognitive thinking visible. The notion of intentional conceptual change brings attention to the
role of students' metacognitive skills (Pintrich et al., 1993). Metacognition is the awareness and understanding of
one's self as a thinker. Experts and effective thinkers tend to pose alternatives for themselves and choose among
them by reflecting and using evidence. In contrast, students attempt to either accept without questioning or ignore
alternative views. Therefore, approaches need to be developed to increase students' metacognitive awareness.

          Traditional collaborative learning environment can make students thinking visible, CSCL environment can
make collaborative thinking visible and can provide explicit support for students to construct arguments, engage in

                                                             455                                                     CSCL 2007
negotiation,    and  explain   conceptual      understanding.    Most   importantly,    the   techniques      involved    in  CSCL
environments     afford   helping  student track  their  thinking  process.  The   ThinkerTools    is  a good   example      of  how
computer-based      environments     may   facilitate students    to  develop   their  metacognitive     capability.   White     and
Frederiksen (2000) report their findings of the instructional trials of the ThinkerTools Inquiry Curriculum in twelve
urban classes    in grades   7-9.  Aiming   at facilitating  the development    of metacognitive      knowledge    and  skills   that
students need to create and revise their theories, the ThinkerTools incorporates a reflective process in which students
evaluate their own and each other's research using a set of criteria that characterize good inquiry, such as reasoning
carefully   and  collaborating    well.  They  found   that  students  who   showed    a  clear   understanding    of  the   criteria
produced    higher  quality   investigations   than  those  who   showed   less  understanding.    Their  findings    support    that
computer    programs     have  the   potential to introduce   a  metacognitive   language      to  facilitate students'   reflective
explorations    of  their work    in classroom    conversations.     Such  metacognitive     process  may     foster collaborative
conceptual    change    by   arousing   an awareness     of  the  need  for   revision  of   knowledge,   initiating   knowledge
reconstruction, and encouraging deep processing.

          In CSCL environments, electronic discussions provide affordances for students to engage in collaborative
reflection.  In  a  face-to-face   classroom   environment,    the   discussion  might    only  benefit  the   few   students    who
participate. The electronic environment allows universal participation. In addition, students have equal opportunities
to respond   to  each other   and  engage  in  meaning    making   (Suthers,  2006).   The   electronic  record is   persistent  and
enables students to reflect on their own thinking as well as alternative ideas raised by other peer students. The CSCL
environments can promote awareness of strategies for thinking by engaging the students in activities that require
reflection. Students can keep and share a "thinking log" where they write down the thinking they employ in learning.
As students share their entries, they gain an awareness of alternatives to their own processes. Activities like these,
that require students to make the invisible work of thinking visible and explicit, help all students to visualize their
thinking and alternative ideas. Hence, more purposeful, flexible, and reflective thinking is the result as the presence
of other alternative perspectives available, which may prompt the process of conceptual change. Goldman, Duschl,
Ellenbogen, Williams, and Tzou (2003) asserted that computer-based instruction might make thinking visible. They
presented an example electronic environment, the Knowledge Forum (KF), which afforded to model the processes
of  coordination,   construction,   and   evaluation  to the students.  Goldman    et  al (2003)   found  within   the  context   of
SEPIA project, which aims to promote scientific reasoning and communication, the KF entries "extremely valuable
for taking the pulse of students' scientific thinking and argumentation approaches" (p. 278). They further implicated
that there were some pragmatic constrains since the real application of the KF was somewhat different from what
the  creators   intended.  For example,    the  students  only   had  time to  make    their own   thinking   visible  but   did not
examine     the  entries  of  other  students'.   Another    example   CSCL     environment     is the   KIE   environment       (the
Knowledge-Learning        Environment,     the previous   version  of  WISE).   In the  KIE,   the  SenseMaker       tool makes   it
possible  to  help  students   see  their thinking   process when     presenting argumentation     (Bell  &   Davis,   2000).    The
SenseMaker helps students figure out the relationships between a numbers of Web resources by asking students to
organize the information into categories and use them as evidence to make an argument. The Mildred tool in the
KIE software provides conceptual and strategic hints to scaffold students' thinking. All these tools facilitate students
to see their own thinking (Bell & Davis, 2000). Both KF and KIE illustrated that the CSCL environments have the
potential to make students' thinking visible and enhance their metacognitive strategies.

          Develop   strategies  to   discover  and  resolve  conceptual    conflicts.  Students   have  difficulties  dealing   with
conflicts and need help realizing that there are competing conceptual explanations for phenomena. Sometimes it is
even necessary to deliberately create conflicting perspectives so that students have chances to learn how to develop
an effective argument in the collaborative work. For instance, in the KIE learning environment, students are asked to
take one    side of two   conflicting   hypotheses   for the propagation    of  light. In this  way,   students  need   to   explore
sufficient experimental evidence to support the stance they take (Davis & Linn, 2000; Linn, 2000). Thus, the KIE
software provides scaffolds for students to first realize the conflicting nature of scientific learning and to secondly
learn how to resolve the conflicts by integrating alternative concepts. Although collaboration offers opportunities for
conceptual conflicts to occur, when facing with such conflicts, students fail to reflect on why such conflicts exist and
either ignore the conflicts or simply accept it without any support of evidence.           Without such reflection, conceptual
change   is unlikely  however     collaborative   learning   settings may   be  more   likely  to  promote    such   reflections  as
students compare their understandings and negotiate meaning.

          CSCL      environments     can  provide   scaffolding  to   promote   effective    ways  of  dealing  with   conceptual
conflicts. Student-initiated hypothesis generation is a central process in many computer-based learning environments

                                                                 456                                                      CSCL 2007
and can help students to construct argument and produce conceptual conflicts. Computer-mediated communication
offers the opportunities to structure learners' discourse in productive ways. Scaffolding and scripted collaboration
can  be  operationalized  by  cues  inserted  into messages      to help  structure  students'   online    discourse  in productive
ways. Weinberger, Fisher, and Mandl (2004) conducted a study investigating the effects of scripts on knowledge
convergence   in   a computer-mediated      communication     learning     environment.     Each   group     of three learners   was
randomly assigned to one of the four experimental conditions in a 2 × 2 factorial design involving two factors: social
scripts and epistemic scripts. Each group was asked to jointly prepare analyses for three case problems via web-
based discussion     boards. Two   of the   four  conditions  had    the  collaboration    scripts implemented     in  the form   of
prompts inserted into the text windows of web-based discussion boards. The epistemic scripts supported the learners
with their learning tasks by providing shared focus on the task, and the social scripts supported students to interact
with each other by guiding them to share and contribute individual knowledge resources. The results showed that
learners  supported   with   epistemic    scripts  were   highly    convergent    regarding     focused    knowledge     during  the
collaborative phase   but  strongly impeded      outcome    convergence,    the  social  script  only  slightly  improved    process
convergence.   These   results  indicated   that different  scripts in  the computer-mediated        environments     may  produce
differential effects on knowledge convergence in collaborative learning.

          A number of software environments that we have described involve scaffolding and scripts for argument
construction  including    KIE  (Davis    &  Linn,  2000;    Linn,     2000),  CSILE    (Scardamalia       & Bereiter,   1992),  the
Multimedia Forum Kiosk (Hoadley, Hsi, & Berman, 1995), Belvedere (Cavalli-Sforza, Weiner, & Lesgold, 1994).
Grounded in research that has demonstrated the importance of argumentation in the process of conceptual change,
all these tools  aim  to  scaffold the   development     of students'   argumentation      and   reasoning.  KIE   is a  web-based
environment   that   allows  students  to   develop argument     and    use   different sources    of  evidence   to  support   their
argument. CSILE is a communal database for building, articulating, and organizing knowledge. It facilitates students
to set up hypothesis, search for knowledge and information to generate explanation and arguments to validate of
falsify initial ideas. The Multimedia Forum Kiosk is an environment for discussion that makes use of multimedia for
socially  relevant representations,   which  allows  the    user to  internalize  and   learn  from    the community     knowledge
base, and  to  construct   knowledge     by synthesizing    new  ideas.    Belvedere    is designed    to  support  problem-based
collaborative  activities  with evidence    and   concept   maps.   It has  been     assumed   in  all these    computer-supported
learning software that by laying out the relationships between evidence and arguments, students learn how to meet
the needs to strengthen an argument.

Implications
          To this point, we have discussed how computer-supported environments may promote conceptual change
in the collaborative learning environment. We propose several implications for the design of CSCL environments to
promote   collaborative    conceptual    change.  First,  the focus     of  this  review   indicated    three   features  of  CSCL
environments that may afford successful collaborative conceptual change. Designers should make efforts to include
these features when designing a learning environment:         scaffolds to improve the quality of collaborative discourse,
make metacognitive thinking visible, and promote strategies to discover and resolve conceptual conflicts.

          Second, it is critical to investigate and build on students' prior knowledge.           In addition, it is also important
to make the students themselves become aware of what preconceptions they hold. Bringing authentic problems or
activities into the computer-supported learning environment may help fulfill this purpose. In this way, students have
cues to activate their prior knowledge and connect it to current learning. However, the prior knowledge could either
promote   or impede    the  process   of conceptual    change    (Pintrich  et  al., 1993).   CSCL     environments    should   give
dynamic feedback to help students change their conceptions. One of the most importance strategies is to support
students  in generating   alternative hypotheses,   for  example    by   providing   the   basic structure   of a hypothesis   as in
BGuile (Reiser et al., 2003) which provides scaffolds for scientific inquiry in the domain of evolution. In addition,
students' alternative perspectives are developed from experience and shaped by a socially constructed commonsense
ways  to  describe   and explain  the world.  CSCL     environments      need  to include   authentic   activities and   real world
problems to connect to learners experiences.

          Finally, as Goldman et al (2003) discovered that sometimes the CSCL tools are used differently from what
the designers  intend  to.  Therefore,   much    research  needs    to be  done  to  investigate   how    to make  full  use  of the
designed  tools  and   the  range  of more    or  less productive      ways   in  which    they  can   appropriated.   CSCL    tools
themselves are not enough to promote collaborative conceptual change. Designers of CSCL environments need to
consider the bigger context of how the tools will be used, the curriculum they will be used with, the participant

                                                               457                                                        CSCL 2007
structures, and the professional development for teachers who plan to use such environments.

References
Barron, B.  (2000).     Achieving   coordination  in  collaborative problem-solving     groups.   Journal  of   the  Learning
        Sciences, 9, 403-436.
Beichner,  R.  J. (1996).  The  impact  of  video motion   analysis on  kinematics   graph interpretation  skills.  American
        Journal of Physics, 64, 1272-1278.
Carey, S. (1991). Knowledge acquisition: Enrichment or conceptual change? In Carey, S. & Gelman, E. (Eds.) The
        epigenesis of mind, Hillsdale, NJ, Erlbaum, pp. 257-291.
Cavalli-Sforza, V., Weiner, A., & Lesgold, A. (1994). Software support for students engaging in scientific activity
        and scientific controversy. Science Education. 78, 577-599.
Chi, M., de Leeuw, N., Chiu, M., & LaVancher, C. (1994). Eliciting self-explanations improves learning. Cognitive
        Science, 18, 439-478.
Chinn,  C. A.,    Anderson,    R. C., &  Waggoner,    M. A.    (2000). Patterns   of discourse in  two  kinds   of   literature
        discussion. Reading Research Quarterly, 36,378-411.
Chinn,  C. A., &     Brewer,   W.  F. (1993). The  role  of anomalous     data in science,  religion, and  magic.    In K. S.
        Rosengren, C. N. Johnson, & P L. Harris (Eds.). Imaging the impossible: Magical, scientific, and religious
        thinking in children (pp. 334-371). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Chinn,  C. A., &     Brewer,   W. F.  (2001). Models  of   data: A  theory of  how   people evaluate  data.   Cognition  and
        Instruction, 19, 323-393.
Chinn,  C. A., &     Malhotra,  B. A.   (2002). Children's  responses  to anomalous    scientific data: How   is  conceptual
        change impeded? Journal of Educational Psychology, 19, 327-343.
Clements, D. H., & Nastasi, B. K. (1988). Social and cognitive interactions in educational computer environments.
        American Educational Research Journal, 25, 87-106.
Crook, C. (1994). Computers and the collaborative experiences of learning. London: Routledge.
Crook, C. (1990). Computers in the classroom. In O. Boyd-Barrett & E. Scanlon (Eds.), Computers and Learning
        (pp. 155-173). Wokingham, England: Addison-Wesley.
Davis,  E. A., &     Linn, M.   (2000). Scaffolding  students'   knowledge  integration:  Prompts   for   reflection in  KIE.
        International Journal of Science Education, 22, 819-837.
Dillenbourg,   P. (1999).   What   do   you mean   by collaborative    learning?  In P. Dillenbourg   (Ed).   Collaborative-
        learning: Cognitive and Computational Approaches. (pp. 1-19). Oxford: Elsevier.
diSessa, A. A. (2006). A history of conceptual change research: Threads and fault lines. In R. K. Sawyer (Ed.), Cambridge
        handbook of the learning sciences (pp. 265-282). New York: Cambridge.
DiSessa, A. (1993). Towards an epistemology of physics. Cognition and Instruction, 10, 105-125.
Driver, R., Guesne, E., & Tiberghien, A. (1985). Children's idea in science. Milton Keynes: Open University Press.
Duschl, R., & Osborne, J. (2002). Supporting and promoting argumentation discourse in science education. Studies
        in Science Education, 38, 39-72.
Goldman, S. (1997). Learning from text: Reflection on 20 years of research and suggestions fro new directions of
        inquiry. Discourse Processes, 23, 357-398.
Goldman,   S., Duschl,     R., Ellenbogen,  K., Williams,   S.   & Tzou, C. (2003).     Science   inquiry in  a digital  age:
        Possibilities for making thinking visible.    In H. van Oostendorp (Ed.), Cognition in a Digital Age (pp. 253-
        283). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum Publishers.
Goldman-Segall, R., & Maxwell, J. (2003). Computers, the Internet, and new media for learning. In W. M. Reynolds
        & G. E. Miller (Eds.), Handbook of psychology: Educational psychology (Vol. 7, pp. pp. 393-427). New
        York, NY: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Hmelo-Silver, C. E. (2006). Design principles for scaffolding technology-based inquiry. In A. M. O'Donnell, C. E.
        Hmelo-Silver       &   G. Erkens  (Eds.), Collaborative    reasoning,   learning and   technology    (pp.   147-170).
        Mahwah NJ: Erlbaum.
Hmelo-Silver,     C. E. (2003).   Analyzing   collaborative knowledge     construction:  Multiple  methods    for   integrated
        understanding. Computers and Education, 41, 397-429.
Hoadley, C. M., Hsi, S., & Berman, B. P. (1995). Networked Multimedia for Communication and Collaboration.
        Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the American Educational Research Association, San Francisco,
        California, April 1995.
King, A. (1991). Effects of training in strategic questioning on children's problem-solving performance. Journal of
        Educational Psychology, 83, 307-317.
Kozma, R. B. (2000). The use of multiple representations and the social construction of knowledge in chemistry. In

                                                             458                                                    CSCL 2007
          J. M.  Jacobson,   & R. B.   Kozma    (Eds.), Innovations  in Science  and Mathematics    Education    (pp.11-46).
          Marhwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Linn, M. (2000). Designing the Knowledge Integration Environment. International Journal of Science Education, 22,
          781-796.
Nissani,  M.  &   Hoefler-Nissani,   D.  M. (1992).  Experimental   studies of belief-dependence    of observations   and of
          resistance to conceptual change. Cognition and Instruction, 9, 97-111.
O'Donnell,   A.,  &  O'Kelly,  J. (1994).   Learning from   peers:  Beyond  the rhetoric of positive   results.  Educational
          Psychology Review, 6, 321-349.
Pintrich, P.  R., Marx,  R.  W.,  &  Boyle,  R. A.  (1993).  Beyond   cold  conceptual change:  The    role of  motivational
          beliefs and   classroom    contextual factors  in the process  of conceptual   change. Review     of   Educational
          Research, 63, 167-199.
Posner,  G., Strike, K., Hewson,     P., &  Gertzog, W.  (1982).   Accommodation    of a scientific conception:     Toward a
          theory of conceptual change. Science Education, 66, 211-227.
Reiser, B. J., Tabak, I., Sandoval, W. A., Smith, B. K., Steinmuller, F., & Leone, A. J. (2002). BGuiILE: Strategic
          and conceptual scaffolds for scientific inquiry in biology classrooms. In S. M. Carver & D. Klahr (Eds.),
          Cognition and instruction: Twenty-five years of progress (pp. 263-306). Mahwah NJ: Erlbaum.
Rogoff, B. (1990). Apprenticeship in thinking: Cognitive development in social context. Oxford University Press,
          New York, NY.
Roschelle, J. (1992). Learning by collaborating: Convergent conceptual change. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 2,
          235-276.
Scardamalia, M., Bereiter, C., & Lamon, M. (1994). The CSILE project: Trying to bring the classroom into world 3.
          In K. McGilly (Ed.), Classroom lessons: Integrating cognitive theory and classroom practices (pp. 201-
          228). Cambridge MA: MIT press.
Simon, S., Erduran, S., & Osborne, J. (2002). Enhancing the Quality of Argumentation in School Science. Paper
          presented  at  the annual   meeting   of the  National  Association  for Research  in  Science    Teaching,  New
          Orleans, LA.
Suthers, D. D. (2006). Technology affordances for intersubjective meaning making. International Journal of Computer
          Supported Collaborative Learning, 1, 315-337.
Tao, P. K., & Gunstone, R. F. (1999). Conceptual change in science through collaborative learning at the computer.
          International Journal of Science Education, 21, 39-57.
Teasley,  S.  D., &  Roschelle,   J. (1993). Constructing   a joint problem  space:  The computer    as a   tool for sharing
          knowledge. In S. P. Lajoie & S. J. Derry (Eds.). Computers as cognitive tools (pp.229-257). Hillsdale, NJ:
          Lawrence Erlbaum.
Trumper, R. (1997). Applying conceptual conflict strategies in the learning of energy concept. Research in Science
          and Technology Education, 15, 5-18.
Vosniadou,    S.  &  Kollias,  V.  (2003).   Using  Collaborative,  Computer-Supported,     Model   Building     to Promote
          Conceptual Change in Science. In E. De Corte, L. Verschaffel, N. Entwistel and J. Van Merrienboer (Eds).
          Powerful learning environments: Unravelling basic components and dimensions. Advances in Learning and
          Instruction, Elsevier Press.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society (M. Cole, V. John-Steiner, S. Scribner, & E. Souberman, Eds.). Cambridge,
          MA: Harvard University Press.
Webb, N. M. (1989). Peer interaction and learning in small groups. International Journal of Education Research, 13,
          21-39.
Weinberger,     A., Fisher,  F.,  &   Mandl,    H. (2004).   Knowledge    convergence    in computer-mediated        learning
          environments: Effects of collaboration scripts. Paper presented at AERA 2004, San Diego.
White,  B.   Y.  (1993). ThinkerTools:     Causal  models,  conceptual   change, and   science education.    Cognition  and
          Instruction, 10, 1-100.
White, B., & Frederiksen, J. (2000). Metacognitive facilitation: An approach to making scientific inquiry accessible
          to all. In J. Minstrell & E. van Zee (Eds.), Inquiring into Inquiry Learning and Teaching in Science. (pp.
          331-370). Washington, DC: American Association for the Advancement of Science.
Wild, M. (1995). Analyzing children's talk in computer-based cooperative groups. Educational Research, 5, 85-104.
Zietsman, A. I., & Hewson, P. W. (1986). Effect of instructing using microcomputer simulations and conceptual
          change strategies on science learning. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 23, 27-39.

                                                              459                                                   CSCL 2007
