         Classroom Model, Model Classroom: Computer-Supported
       Methodology for Investigating Collaborative-Learning Pedagogy
        Dor Abrahamson, University of California ­ Berkeley, 4649 Tolman Hall, Berkeley, CA, 94720-1670.
                                                    dor@berkeley.edu
        Paulo Blikstein & Uri Wilensky, Northwestern University, 2120 Campus Drive, Evanston, IL, 60208.
                                            {paulo, uri}@northwestern.edu

         Abstract: We have been exploring the potential of agent-based modeling methodology for social-
         science research and, specifically, for illuminating theoretical complementarities of cognitive and
         socio-constructivist conceptualizations    of learning (e.g., Abrahamson    &   Wilensky,  2005a).     The
         current  study advances   our research   by   applying our  methodology     to  pedagogy   research:   we
         investigate individual  and  social   factors underlying   outcomes   of  implementing    collaborative-
         inquiry classroom practice. Using bifocal modeling (Blikstein & Wilensky, 2006a), we juxtapose
         agent-based  simulations  of  collaborative   problem  solving  with  real-classroom  data  of students'
         collaboration in a demographically diverse middle-school mathematics classroom (Abrahamson &
         Wilensky,   2005b).  We   validate the  computer  model    by comparing    outcomes   from  running    the
         simulation  with  outcomes   of the   real intervention.   Findings   are that  collaboration  pedagogy
         emphasizing group performance may forsake individual learning, because stable division-of-labor
         patterns  emerge  due  to utilitarian preference of   short-term  production   over  long-term learning
         (Axelrod,  1997). The   study may   inform    professional development    and   pedagogical policy     (see
         interactive applet: http://ccl.northwestern.edu/research/conferences/CSCL2007/CSCL2007.html).

Background and Objective
         We  present  a new   methodology    for developing    and  critiquing education  theory,  agent-based    modeling.
Agent-based  modeling    (hence  ABM)   has    been increasingly  used  by natural  scientists to study    a wide    range of
phenomena such as the interactions of species in an ecosystem, the interactions of molecules in a chemical reaction,
the percolation of oil through a substrate, and the food-gathering behavior of insects (e.g., Bonabeau, Dorigo, &
Théraulaz. 1999; Wilensky & Reisman, 1998, 2006). Such phenomena, in which the elements within the system
(molecules, or ants) have multiple behaviors and a large number of interaction patterns, have been termed complex
and are collectively studied in a relatively young interdisciplinary field called complex systems or complexity studies
(e.g., Holland,  1995). Typical  of  complex    phenomena   is  that they  lend    themselves  to two   or   more   layers of
description--e.g., collisions of particles  in a gas   chamber  are  the "micro"   events, and    pressure   is the  "macro"
event-- and the cumulative (`aggregate') patterns or behaviors at the macro level are not premeditated or directly
actuated by any of the "lower-level" micro elements. For example, flocking birds do not intend to construct an
arrow-shaped structure. Rather, each element ("agent") follows its "local" rules, and the overall pattern arises as
epiphenomenal to these multiple local behaviors--the overall pattern emerges.

         Specialized  computer-based     environments    (Collier   &  Sallach,    2001; Langton    &   Burkhardt,     1997;
Wilensky, 1999) have been developed as research tools for investigating complex phenomena (North et al., 2002;
Wilensky, 2001; Wilensky & Reisman, 2006). The agents can be instantiated in the form of a computer program that
specifies their rule-based behaviors. ABM is thus particularly powerful for studying complex phenomena, because
once the modeler assigns agents their local rules, the modeler can set these virtual agents into motion and watch for
any overall patterns that arise from the agents' interactions. E.g., the modeler might assign a group of virtual birds a
set of rules and then watch their interactions to see whether typical flock structures emerge (Reynolds, 1987).

         Whereas initially complex-systems methods and perspectives arose from the natural sciences, complexity,
emergence, and micro- and macro levels of description of phenomena are all highly relevant to research in the social
sciences. Indeed, the recent decades have seen a surge in social-science studies employing ABM (Axelrod, 1997;
Diermeier, 2000; Epstein & Axtell, 1996). Learning, too, we argue, can be construed as a complex phenomenon,
and thus ABM is a potentially powerful research tool conducive to the investigation of patterns, including structures
and rules, underlying the emergence of learning. Specifically, we are proposing to use ABM in investigating the
social dynamics underlying participation patterns observed when students interact around collaborative classroom
assignments, such    as construction  projects.  Thus,  whereas    our  paper  deals  squarely  with   `mice,    minds, and

                                                            46                                                      CSCL 2007
societies'--the  theme  of  the  CSCL    2007   conference--we     are  not  so much    dealing   with  computer-supported
collaborative learning as such, as much as with computer-supported inquiry into collaborative learning (CSiiCL).
Nevertheless, we hope to lay out agenda and methodology to facilitate synergies between the CSCL and complexity-
studies communities--synergies that increase understanding, within education research, of mechanisms and practice
pertaining to individual learning within social contexts. Thus, armed with computers as methodological tools for
ultimately improving collaborative learning, this paper is about computer-supported collaborative learning.

          We   have   been  working    with the   NetLogo     (Wilensky,    1999)  multi-agent    modeling-and-simulation
environment. A vision of the NetLogo development effort is that building simulations will become common practice
of  natural/social-sciences  scholars   investigating    complex    phenomena:     the   scholars    themselves--not     hired
programmers--build, run, and interpret the simulations (Tisue & Wilensky, 2004; Wilensky, 2003). The new lenses
of ABM, we believe, will enable education researchers to explore, articulate, develop, and share an intuition we
have  struggled  to  study rigorously  and  express   coherently:   the intuition  that individuals   and   communities   are
interdependent through myriad dynamic reciprocities (Cole & Wertsch, 1996; Greeno, 1998).

          In the remaining  sections  of this  paper,  we:  (1) introduce   the case  study--a    collaborative construction
project in   a demographically   diverse    middle-school   mathematics      classroom   studying    combinatorial   analysis
(Abrahamson, Janusz, & Wilensky, 2006; Abrahamson & Wilensky, 2005b); (2) discuss the rationale, design, and
implementation of a complexity-based analysis of the case-study's participation patterns, i.e., an agent-based model
that purports to simulate this phenomenon; (3) introduce `bifocal modeling' (Blikstein, Abrahamson, & Wilensky,
2006),  a computer-assisted    research  technique   for juxtaposing    real and   simulated  data   toward  calibrating  the
simulation such that it emulates the real data--we demonstrate this juxtaposition by aligning participation patterns in
our classroom    data with simulated   patterns emerging   in the  ABM;    (4)  report  findings; and  (5)  offer concluding
remarks on the implications of this study and the limitations of ABM and suggest directions for further research.

Case Study: Emergence of a Stratified Learning Zone in a Collaborative Project in
a Demographically Diverse Mathematics Classroom
          Complexity-studies methodology is particularly suitable for understanding student learning in pedagogical
frameworks that support individual agency. When such classrooms engage in collaborative construction projects,
participation patterns emerge, some that may be undesirable, from the educator's perspective. As we explain, below,
these patterns  emerge  through  iterative  student-to-student  negotiation  of   roles vis-à-vis students'  skills and  their
interpretation of the  overall classroom   objectives. When     these  objectives are   taken to  be production   rather than
learning, inequitable  participation  patterns  may  emerge,    because students   are  rewarded  for  their contribution    to
production rather than for their learning. The interactions of these two reward systems (the first, indexing students'
contribution   toward successful completion    of a  group  project;  the  second, indexing   students' own    learning)  is a
complex   system--ABM      enables us   to study  the  nature   of students' iterative  negotiations   that give  rise to the
inequitable  participation patterns.  Thus, simulating   participation  patterns   could  provide    designers  and  teachers
valuable  tools  for  running  equitable   classrooms.   In particular,    understanding   the   emergence   of   inequitable
participation may help educators formulate responses that temper production to the benefit of learning. We now
explain the case study that we investigated using ABM.

The Combinations tower: A Combinatorial-Analysis Collaborative Project
          The  current  investigation  uses data  from   a  design-based     research   study  of middle-school     students'
mathematical cognition pertaining to the topic of combinatorial analysis (Abrahamson, Janusz, &             Wilensky, 2006;
Abrahamson     &  Wilensky,    2005a).  Central   to the study     was  an implementation     of  a  challenging    classroom
collaborative project--the construction of the combinations tower, the exhaustive sample space of a 3-by-3 grid of
nine squares that can each be either green or blue (for a total of 512 distinct "9-blocks"). The classroom, working in
groups, created all the 9-blocks and assembled them into a very tall "histogram." This histogram consisted of 10
columns running from "no-green" through "9-green" (the columns' heights were, respectively, 1, 9, 36, 84, 126,
126, 84, 36, 9, 1--coefficients in the binomial function [a + b]9).

The Stratified Learning Zone: Group Dynamics From an Emergence Perspective
          Data analysis revealed unanticipated participation patterns. Namely, individual students operating within
groups assumed by-and-large restricted roles that we named: (a) "number crunchers"; (b) designers; (c) producers;
(d) implementers; (e) checkers; and (f) assemblers; and in addition, some students operated between groups as (g)

                                                             47                                                     CSCL 2007
ambassadors. We demonstrated the descending mathematical challenge of the a-through-f roles, e.g., the designers
initiate combinatorial-analysis strategies, the implementers carry out these strategies, and the assemblers glue the 9-
blocks onto a  poster.  We    demonstrated  that    students' individual roles   were  related   both to their  mathematical
achievement, as reported by the teacher, and their demographics. We argued that these roles were emergent and that
they affected the students' learning opportunities and self image and that therefore it is important to understand how
some students landed up on the lower rungs of the production line--how a stratified learning zone emerged.

        A stratified learning zone is a design-engendered hierarchy of students' potential learning trajectories along
problem-solving   skill sets, each  delimited   in  its conceptual    scope, and   all simultaneously    occurring   within a
classroom. In comparison, the term continuous learning zone depicts a space wherein students can each embark
from a core  problem,   sustain engagement      in  working   on  this  problem, and   build   a set of  skills wherein   each
accomplishment suggests, contextualizes, and supports the exploration and learning of the successive skill, so that a
solution path is learned as a meaningful continuum.

Validation Through Feedback From the Students and Teacher
        Based   on  interviews   with   the    teacher  and   the students,  we    formulated    the  following    agent-based
explanation of the emergence of student task distribution. Students' roles emerged as a function of individual student
interactions: Within a group, once a student realized that he had reached his limit in terms of mathematical problem
solving as compared to another student within that group, the first student would often capitulate to his group-mate
the task of pursuing that mathematical problem, and then she would take over, relegating to him a necessary task
that was within his zone of achievement, thus freeing herself to focus on the problem he had abandoned. A network
of symbiotic relationships crystallized as the more advanced students assumed leadership of their groups and as the
emergent task specifications were articulated in terms of student roles and student-to-student and group-to-group
negotiated partnerships.  The  likelihood   of an   individual student  dominating     another was   affected   by personality
traits: of the mathematically advanced students, those who were less socially fluent preferred to work individually,
whereas "bossier" students were more likely to assign tasks to other group members.

Exploration Vs. Exploitation: A Perennial Tradeoff of Collaborative Inquiry?
        When    a classroom    that is engaged  in  collaborative  project-based    activity progresses  towards    successful
completion of the project, could there be any justification to tamper with this progress? And yet, is a facilitator
ethically permitted to sacrifice individual students' learning so as ensure the completion of the project? To address
this design-and-facilitation dilemma, we will now turn to a complexity-studies perspective on organizations. One
could arguably model the study classroom as an organization, a collective of individuals with some shared objective
and a modus operandi for working towards this objective. There are no monetary stakes involved, but certain roles
enable some students to gain knowledge capital, whereas other roles do not. Our motivation to model the classroom
as an organization is that construction projects may tacitly import to the learning space ethics, ethos, and praxis of
working spaces that may not be entirely beneficial for all students.

        Axelrod and M. D. Cohen (1999) discuss exploration versus exploitation, a tradeoff inherent in complex
adaptive systems, such as organizations. For instance, in allocating resources, an organization must determine which
strategy will maximize its benefits--"mutating" to check for better fits with the changing environment or stagnating
and cashing in  on a    proven model    of success.  Typically,   "the  testing of new   types   comes  at some    expense  to
realizing benefits of those already available" (Axelrod & M. D. Cohen, 1999, p. 44). We submit that a classroom can
be seen as a complex adaptive system (Hurford, 2004), at least in terms of students' within-group free-range agency
in problem solving and the interactions that shape these agencies. Initially, all students are explorative. Yet, once a
functioning coordination scheme has evolved that is apparently well adapted to the environment, i.e. the classroom-
as-a-whole  is apparently  progressing   along    a trajectory towards   successfully   completing    a prescribed   task and
positive sanctioning is received from the forces that be (the facilitators), an implicit quietus is set on any further
exploration, and the group achieves dynamic stability. From that point on, the individual cogs in the production
mechanism hone their skills and produce (see Durkheim, 1947, for a social critique of the division of labor).

Finding: Some Answers, New Questions
        When    students  are   given   the freedom     to  explore   a problem    collaboratively,   both  remarkable    and
undesirable group behaviors may emerge. It is not a zero-sum game--these "pros and woes" need not cancel each
other out. An experienced and able teacher who anticipates this emergence and is sensitive to unforeseen behavior
can steer this sensitive dependence     so  as to  optimize   student  sharing  and learning   opportunities.   The proposed

                                                              48                                                     CSCL 2007
methodology     introduced  in  this paper  may  provide   education    researchers,  designers,  and   practitioners  tools for
understanding classroom dynamics such that they can identify points of leverage for working with students' natural
behavioral inclinations to achieve equitable participation. The next section explores this possibility.

Implementing a Theoretical Model of the Case-Study Emergent Classroom
Participation Pattern in the Form of "Runnable" Agent-Based Procedures
         In this section, we demonstrate the applicability of ABM methodology for the investigation of pedagogical
practice by explaining our design rationale for simulating the emergence of a stratified learning zone in a virtual
classroom.   Also,   we  demonstrate    the  iterative nature   of   this  methodology     by  describing   some    of  our  key
understandings, along the modeling process, that informed the improvement of the model. Whereas this paper is
primarily methodological--we use particular research content so as to demonstrate an investigation technique--the
reader  may  disagree   with our   theoretical model   of  the causes   of stratification. We  welcome     such  disagreement,
because we regard it as manifesting a strength of the ABM methodology: scholars from across the disciplines, who
may not share literature, constructs, or methodologies, can nevertheless critique each other's work pointedly--ABM
is an interdisciplinary lingua franca (Abrahamson & Wilensky, 2005a). In fact, readers are welcome to download
the model file and modify or replace the procedures so as to express their own hypotheses.

Rationale of the Stratified Learning Zone model: Selection of Key Parameters,
Hypothesizing Behavior Rules, and Authoring the Rules Within the NetLogo Environment
         Any model, regardless of the medium in which it is expressed, e.g., text, diagram, or agent-based model, is
per force an attenuation of the "objective" reality. Initially, the modeler must use circumspection in answering the
question, "What is the nature of the phenomenon we are attempting to model?" For example, we asked ourselves
whether we are modeling: (a) a specific activity, i.e., "students collaborating on constructing the sample space of the
binomial stochastic generator that has 9 variables each with the values "green" and "blue" that are glued onto purple
construction paper"; or (b) "students collaborating on a task that demands a variety of roles that range by the content
knowledge they foster." We chose the latter option. Next, in building an agent-based model, one defines the agents
(e.g., students, teacher)   and any  other  objects at play   (e.g., portable artifacts),  and assigns    the agents   properties
evaluated as relevant to the phenomenon under investigation, including constants (e.g., gender) and variables (e.g.,
role in collaborative   activity). The  modeler's   selection  of  these  agents   and properties   is informed     by a general
rationale of the model, which the modeler articulates, e.g.:

     ·   Classroom objectives are mandated by a curriculum
     ·   A total of n individual students cluster in m groups of variable size; whom they group with is a mixture of
         student and teacher choice (teachers may opt to create either homogeneous or heterogeneous groups)
     ·   Individuals    are reinforced  by   their  group-mates    for  contributing   toward   a   group's   objective,   where
         `contribution' is measured vis-à-vis the project specifications

         For the stratified learning zone (SLZ) model, we chose a puzzle task (see Figure 1, below). This linear
puzzle consists of set of pieces that need to be concatenated according to a logical sequence. Necessary activities
within  this task   are retrieving   pieces (simplest  task),  connecting   pieces  (most   demanding     task), and   verifying
(intermediate demand). Thus, the roles that students might specialize in are piece-retrievers, piece-connectors, and
puzzle-verifiers. Puzzle pieces are scattered all over the classroom. Retrievers wander around and, when they find a
piece that they evaluate as useful (it may in fact be incorrect), they go back to their group's table, deliver the piece to
the connector and then return to retrieve more puzzle pieces. Upon receiving a piece, the piece-connector evaluates
its fit to the puzzle in its current state. If the piece is not suitable, the piece-connector orders the piece-retriever to
drop the piece somewhere else and bring a new one. If the piece is suitable, the piece-connector takes it and tries to
add it to the puzzle. Once the puzzle is completed, the puzzle-verifiers check it. If one piece is out of place, the
group   has  to re-assemble   parts  of the  puzzle.   For each   task,   students  increase  their skill (faster   and/or more
accurate). Overall group performance is evaluated by the correctness of the puzzles and time-to-completion. Our
independent variables are: (a) pedagogical style (with or without mandated role rotation); (b) students' initial skill
level for each task and distribution of skill levels within student; and (c) task difficulty. Note: As a measure of
achieving   initial "reliability"--evaluating   whether    the  model     rationale indeed    expresses   what   it purports  to
express--the modelers first worked individually and only then shared notes. We could thus partially validate our
conjectures through inter-modeler triangulation.

                                                               49                                                      CSCL 2007
                  Figure 1. Design rationale for the Stratified Learning Zone agent-based model.

       Once   the  model   rationale has been   articulated, as above, the modeler couches  the         agents' rules of
interacting with each other and the environment in IF­THEN couplets and packages each topical set of rules in a
procedure. These  procedures  express  the researcher's conceptual  model. For example, the following        procedure
(simplified for rhetorical clarity) is for the retriever­connector interaction, and delineates the agent's commands--
retrievers gather pieces, connectors receive and evaluate pieces, and retrievers drop unfitting pieces.

to retrieve    pieces
        ask  retrievers
           [
            find-piece-around
            create-link-with      chosen-piece
            go-back-to-group

            if  any?  connectors      around   me
                 [
                   if (chosen-piece        fits puzzle)
                           [
                           unlink-piece-from-retriever
                           deliver-piece-to-connector
                           update-skill-retriever
                           update-skill-connector
                         ]
                  if  (chosen-piece      does-not-fit     puzzle)
                         [
                           go-far-and-drop-piece
                           update-skill-retriever
                           update-skill-connector
                         ]
        ]]
end

       See http://ccl.northwestern.edu/research/conferences/CSCL2007/CSCL2007.html for an interactive applet
of the NetLogo simulation.

                                                         50                                                     CSCL 2007
Bifocal Modeling: Juxtaposing Real and Simulated Data as a Research
Methodology for Iteratively Improving and Evaluating a Conceptual Model
          In creating the SLZ  model,  we   worked with    videotaped data from  the original  study. To  facilitate the
modeling and to iteratively evaluate its "curve fit" to the classroom data, we employed bifocal modeling. We now
introduce this methodology and then demonstrate its application to our case study.

Introduction of bifocal modeling

 Figure 2. Bifocal modeling: A `linked' (hybrid) system for real-time physical/virtual investigating of heat transfer.

          Bifocal modeling (Blikstein & Wilensky, 2006a; Blikstein, Abrahamson, & Wilensky, 2006) combines two
ostensibly disparate research practices that are in fact methodologically complementary: agent-based modeling and
enhanced visualization. Side by side on a split computer screen (see Figure 2, above, on the right) run the real and
the virtual: (a) a movie or graphical representation of a phenomenon under inquiry (whether directly captured by
cameras/sensors or enhanced through micro/macro or slow/fast-motion treatment), e.g., crystallization, heat transfer,
or clinical interviews with preschoolers engaged in mathematical inquiry (see Figure 2, the physical model on the
left, with sensor connecting into the computer and visualized in the `Real-World' image); and (b) a multi-agent
model simulating the same phenomenon in the form of a procedurally expressed and "runnable" scientific model,
e.g., myriad interacting avatars representing elements in the conjectured process of annealing or cognitive elements
of students' conceptual construction in classroom argumentation. Because the computer models have been carefully
constructed to imitate the phenomenon's visual language, the bifocal methodology minimizes interpretive challenges
typical of multi-media  research.  That is, the seen   and the hypothesized are displayed  such  that their perceptual
differences are backgrounded and, therefore, their procedural differences are more likely to be revealed. By thus
utilizing the power of computation and representation, bifocal modeling constitutes a multi-disciplinary research
tool that  offloads aspects of both   the interpretive and  menial burden   of scientific practice, freeing cognitive,
discursive, and material resources that can thus be allocated toward validation of the hypotheses. The adaptable
quality of the NetLogo    multi-agent modeling-and-simulation   environment    enables users to keep  calibrating their
proceduralized hypotheses until their visualization reaches compelling micro/macro similarity to the real-data, such
that there are grounds to assume that the proceduralized model indeed emulates this phenomenon.

A Bifocal Model of Emergent Collaboration Practices in a Mathematics Classroom
          Figure 3, below, shows three examples of real-data (on the right) and simulated data (on the left). Note that
our choice to model a generic collaborative activity, rather than modeling the precise activity, makes for surface
differences  between  the real and the  simulated  data. The   comparison  is thus analogical:  the real sample   space
corresponds with the linear puzzle, and eight roles in the original data have been simplified to three. In introducing
such simplification, one must adopt a skeptical stance, because in any act of modeling lies the inherent possibility
that some critical aspect of a situation has been overlooked. And yet, this challenge of modeling is certainly not
unique to agent-based modeling but is typical of any scientific endeavor in which a researcher seeks to articulate
patterns and mechanisms underlying phenomena under inquiry.

                                                           51                                                CSCL 2007
                  Onset of group work: before the assignment of individual roles emerge.

              Student (standing) whose role is to help other groups improve on a specific skill.

              Students whose emergent role involves conducting a mathematically trivial skill
   Figure 3. Bifocal modeling of collaborative learning: Three samples of paired states in student collaborative
                     practice--computer simulation (left) and classroom data (right).

Findings From the Agent-Based Inquiry Into the SLZ Participation Pattern
       We succeeded in simulating the emergence of a stratified learning zone. Furthermore, the model plausibly
demonstrates relations between pedagogical practice and student learning, as follows:

       a) When student­agents are reinforced for group production rather than individual learning, students
        become entrenched within skills reflecting their initial within-student skill-level distribution and increase
        their personal level in those skills.
       b) However, when role rotation is mandated, production slows down yet more learning occurs, per student,
        in both levels (high- and low-level skills).
       c) A careful analysis of the impact of each task performance on group performance is necessary to build a
        causal explanation of our numerical results. Indeed, different tasks have diverse impact on overall group
        performance. Increasing a low-level task skill (i.e., increasing the number of puzzle pieces a retriever­
        student can bring to the group per time tick) appears to improve group performance linearly (see red line
        in Figure 4, next page). On the other hand, increasing the high-level task skill (i.e., increasing the
        probability of the connector­student choosing a correct piece for the puzzle) effects a non-linear trend
        (see the blue line, in Figure 4).

                                                         52                                                CSCL 2007
   Figure 4. Comparison between initial skill levels for retrievers and connectors. Each data point represents the
                        average of 20 runs of the model with the same initial parameters.

       Interaction between different effects of low- and high-level tasks might indicate that the multidimensional
combinatorial space of all possible skills levels and types is not a linear n-dimensional surface, but might contain
discontinuities and multiple local minima and maxima. Specialized functionality of the agent-based environment
(BehaviorSpace, Tisue & Wilensky, 2004), combined with the bifocaling technique, enable researchers to sketch the
topography of this territory, locate minima and maxima, and connect them to real classroom scenarios. For example,
the non-linear behavior of connector skills, concurrent with the linear behavior of retriever skills, describe a "hilly"
3-D surface (see Figure 5, below). In some region, slight improvement in connecting skills may significantly impact
group performance. Within the same region, improvement in low-level skills renders negligible impact on group
performance. This could correspond to a classroom scenario in which one heterogeneous group of students suddenly
improves its performance, while other groups, perhaps more homogeneous, still struggle to solve the task at hand.
The gain in performance could be attributed to a single student who advanced on a high-level task. Group mates
may not have learned the new skill at all, but the group performance, as observed by the teacher, would have
improved greatly.

Figure 5. A multivariable experiment, in which both connecting and retrieving skills varied from 1 to 10 (10 runs per
  data point, for a total of 1000 runs). While still in exploratory stages, this kind of visualization can reveal local
   minima and maxima, as well as different patterns of performance gains for the combinatorial space of skills.

                                                         53                                                CSCL 2007
         We are improving the model so as to further examine relations between pedagogy and equity. We are
particularly interested to simulate pedagogical practices (e.g., Aaronson, Blaney, Srephan, Sikes, & Snapp, 1978; E.
G. Cohen, 1986) so as to understand their underlying mechanisms and gauge their potential.

Conclusions
         We have presented a computer-based methodology for conducting research into collaborative learning. To
demonstrate the methodology, we described the design and implementation of an agent-based model for studying
the emergence of inequitable participation patterns observed in a middle-school implementation of a collaborative-
inquiry activity. Based on the functional resemblance of the simulated and real behaviors, on interviews with the
teacher  and students,  and  on inter-modeler   reliability, we   conclude   that  the  model constitutes   a viable, if not
complete, explanation for the emergence of the observed patterns. We submit that our case study is sufficiently
generic so as to shed light on behavior patterns observed in a range of classroom interactions around collaborative
projects. We end this paper with remarks on the applicability and limitations of ABM methodology.

Applicability of Agent-Based Modeling to Educational Research
         The current study extends our previous modeling-based inquiry into the dynamics of individual learning in
social contexts. The inquiry encompasses different "levels" of learning: individual cognition is viewed as arising
from distributed dynamics of cognitive elements, and group learning is viewed as arising from distributed dynamics
of human elements. An ambitious goal of this work is to combine these two levels of modeling. Such cognitive­
social modeling would advance the cause of an integrated learning-sciences theory (Cole & Wertsch, 1996).

Strengths and Limitations
         Papert (1980) has demonstrated the intrinsic power of modeling--by virtue of creating a procedure-based
model of a phenomenon under inquiry, one has occasion to hone and critique one's own conceptual model of the
phenomenon.    The  application of agent-based    modeling   to  research  in  the social sciences is still young,  and  the
specific application of this mode of inquiry in the learning sciences is only nascent. Yet we believe in the potential
of this methodology. The caveat of proceduralization that agent-based methodology imposes on the researcher can
be a humbling experience, because it imperviously demands such clarity and precision as are quite uncommon to the
social sciences. Yet once the model appears to plausibly simulate a complex system, it enables powerful exploration.
In particular for the social science, where human-subjects issues naturally limit the scope of research, agent-based
modeling   provides opportunities  to  investigate the `what     ifs' that are key   to fostering change.   This   study has
illuminated  for us regions  of potentiality that are exciting   in their  prospects.  Of course, in order  to validate  our
findings from  the  virtual medium,  we  will  have   eventually  to  return  to the  source  phenomenon,     where we   will
evaluate whether the classroom model indeed helps us create a model classroom.

         Regardless of the medium in which it is implemented, any model is still just a model--it is an embodiment
of a system of conjectures held together through theoretical plausibility, sensed coherence, and empirical support.
One must   be especially  wary  in the case  of models  embodied      in  dynamic   visual media,  because    the superficial
features might   divert the researcher from  attending to    the deep  mechanisms     (`seduction of sim,'  Starr, 1994). It
might look and smell like a duck but still be a rabbit. Also, our source study was not designed with a focus on
participation patterns within groups, so our video data do not track any one particular group over the entire duration
of the implementation, but rather sample from the groups. We can only conjecture as to the group dynamics that
transpired in that classroom during the data gaps. In future studies, we will work with data that cover the entire
evolution of group dynamics. Finally, student interactions are vastly richer than we have portrayed in our case-study
model.   A possibly provocative   statement  is that  any theoretical    lacuna  detected  in the current   model  could  be
covered by further procedures, such that one could plausibly build agent-based models that capture, if not exhaust,
the wealth of learning-sciences theory.

References
Aaronson, E., Blaney, N., Srephan, C., Sikes, J., & Snapp, M. (1978). The jigsaw classroom. Beverly Hills, CA:
         Sage.
Abrahamson, D., Janusz, R., & Wilensky, U. (2006). There once was a 9-block...--A middle-school design for
         probability and statistics [Electronic Version]. Journal of Statistics Education, 14(1) from
         http://www.amstat.org/publications/jse/v14n1/abrahamson.html.

                                                             54                                                    CSCL 2007
Abrahamson, D., & Wilensky, U. (2005a). Piaget? Vygotsky? I'm game!: Agent-based modeling for psychology
       research. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Jean Piaget Society, Vancouver, Canada.
Abrahamson, D., & Wilensky, U. (2005b). The stratified learning zone: Examining collaborative-learning design in
       demographically-diverse mathematics classrooms. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American
       Educational Research Association, Montreal, Canada.
Axelrod, R. M. (1997). The complexity of cooperation: Agent-based models of competition and collaboration.
       Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Axelrod, R. M., & Cohen, M. D. (1999). Harnessing complexity: Organization implications of a scientific frontier.
       New York: Free Press.
Blikstein, P., & Wilensky, U. (2006a). The missing link: A case study of sensing-and-modeling toolkits for
       constructionist scientific investigation. In Proceedings of the 6th IEEE International Conference on
       Advanced Learning Technologies (ICALT 2006), Kerkrade, The Netherlands, 980-982.
Blikstein, P., Abrahamson, D., & Wilensky, U. (2006b). Minsky, mind, and models: Juxtaposing agent-based
       computer simulations and clinical-interview data as a methodology for investigating cognitive-
       developmental theory. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Jean Piaget Society, Baltimore, MD.
Blikstein, P., & Wilensky, U. (2006). Learning about learning: Using multi-agent computer simulation to
       investigate human cognition. Paper presented at the International Conference of Complex Science, Boston.
Bonabeau, E., Dorigo, M., Théraulaz, G. (1999). Swarm intelligence: From natural to artificial systems. London:
       Oxford University Press.
Cohen, E. G. (1986). Designing groupwork: Strategies for the heterogeneous classroom. New York: Teachers
       College Press.
Cole, M., & Wertsch, J. V. (1996). Beyond the individual-social antinomy in discussions of Piaget and Vygotsky.
       Human Development, 39(5), 250-256.
Collier, N., & Sallach, D. (2001). Repast. Chicago: University of Chicago. http://repast.sourceforge.net
Diermeier, D. w. A. M. (2000). Government turnover in parliamentary democracies. Journal of Economic Theory,
       94, 46-79.
Durkheim, E. (1947). The division of labor in society (G. Simpson, Trans.). New York: The Free Press. (Original
       work published 1893).
Epstein, J., & Axtell, R. (1996). Growing artificial societies: Social science from the bottom up. Washington:
       Brookings Institution Press.
Greeno, J. G. (1998). The situativity of knowing, learning, and research. American Psychologist, 53(1), 5-26.
Holland, J. H. (1995). Hidden order: How adaptation builds complexity. Reading, MA: Helix Books.
Hurford, A. (2004 ). A dynamical systems model of student learning and an example from a HubNet Participation
       Simulation. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Educational Research Association, San
       Diego, CA.
Langton, C., & Burkhardt, G. (1997). Swarm. Santa Fe: Santa Fe Institute. http://www.swarm.org/release.html.
North, M., Macal, C., Cirillo, R., Conzelman, G., Koritarov, V., Thimmapuram, P., et al. (2002). Modeling of
       electricity markets. Paper presented at the Agents 2002, Chicago, IL.
Papert, S. (1980). Mindstorms: Children, computers, and powerful ideas. NY: Basic Books.
Reynolds, C. W. (1987) Flocks, herds, and schools: A distributed behavioral model. Computer Graphics, 21(4)
       (SIGGRAPH '87 Conference Proceedings), 25-34
Starr, P. (1994). Seductions of Sim. The American Prospect, 17, 19-29.
Tisue, S., & Wilensky, U. (2004). NetLogo: Design and implementation of a multi-agent modeling environment. .
       Paper presented at the Agent 2004, Chicago.
Wilensky, U. (1999). NetLogo. Northwestern University, Evanston, IL: The Center for Connected Learning and
       Computer-Based Modeling http://ccl.northwestern.edu/netlogo/.
Wilensky, U. (2001). Modeling nature's emergent phenomena with multi-agent modeling languages. In Proceedings
       of EuroLogo 2001. Linz, Austria.
Wilensky, U. (2003). Statistical mechanics for secondary school: The GasLab modeling toolkit. International
       Journal of Computers for Mathematical Learning, 8(1, special issue on agent-based modeling), 1-41.
Wilensky, U., & Reisman, K. (1998). Learning biology through constructing and testing computational theories -
       An embodied modeling approach. Paper presented at the Second International Conference on Complex
       Systems, Nashua, NH.
Wilensky, U., & Reisman, K. (2006). Thinking like a wolf, a sheep or a firefly: Learning biology through
       constructing and testing computational theories--an embodied modeling approach. Cognition &
       Instruction, 24(2), 171-209.

                                                         55                                                 CSCL 2007
