 Enabling Organizational Learning through Event Reporting: A Case
                                  Study in a Health Care Context
           Pei-Ju Liu, James Laffey, Karen Cox, University of Missouri ­ Columbia, MO 65211
                  PLiu@mizzou.edu, LaffeyJ@missouri.edu , CoxK@health.missouri.edu

           Abstract: Applying the organizational learning framework, we argue event reporting is an enabler
           for organizational learning in healthcare contexts in order to reach the optimal patient safety and
           care quality. The findings in this case study describe how the four different learning activities
           (intuiting, interpreting, integration, and institutionalizing) occurred in event reporting and suggest
           several challenges that need to be overcome before a health care organization can transform to a
           learning organization.

Introduction
        In health care, continuous  improvement    of quality  and patient  safety has  increased   prominence  since  the
Institute of Medicine report that estimates each year 44,000 to 98,000 people die of an iatrogenic injury, either as a
main or a contributing cause, and that 1.3 million are injured by medical treatment. A key process in achieving
patient safety is the ability to learn from errors. Within a healthcare environment the occasion of a safety event is
also a learning opportunity for members and the organization. Not surprisingly, working in a hospital, health care
professionals regularly encounter safety events that afford organizational learning opportunities; yet not many of
these events are recognized as learning opportunity during the heat of the critical events (Naidu & Oliver, 1999).
Therefore, many health care organizations and even some states have required health care professionals to report
medical related adverse events as a means to monitor patient care quality and to learn from those events for future
prevention. As a result safety event reporting systems are becoming critical parts of health care information systems.

Event Reporting as an Organizational Learning Process
        In organizational  development    research,   organizational  learning  (OL)    is defined   by   the continuous
development of knowledge and capacity, both individually and collectively (Senge, 1990). A learning organization
provides continuous learning opportunities, promotes a culture of learning, uses learning to reach goals, and links
individual   performance   with    organizational  performance   ensuring    individual    learning  and  enhancing    the
organization as a whole. According to Argyris and Schon (1978), OL is a process of detection and correction of
errors. In their view, individuals are seen as the agents of learning for organizations. In other words, OL is a multi-
level dynamic process of continuous knowledge transformation and improvement in organizations. Crossan et al.
(1999)   suggested four  main processes   of   OL.  First, intuiting is the  preconscious   recognition  of patterns  and
possibilities inherent in a personal experience. Second, interpreting is the explanation of an idea to oneself and to
others through words or actions for building shared meanings and understandings. Third, integrating is the mutual
adjustment,  negotiated  action,  and shared practice  among    individuals. Last,  institutionalizing is the  process of
formalizing actions from individual practices to the organizational routines. These processes are embedded in the
workplaces and practices of organizational members, and collective knowledge is built through participation and
negotiation  of   meaning  among    the  members.   Event   reporting   systems that invite  participation    and support
communication and collaboration among the staff to resolve and learn from safety events have great promise for
improving organizational learning and supporting patient safety.

        In health care settings front-line practitioners spend the most time with patients and are most likely to observe
safety events. These practitioners, against human and social barriers about reporting safety events, must feel free to
report events and be supported in working with managers to identify root causes and safety solutions. It takes a
cooperative team to construct a safety culture and to prevent errors from happening again. Collective knowledge and
organizational learning are developed through member interactions that include negotiation of meaning. Technology
can, and perhaps must be used in hospital settings given the time, distance and role separation inherent in hospital
staffs, to mediate  and  support   these interactions by   providing  timely  information,  facilitating  communication
processes, and supporting coordination and cooperation process among members regardless the physical barriers.
Additionally  appropriate   design   can  turn these   interactions   into  collaborative  and organizational     learning
opportunities. The purpose of this study is to build new knowledge about how health care professionals collaborate
in knowledge building for organizational learning and enhancing patient safety as well as in what ways information
technology can influence the process of organizational learning.

                                                           460                                                  CSCL 2007
Methodology
      This case study was conducted in the context of University of Missouri Healthcare (UMHC), that in 2000
developed the electronic event reporting system, Patient Safety Network (PSN), to support healthcare safety. PSN is
a web-based application that allows users to include general comments while reporting specific safety-related events.
After an event submission, the report is directed to the responsible departments for review and resolution. PSN has
been implemented for four years, and it has proven to be a successful system for reporting events (Kivlahan, et al.,
2002). In 2005 a design effort was begun to advance PSN from simply a reporting system to a more collaborative
problem resolution system with hopes that the new focus could facilitate a stronger culture of safety and support
individual and organizational learning for promoting patient safety. A qualitative research design is used to best
understand the healthcare context and the ways that healthcare professionals collaborate for knowledge construction
in their work    practice and  activities. The target  population   included  staff members   who   had    event reporting or
resolution responsibility,  such  as managers,    staff, etc. In  order to rapidly  collect rich  information  of  healthcare
professionals' experiences, a purposeful sampling approach was chosen. The sampling criteria were the self-reported
participation in  PSN  and  the work    locations. Two   types   of areas (ancillary and   direct patient) were  selected  for
participation. A total of 12 participants (4 managers and 8 general users) were recruited in four different units. Two
individual semi-structured interviews asked the participants to talk about their use of PSN with two months apart.
The interim period allowed the researchers to examine the first responses for the follow-up interviews. In the interest
of finding the common themes and critical elements, the OL framework was used as a lens for data analysis.

Results
Intuiting of Event Reporting through PSN
      In general, managers were the most frequent users of PSN as they regularly used it to resolve events while
general users use it irregularly to report events that arose infrequently. Both managers and general users recognized
the benefits  and  new    opportunities of  PSN   for  event  reporting and  resolution over  the  old  paper-based  system.
Moreover, they also appropriated PSN for other patient related activities beyond event reporting. For example, some
participants discovered ways of using PSN to seek expertise or help from outside their unit for problem solving.

Interpreting and Sense Making through PSN
      Participants  expressed    a  belief  that  the  use of  PSN   had   improved   the  efficiency   of coordination   and
communication among individuals and departments for event reporting. Moreover, they found that by submitting an
event to PSN, that some professionals in the UMHC who had knowledge, expertise, or resources became engaged to
help solve the problem. This result demonstrated an innovative individual learning in PSN for accessing knowledge
and expertise from the right people at the right time. However, most meaning negotiation among individuals, such as
event investigation and discussion, took place outside PSN. Overall, PSN served as a trigger for initiating more face-
to-face or other online communication and discussion but not as an effective mechanism. The implications seem to
be that to the extent that communication and collaboration could be supported in PSN that would cut down the costs
of using other mechanisms, replicating information that was already in PSN, and create a more complete report of
the problem and resolution, which is the foundation for establishing the common ground among individuals.

      However, some controversy was reported. Some participants wanted to have anonymous reports, while others
argued that showing individual's identity could help establish validity and credibility for an event. Furthermore,
managers felt that anonymous reports hindered the meaning negotiation process due to lack of communication and
follow-up available under this type of circumstance. Another barrier for building a common understanding about an
event is the  lack of feedback    returned  to individuals    and that contributions of  submitting   reports were  not well
recognized. Many participants saw event reporting as not just something to which they impersonally submitted an
event, but rather they felt eager to know the details of what happened because of their submission and to learn how
best to deal with the situation in the future. They expressed strong needs for active involvement and engagement in
the process of resolution. With a strong intention for active participation and contribution, the lack of feedback or
unclear  responses  seems   to be  a major   limitation  that hinders  their participation  and ability to learn  from event
reporting. The participants described that when they could not get the feedback they hoped for from the PSN they
would turn to other means (email, phone, etc.) to obtain the information that they thought would be helpful and
meaningful    to them.    Moreover,  the   status that no  contributions   were recognized    or  acknowledged     by  others
frustrated the participants, especially when they showed strong intentions to contribute their professional knowledge
to help solve a problem. A participant said "Especially when I put in a suggestion about what I think would fix the
problem. I look at the list and I look at everyone's resolution, and no one even looks at it or it looks like no one even
looks at my suggestion. My suggestion doesn't get seen. That is basically blown off. That's frustrating for me."

                                                              461                                                   CSCL 2007
Integrating of Patient Safety Practice through PSN
       Managers expressed PSN facilitated the negotiation of meanings and helped build common ground among
departments as they strove to build a complete picture of an event though sharing information. A manager said "I
add their side of story to it, and then that's the nice part when I go in to look at any resolution all the departments
that are included, look at what they put in there so I can see their side of the story. And, sometimes it helps you
understand the whole thing in order to help you decide: Hey! We need to get together to look at this further". Event
reporting also provided a chance for managers to discover potential problems for timely training, education, and
prevention. However, some challenges were reported when trying to develop collective actions for event reporting
and resolution. The lack of integration with other applications was a barrier for building shared work practice and
making mutual adjustments in work activities. The participants explained they had to hunt down several different
applications and charts to get the information needed for reporting and resolution. Also the hectic and distributed
nature of the healthcare work limited the time and effort they had for developing the shared patient safety practice.

Institutionalizing of Patient Safety and Learning Culture
       The participants thought of themselves as members of the hospital so they wanted to contribute to positive
changes and improvements in the hospital. There were several factors reported that hindered the institutionalization
of a blame-free and learning culture. Key among these factors is the lack of feedback from the organization to the
contributor. Thus, the participants did not understand in what ways and to what extent their reporting and resolution
helped the organization grow and move forward. A manager said "Staff don't realize that they put a PSN in and
something good comes up of it". The participants were not sure how the reports were used for improving health care
quality  and enhancing patient   safety   in the hospital. Similarly, managers  also explained  that  they did not have
hospital-wide information that can help them make a higher level solution for patient safety. The lack of feedback
limited the formation of learning culture as well as the institutionalization of patient safety practices in the hospital.

Discussion and Conclusion
       Several lessons are learned in this study. First, the current PSN has helped make reporting and resolution
more  efficient and effective    by capturing  information  and   supporting flow  and  coordination. It seems  to have
positively impacted   intuiting, interpreting  and integrating,  even if only  in small ways.  Second,   while PSN  has
potential to support some levels of social interaction among users to date it is experienced more as a documentation
tool. Third, the participants expressed interest in building personal knowledge and contributing to organizational
learning, but the lack of collaboration within PSN made that challenging, and the lack of feedback on submissions
frustrated and thwarted the good intentions of the members. Without the ability to interpret and negotiate meanings
among individuals, they feel their participation and hence knowledge building ends right after they enter the event
data. Fourth, a dynamic tension exists between privacy concerns and recognition of contribution. Fifth, due to the
lack  of feedback   from the     departments   and  the   organization,  the participants had  no  sense   of  collective
organizational knowledge being built and no learning cycles of activity were developed for the reporters to advance
their knowledge   and  support   organizational   performance.   To   complete the  dynamic    OL process,  feedback  is
required during the process and the design of information technology must take it into account.

       These  lessons suggest    that the PSN    redesign  for making greater  contribution to OL  needs   to implement
support for collaborative learning, such as feedback and integral communication. Further the redesign should invite
members to identify themselves, but respect that in some situations that are not desirable for them. Only in doing so
will  PSN  support  individual   performance,    build collective  knowledge,  and  ultimately  improve    organizational
performance. From an OL perspective, event reporting and resolution can be characterized as an intense knowledge
construction activity that can connect healthcare professionals to continuously communicate with each other and
learn from events while sharing knowledge and expertise, and to construct a medium which can promote a safety
culture in organizations which in turn helps the healthcare organization improve patient safety and care quality.

References
Argyris, C., & Schön, D. (1978). Organizational learning: A theory of action perspective. Reading, MA: Addison Wesley.
Crossan, M., Lane, H., & White, R. (1999). An Organizational Learning Framework: From Intuition to Institution. Academy of
         Management Review, 24(3), 522-537.
Kivlahan, C., Sangster, W., Nelson, K., Buddenbaum, J., & Lobenstein, K. (2002). Developing a Comprehensive Electronic
         Adverse Event Reporting System in an Academic Health Center. Journal on Quality Improvement, 28(583-594).
Naidu, S., & Oliver, M. (1999). Critical Incident-Based Computer Supported Collaborative Learning. Instructional Science.
         27, 329-354.
Senge, P. (1990). The Fifth Discipline: The Art & Practice of the Learning Organization. New York: Currency Doubleday

                                                            462                                                 CSCL 2007
