   Web based platforms in co-located practice ­ The use of a wiki as
                          support for learning and instruction
   Gustav Lymer, Dept. of Education, Göteborg University, Box 300, 405 30, Göteborg, gustav.lymer@ped.gu.se
  Johan Lundin, Dept. of Applied IT, Göteborg University, Forskningsgången 6, 417 56, Göteborg, jolun@ituniv.se
    Barry Brown, Dept. of Computing Science, Glasgow University, 17 Lilybank Gardens, Glasgow, G12 8QQ,
                                                 barry@dcs.gla.ac.uk
                     Mattias Rost, Dept. of Applied IT, Göteborg University, rost@viktoria.se
                  Lars Erik Holmquist, Dept. of Applied IT, Göteborg University, leh@viktoria.se

         Abstract: This study describes how a wiki platform worked as a resource in a university course
         on applied ethnographic research method. The platform was primarily used for uploading field
         notes from students'  ethnographic   work.   We describe  the  use of the wiki in terms of  how  it
         supported orientations among students towards relevant competencies involved in fieldwork, and
         how teachers used it as a way of gaining access to students' work. We discuss these functionalities
         in relation to ethnomethodological work on learning-and-instruction, showing how wiki entries
         were used as references in students' and teachers' talk. Distributed activities were thereby made
         available for instructive practices, and the competencies involved in note taking and observation
         could be collaboratively   oriented to. We   thus show   that although the wiki  was a  web based
         distributed tool, its primary pedagogical functionality lay in its being used as a resource in co-
         located face-to-face talk.

Introduction
         Wikis are simply structured web-sites, based on the idea of unconstrained editing possibilities, enabling
anyone to upload and edit material. The most well known example of a wiki is the online encyclopedia Wikipedia,
with the English language version collecting over 1.5 million articles. The originators of the wiki idea described this
type of system as "a freely expandable collection of interlinked web pages, a hypertext system for storing and
modifying information" (Leuf & Cunningham, 2001, p. 14). The idea of the wiki was to create "the simplest online
database that could possibly work" (www.wiki.org).

         This is a study of how a wiki was used as a resource in a master's level course in applied research method,
a course covering   the basics of    design-oriented  fieldwork. The   background  of the  implementation were    the
hypotheses that this might be a good way for students to manage collaboration in their project work, and that the
wiki could prove pedagogically useful through the ways in which it allows students to share their work with peers.
In this paper, we focus on these pedagogical aspects. The study places itself in the context of studies of complex
interventions in educational settings (see Brown, 1992), looking at the process rather than the learning outcomes of
the course (see Koschmann, 2001). We will not give an exhaustive account of the "systemic whole" (Brown, 1992)
of these processes, however, but rather illustrate and discuss a set of interrelated points about wiki functionalities on
a more general level. In our description of the use of the wiki we will articulate an approach that focuses on how the
technology supported students and teachers in showing, orienting to, and "making visible" the subject matter of the
course (Lindwall & Lymer, 2005; 2005b). In that description, we make use of ethnomethodological understandings
of instructive practices (e.g., Goodwin, 1994; 2007).

         The central concerns of CSCL were formulated by Koschmann (2002, p. 20) as pertaining to "meaning and
the practices of meaning-making in the context of joint activity and the ways in which these practices are mediated
through designed artifacts". Within CSCL, joint activity and collaboration is recognized as particularly conducive to
fostering learning, through the practices of articulation and interaction required to collaborate (Bruffee, 1973; Stahl,
2002). For distributed activities, a collaborative or joint activity becomes harder to achieve (Kreijns, Kirschener &
Jochems, 2002). In particular, the objects of collaboration, the concrete things around which collaborative learning is
organized (Arias, Eden, Fischer, et al., 1999) will not normally be directly shared in a distributed group (Morrison &
Dennis, 2005). Some of the central features of collaborative learning are therefore compromised. The fieldwork
focused on in this study was one such context, where distribution of activities hindered effective collaboration. As
we argue below, the wiki used during the course showed interesting functionalities through which these problems
could be addressed.

                                                          476                                                CSCL 2007
Wikis and education
        Several studies have been made of educational implementations of wikis (see Schwartz, Clark, Cossarin, et
al., 2004, for a review). Two wiki symposia have recently (2005 and 2006) been held, where educational uses were
one focus.  Among     the  implementations    discussed  were   supports  for  developing   a  "community      of  practice"  for
teachers (Da Lio, Fraboni & Leo, 2005); adaptations and improvements of the basic wiki architecture for pedagogic
purposes (Reinhold, 2006); support for increased teacher guidance to balance students' free explorations of subject
matter content with the desired goals of the curriculum (Lund & Smördal, 2006); and wikis as a way of fostering
ICT literacy in a group of university students (Bruns & Humphreys, 2005). There seems to be a general consensus
that wikis facilitate "collaborative finding, shaping, and sharing of information" (Reinhold, 2006), but just how this
is pedagogically useful is largely unspecified. In this study, we elaborate on this issue, attempting to specify what
these collaborative aspects mean in practice.

        Implementations     of   wikis outside  of  educational    settings have  been    dominated   by  support    for on-line
communities that rarely meet face-to-face, rather than serve as resources for physically co-located communities
(Gaved, Heath & Eisenstadt, 2006). In contrast, several of the educational uses of wikis are lodged within regular
co-located  practice (e.g. Lund  & Smördal,   2006; Brereton,   Donovan     & Viller, 2003; Da Lio    et al., 2005).   Similarly,
the implementation described in this study was made to support an otherwise physically co-located community of
students, and the function of the wiki can, to anticipate the discussion below, be said to hinge on the surrounding
face-to-face talk about uploaded text, rather than solely on collaborative work via the platform itself.

        A   study  conducted     by Brereton    (et al., 2003)   engages    with  the use  of  wikis   and other    educational
interventions in teaching observational skills to engineering students. Although their focus is not on the wiki as such,
one pedagogical aspect of the wiki is mentioned: students' postings of finished analyses on the wiki, the authors
argue, allowed   students  to see   differences  within  the   class, and reflect  and   comment   on    these differences.   As
described below, something similar happened in the implementation reported on here, although not confined to post-
facto reflections on finished projects. Since the participants in this study used the wiki as a support for their ongoing
work in the course, it could be employed as a resource for ongoing talk about their distributed activities. Talking
about work, or "collective reflection" on work has been shown elsewhere (Argyris & Schön, 1974; Lundin, 2005) to
be important aspects of learning, and technologically supporting this type of practices has been suggested as an
important area for CSCL research (e. g., Baker & Lund, 1997; Huppertz, Massler & Ploetzner, 2005). We return to
this issue when discussing the specific functionalities of the wiki, looking at talk about work from the standpoint of
an ethnomethodologically informed understanding of practices of learning and instruction (e.g. Goodwin, 1994;
Hindmarsh & Heath, 2000; Lindwall & Lymer, 2005).

Setting and study
        This study focuses on describing some aspects of the use of the wiki. This technology, however, was only
one of a range of "discourse contexts" (Gruber, Peyton & Bruce, 1995), engaged in by students and teachers: besides
using  the wiki  platform,   the students  met   face-to-face,   both  casually   on  the university   premises,    in arranged
meetings, lectures and supervision sessions, and communicated electronically in a host of different ways, including
telephone   and  regular   e-mail.  As  Brown     (1992)   points   out,  when    changing  one   aspect   of  an   educational
environment,  this has perturbations    in other  parts  of the  setting: "the  role  of students and    teachers,  the  type of
curriculum, the  place of   technology   and  so  forth  [...] are all seen  as  inputs  into the working   whole"     (p. 143).
Accordingly, before the results of the study can be seen in context, we describe this particular setting by way of
delineating  the  subject   matter  taught,   the   organization    of  the curriculum,    and    the existing     technological
infrastructures into which the wiki was fitted.

        The goal of the course was to introduce students to the practices of design-oriented ethnographic fieldwork,
and engage them in scientific writing through a final. Ethnography has been called "invisible work" (Forsythe,
1999),  referring  to  the  ways    in which    common      views   in   research and    industry construe     its methods    as
commonsensical     and therefore    requiring no    special competencies     besides  "what   everyone    knows".    From    our
experiences with courses in research method, ethnography does indeed seem to involve several areas of disciplinary
competence, which become apparent in students' troubles in the field, as well as when writing reports. The ways in
which some of these competencies played out in the course, and how the wiki was used in the process, is described
below.

                                                               477                                                     CSCL 2007
         Before the fieldwork started, the students were divided into five groups, each group being assigned a
project. Group one studied learning support amongst school kids, investigating activity in a local science discovery
centre. The second group explored ideas of supporting mobile workshops, studying repair workshops for trucks,
planes and buses. Group three investigated the use of paper in a newspaper and a photo bureau.        Group four looked
at facility management work in an office building, and the final group focused on messenger firms that made daily
deliveries by truck and car. The students were expected to engage in two weeks of fieldwork and then three weeks of
analysis and writing of a report.

         In connection  to the    fieldwork, supervision   sessions were     held where   students    could discuss  their
experiences with each other and the supervisors, providing one arena for more explicit instruction, making available
a skilled perspective on the students' experiences through the supervisors' comments (Macbeth, 2004). Supervision
sessions were also held during the writing of the report, in which teachers commented on students' drafts of the
reports. The writing phase was thus comparatively easily available to direct instruction; teachers could comment on
students' phrasings, choice of excerpts, analytic categories used etc. For the practices involved in the fieldwork as
such, however, direct instruction was more difficult. As discussed below, the presence of fieldnotes on the wiki
contributed to the students' work becoming more available for teachers' instructive work.

The wiki
         The original aim of the wiki (figure 1) was to allow the students to share their fieldnotes within their
fieldwork group.  We used the open source `TikiWiki' (http://tikiwiki.org/) software, one of the most popular free
Wiki systems available. Tikiwiki has many of the features of more advanced groupware systems such as support for
forums,  blogs, and even workflow      integration.  For our   purposes, its ability to protect pages  of   the wiki with
passwords allowed us to support the privacy of fieldnotes amongst the class. The students asked their contacts at the
field sites for permission to share fieldnotes with advisors and classmates.   All groups obtained permission, except
one group where the notes were confidential.   For all the other groups fieldnotes were left open, editable to teachers,
the respective clients, and the whole of the class. The students were given a demo of the wiki in class, and were
asked to enter all their typed fieldnotes into the wiki as the fieldwork progressed.    In total over 109 fieldnotes and
analytic notes were entered into the system (6 per student), distributed over 86 separate pages in the wiki. Below is a
picture of the start page of the wiki.

                              Figure 1: The start page of the wiki used in the course

         As seen in Figure 1, the wiki start page consisted in a short introductory text, under which the project sites
for each  group  were listed. The   last  project,  "fieldwork on fieldwork",  was    our own   site, where  information
concerning this study was made available within our project group and to interested students.

         Other available technologies used during the course ranged from paper notebooks to laptops. All students at
the program were equipped with laptops that either were their own or rented from the university. The fact that all
students had laptops is an important infrastructural aspect of their work in the course. Without personal computers,
the wiki would probably not have worked similarly as a resource that was available anywhere for the students, and
its educational efficacy could thereby have been compromised.

                                                           478                                                   CSCL 2007
The study
         The points made in this paper form part of a larger project studying learning and instruction in IT design
education. Our  interests  range from   practices of   giving  and following                              instructions           in    writing,      to  developing
technological support for the students. In order to make sense of the setting, with these different interests in mind,
multiple types of  data have  been  collected.  First, the second  and                         the     third    author       participated         in  the course as
teachers and supervisors, and could follow the progress of the course first-hand as participant observers. Second,
video recordings were made of supervision sessions, as well as of some of the students' own analysis sessions.
Third, the use of the wiki amongst the students provided log data on their sharing of fieldnotes. Fourth, interviews
were held with students, covering issues such as how they worked with fieldnotes and how they used the wiki. We
were furthermore given some of the printed course work reports with the students' and teacher's written notes, and
also notebooks from two of the students. Although this material both affords and demands detailed and exhaustive
analyses, the following will focus on highlighting and describing a set of interrelated points about the role of the
wiki, with excerpts from the data being used as illustrations of this general discussion.

The wiki as a resource for students and teachers
         In this section, we describe some ways in which the wiki worked as a resource for students and teachers,
restructuring the activities that they engaged in. The presentation takes the form of two sections, each highlighting
one aspect  of the use  of the wiki: first, sharing  field notes  as                      supporting            student         orientations      toward   relevant
competencies; and second, visualizing student activities as support for teachers' instructive work.

Supporting collaborative learning
         As thoroughly    described by  Scribner  and   Cole   (1981),                         transforming              the    practices         and  technologies
surrounding writing can also have more general consequences for how participants relate to text, and for the skills
and competencies   that  are engaged  with,  and  learned.   Although                          Scribner         and    Cole      refer       to   more   large-scale
differences in literacy practices, a change as local and small scale as the introduction of a wiki ­ and the associated
practices of writing that change along with it ­ could nevertheless have consequences that go beyond the mere
organization of textual work. In this study, one function of the wiki that became apparent was the way in which it
supported and encouraged students' orientations towards relevant practices and competencies involved in fieldwork.

                                                                                    09:00  Arrival to Volvo trucks centre
                                                                                    09:02  Picks up the mobile/camera in the car
                                                                                    09:04  Walk to Håkan's room, he is responsible for the Action
                                                                                           service department, however, it turns out that he's on
                                                                                           vacation, another woman who is a consultant has taken
                                                                                           his office. We  decide   to talk  to Tomas  about  Action
                                                                                           Service later, right now he's at a meeting.

                                                                                    09:12  We go to Martin (janitor) we think that he might know
                                                                                           of some good truck that we can follow during the day.
                                                                                           He  says  that it's breakfast right   now.  We  ask if he
                                                                                           knows of some car that will need a diagnostics device
                                                                                           (ex VCADSPro). But since this part of the workshop is
                                                                                           mostly   responsible for  wagon    damage   and changing
                                                                                           stickers (that's why it smells of solvent in the room)
                                                                                           they hardly use the diagnostics device. He says that
                                                                                           what's   there today is a   theft damage   and  a crooked
                                                                                           wagon. We decide that this part of the workshop isn't
                                                                                           as interesting because of that.
                                                                                    09:16  We continue talking about Action Service, Martin says
                                                                                           that they work a lot of weekends and evenings, that is,
                                                                                           when   the  workshop   is closed.    During the day  they
                                                                                           sleep at home, they take the "on-call-car" with them,
                                                                                           they are on call 24 hours a day. They get their orders
                                                                                           through Gent, where Action Service is located.

                   Figure 2: A comparison between original field note and typed field note.

         During  fieldwork,  one  issue that   emerged   for   students                        was     seeing        what       was       relevant    in  the field.
Ethnography's disciplinary competencies became problematic for students in part as to the level of detail at which
the "findings" were supposed to appear. This issue surfaced during the early supervision sessions (see section 4.2),
but it also became a topic in conversations among peers; the students discussed how to take notes, what to write and

                                                           479                                                                                            CSCL 2007
how to formulate what they saw in the field. Figure 2 shows an example of an original field note as compared to a
note typed on the wiki. It shows how the wiki engaged students early on in the production of text. It was in part
through orienting to the skills and norms involved in this basic disciplinary writing that students began developing a
sense of there being differently "good" field notes, and thus differently "good" practices of field observation.

        As is visible in Figure 2, the typed field note is more extensive than the original, indicating that work has
been put on elaborating the note, adding detail, providing explanations of terms etc. Through the ways in which the
instructions and the organization of the students' collaborative fieldwork encouraged continuous typing of fieldnotes
after each day in the field, the wiki thus influenced the students' analytic work. Entering field notes, however, was
not mere typing for private analytic purposes: writing on the wiki was a public activity displaying each individual's
activities to the rest of the class and to the teachers. Otherwise private and "invisible" work became accountable
work, to which students were made answerable in discussions with peers. The public character of field note typing,
and the student's orientation to the field note as public, thus led to elaborations of notes with an eye toward the
potential reader.

        Interestingly, students   did not use the  wiki  much   to comment     on  others' notes. Instead,  they  reported
speaking to one another in person when discussing notes. Face-to-face talk was thus the preferred discourse context
in which the proper content and lay out of field notes were highlighted. This reterritorialization of web-based media
into co-located practice points to an important consideration for CSCL research on wikis and other web-based
platforms: collaborative systems with a lot of built in functionalities for distance interaction might not be the best
option for the most common forms of educational practice, where distributed and co-located elements of work are
intertwined. We return to this issue in the discussion.

        During interviews, students reported having read each other's notes, within groups as well as within the rest
of the class. This was done "to get an idea of how the other members went about their work, to get ideas on what to
focus on", as one student put it. Confirming this, website logs showed students reading each others' fieldnotes, and
each note being viewed on average 70 times. As a consequence of this sharing of field notes, practices of wiki use
tend to spread. On a surface level, analyses of the wiki pages show the development of common norms for what a
"proper" field note was. As one group put up a lot of drawings and pictures, for instance, others could imitate this
way of working. Time coding next to field notes (as in figure 2) was one practice that spread quickly. Another
illustrative example is the early use by some groups of emoticons (e.g., "smileys") and other textual techniques tied
to web-communication; upon being confronted with the more serious tone in other students' fieldnotes, students
deleted these icons and imitated the tone of others' notes. These surface traces of collaborative processes suggest
that students oriented towards    developing and  bringing  their  note taking  and  typing  practices into line, thereby
collaboratively defining and orienting towards norms of good practice.

        Notes  becoming   similar  also implied   observational   activities tied to note  taking being influenced.  The
original differences between the group members' notes, that is, did not concern only surface features, but also what
was captured in the notes. Thus, the disciplined perception (Goodwin, 1994) of fieldwork surfaced as a participant's
concern, and the competencies involved in fieldwork were made into topics in students' everyday conversations.
Furthermore, through a common orientation towards writing field notes in a "good way", students not only oriented
towards doing right, themselves. Such discussions also make possible engaging in practices of explicitly formulating
and identifying something done well ­ to distinguish a good field note as collaboratively defined from a "bad" one.
Of course, students could, with some effort, have read each others' field notes and engaged in these practices even
without the wiki, but the fact is that during previous years, reading and comparing notes did not become similarly
focal for the students, arguably as a result of the extra work taken to make private notes into a publicly available and
referable resource.

        The   way   professional  competence  to a large  extent  involves   a fluency in  seeing and  talking about the
discipline's workaday objects has been a recurring issue in Goodwin's (e.g., 1994; 1995) studies of archaeologists,
marine biologists and other professionals. Although Goodwin focuses on vision per se, the instructive practices he
describes ­ what he calls "the interactive organization of apprenticeship" (2007, p. 57) ­    show how interaction can
be pedagogically efficacious by virtue of shared orientations to common "domains of scrutiny". In a similar vein,
Hindmarsh and Heath (2000) have analyzed interactions around "objects" as critical to the inculcation of newcomers
into the skilled ways of acting in professional settings. In line with these studies, we could see the wiki as supporting
the students' initial dealings with ethnography through encouraging orientations towards the visual-and-discursive

                                                           480                                                   CSCL 2007
competencies by which the field is to be seen in terms of relevant categories, organized as a set of "interesting"
features and findings, and described through textual practices.

Supporting instruction
         The teachers' task during the course was to guide the students and provide timely support in their ongoing
work. At the early supervision sessions, the discussions with students centered on their difficulties in deciding what
was "important" in the field, as they struggled with getting to grips with what fieldwork was all about. Basically, the
students reported either "seeing nothing", or being overwhelmed by the stupendous amount of detail that could be
recorded in any setting. "I didn't know what was interesting", was one student's formulation of the issue. In contrast
to this, an experienced fieldworker tends to have some bearing on what might be an interesting feature to note, even
though every new setting requires a great deal of re-learning. Having read the students' notes on the wiki, teachers
were better  able to     respond   to  these    issues,    and could   refer to students' field notes  in their formulation  of
instructions. The students' own work could thus be used as "cases" (Macbeth, 2004) in the sequences of talk-in-
interaction constituting the supervision session.

         To  take an     example    from   the   group     looking at  delivery firms: in the supervision  session, one  of the
supervisors brings up an issue that the students have mentioned to him, about the drivers just doing the same things
every day, and their fieldwork being "saturated" after two days in the field. Having the students' field notes on the
laptop    in    front        of     him,        he     counters     their     description   with      one    of     his   own:

Excerpt from supervision session

1     Teacher:        you  said   earlier    that     it   seems
                      that   you   are   writing     the    same
                      notes,   that   you   are     seeing   the
                      same  things  all  the    time
2     Student:        yes
3     Teacher:        just  before    you   came    in   today.
                      ehrm,   and eh  when   I'm    looking   at
                      your  notes    they're     not,   they're
                      kind   of   specific.      so  you    make
                      kind   of   good    notes.     it's    not
                      about   the  same   things     going   on,
                      is  it?  cause  when   I   look   at  your
                      notes   ((leans   in  to    look   at  the
                      screen))    it's   not,     "nine    forty
                      five,  eh  ninety   two   to  Marstrand,
                      could   you    call   Kick's      at   the
                      Arcade".    ((leans   back))     I   guess
                      he  doesn't   make   that     phone   call
                      every  day
4     Student:        no  but  they   make  phone     calls   to
                      other  customers    [...] they  have   thesameroutine,Idon'tseetheFigure 3: Supervisor (to the left) reading aloud
                      difference,     don't     know    how   to                       from students' fieldnotes
                      interpret

         In this short excerpt, we can see some of the roles played by the wiki field notes in the early supervision
sessions. The students' descriptive categorization of "sameness" (turn 1) with regards to their notes and the drivers'
work, is juxtaposed with designations of the notes as "quite specific", "kind of good", and "not the same" (turn 3).
The conversation continues, with supervisors offering alternative descriptions of the students' own field notes, in
order to make them see what a skilled ethnographic vision (cf. Goodwin, 1994) ­ enacted through the instructions ­
would see in the notes. The supervisors bring up examples of what they see as "findings" and "interesting things"
thereby using the uploaded material on the wiki as resources in their formulations of instructive remarks. Through
instructions and corrections, made with reference to the concrete objects present on the wiki, relevant competencies
were made visible and thereby pedagogically available for the students (Lindwall & Lymer, 2005). Since this kind
of course content involves skills and practices that are hard to articulate and explain in general, having concrete
student-produced text at hand proved valuable for the teachers to be able to articulate suitable instructions and
advice.

         Apart from      field  notes,  the     students  also uploaded   analytic notes  from  their meetings,  displaying for
instance how they grouped excerpts from field notes according to their developing sense of what was interesting.
This made available to teachers the students' grasp of the discursive practices of social scientific analysis. Recurring

                                                                   481                                                CSCL 2007
ways of reasoning made visible through the wiki ­ as for example a tendency to make psychological interpretations
of why people behaved this or that way ­ could be met during the supervision sessions. Beginning each session with
knowledge of students' work proved beneficial, as teachers knew what students were up to even in the absence of
any submitted texts. The analytic notes would show, for example, how the facilities management group analyzed
their fieldnotes, using the categories "preparations", "communication", and "mobility", while the group studying a
science  centre used  a distinction  between    "active" and  "passive"     events, defined   respectively   as "thinking   for
yourself, two-sided communication" (such as a visitor asking a guide for directions or seeking information from
signs), and "visitor only fed information, one-sided communication" (such as following a guide without asking
questions, or "just looking at stuff"). The notes from these two groups thus made visible two quite different analytic
venues. The former was more in line with what was preferred, while the latter was responded to as being in conflict
with the approaches to interaction and conversation taught in the course. Knowing about these differences was
useful for the instructors: they could respond to the students' choices of categories and strategies, seeing them for
the ways in which they differently measured up to the sought after brand of design-oriented fieldwork.

         This instructive function of the wiki hinges on the responsive nature of teaching; teachers and students, that
is, "interpret each others' actions and make, what seems to them, relevant responses" (Dyson, 1999, p. 144). Just as
students gain access to disciplinary knowledge through the supervisors' instructions, the supervisor gains access to a
concrete sequential context in which to formulate instructions through students' actions (cf. Lindwall & Lymer,
2005b). And for this, students' actions need to be concretely available in some form. Through wiki entries' presence
as "persistent artifacts as discourse reference" (Morrison & Dennis, 2005), providing students' activities with an
increased visibility, the teachers' relevant responses could be made with reference to concrete texts, something that
otherwise would have had to await the first drafts of the report. Rather than having to instruct students in note
taking, observation, and analysis generally, the teacher could respond directly to students' own products, counter
students' formulations of their own work, seeing in their notes qualities that they themselves had not the ability yet
to see.

Discussion
         In this study, we have described and discussed how a wiki was implicated in the processes of teaching-and-
learning during  a course  in  applied    research method: first,  by providing     a material    support for sharing  text, it
supported the status of "proper field notes" as an oriented-to feature of the students' work, and as a topic in their
everyday  conversations.  Second,   by    encouraging  a continuous   production    of  text, teachers could    assess student
activities and use this as resources in their work, partly through the possibility of referring explicitly to wiki notes in
supervision sessions.

         Students  used   the uploaded    field notes to talk about   ethnography's     disciplinary concerns.   Formulating
practices as part of getting to know them have been lifted up as an important aspect of learning (e.g. Argyris &
Schön, 1974; Nonaka & Takeushi, 1995; Orr, 1996; Lundin, 2005; Höyrup, 2004). This positioning of dialogue
among   colleagues as   a pedagogical     practice (Järvinen  &    Poikela, 2001)   shares    the CSCL    tradition's  view  of
collaboration as particularly conducive to learning (Bruffee, 1973; Stahl, 2002). In this study, we have thought of
collaboration in terms of how students and teachers orient towards, show and make visible relevant competencies.
We argue   that an interest   in such orientations  might  be    a useful way    of approaching    the study  of  educational
technologies;   pedagogically    relevant aspects  of  technologies   are   articulated without     treating  technologies   as
independent variables leading to straightforward effects on learning outcomes (see Lindwall and Ivarsson, in press,
for a similar approach to the contrasting of two different technologies used in a physics lab).

         When describing the use of the wiki, we have not been concerned only with talk, but also with material and
embodied aspects of interaction. Having concrete objects at hand to point to and talk about has been seen previously
to be an important aspect of practices of learning-and-instruction, in everyday as well as professional settings (cf.
Goodwin, 2007); in a study of a tele-services control centre, Hindmarsh and Heath (2000) describe "object focused
discussions", a kind of articulation work that the authors argue to be central for the inculcation of newcomers into
specialized work settings. Similarly, Goodwin's (1994; 1997) studies of instructive practices in archaeology and
chemistry show how deeply the development of disciplinary competence is dependent upon interaction around the
concrete objects of the setting. The wiki can thus be said to make the disciplinary objects of ethnography ­ field
notes, analyses, and observations ­ accessible and referable in students' talk. Thereby, the participants could orient
to these objects, and to the competencies involved in their production and proper perception. This was a central part
of the role of the wiki, not only in peer-to-peer talk, but also in instruction.

                                                             482                                                    CSCL 2007
          While students used the uploaded field notes to develop a sense of what a field note was, the teacher's task
was to provide instructive guidance to the students. The prime site for this was the supervision sessions; in close
face-to-face engagement with students, an instructor can provide timely responses to students' actions, seeing in
these actions evidence for lack of understanding, faulted presuppositions or the like, and in sequences of verbal
remark construe these as in need of correction, thereby showing what was to be taken as a correct, rational and
effective way of acting in this setting (cf. Goodwin, 2007; Lindwall & Lymer, 2005b; Lundin & Nuldén, 2007). But
this requires of students' actions that they are visible to the instructor, and during fieldwork they typically are not.
Through referring to field notes uploaded on the wiki, the instructor could nevertheless talk about students' activities
in the field. In so doing, he could instruct them as to what was there to see. Through making available a skilled
perspective on their notes, the supervisor could show that skill in and as the alternative formulations he offered.

          The wiki can be said to have afforded a sort of social translucence (Ericksson & Kellog, 2000; Thomas et
al., 2001), in that it allowed students "to observe and imitate others' actions, [...] to create, notice, and conform to
social conventions" (ibid, p. 873). When systems supporting such visualization of distributed activities have been
developed, the context has most often been the implementation of networks of workers or learners that rarely meet
in person. Therefore, functionalities for mimicking the structures of ordinary conversation have been addressed in
these systems   (Ericksson   &   Kellog,   2000;   Kirk &   Fraser,  2005; Mühlpfordt   &   Wessner,   2005).   Morrison  and
Dennis (2005) summarize such efforts within CSCL as having found three aspects particularly important: "visual
reinforcement   of shared    knowledge,    persistent artifacts  as  discourse reference, and   shared spaces    for   mutually
editable information" (p. 20). In this study, the wiki was only one of a range of different discourse contexts available
to the students. Wiki entries thus worked as resources in ordinary face-to-face conversation, rather than as means for
replacement of the same. In that sense, it was a system for collaboration, rather than a collaborative system in itself.
The  problems   addressed    through  the  use   of the  wiki,   then, were   not ones  relating  to  lack of conversational
interaction per se, but rather to the relative difficulties involved in establishing concrete shared references in talk,
when the activities talked about were engaged in individually, and at different locations.         Since this mix of face-to-
face and distributed activities is the dominating organization of education, the dominance of collaborative tools for
distance interaction might lead to potential applications of CSCL research being neglected.

          The functionalities described here should not be taken as specific for ethnography as course content. On the
contrary, commenting       and criticizing text is  a pervasive   practice in  higher education.   Furthermore,   many   other
collaborative activities   involve individual   work   that is similarly rendered  inaccessible   for others  through   spatial
distribution, hindering a common orientation in talk to competencies involved in that work. Da Lio (2005) makes
this observation   in relation  to a  wiki  implementation     to  share teacher  practice, stating  that  "although   teachers
develop new knowledge through their work, it is often poorly documented and must be better managed to capture
both tacit and explicit forms" (p. 86). Likewise, many educational programs involve elements similar to field work.
Consider for example the work place practice engaged in by students in many professional study programs (teacher
students is one example: see Huppertz et al., 2005, for a study of video-based facilitation of dialogue in a group of
pre-service teachers). These similarities suggest wider applications of simple web-based technologies. In particular,
we argue that distributed activities, through continuous visualization on wikis or similar systems, might be made
more accessible for collaborative co-located practices of learning and instruction.

Conclusion
          In this study, two interlinked aspects of the pedagogical usefulness of a wiki have been described and
discussed. In particular, the ways in which the wiki could visualize otherwise individual work ­ and make that work
available for collaborative learning and instruction ­ was highlighted as an important functionality. While many
implementations of wikis have been directed at supporting shared databases of student texts about some subject
matter, this study shows how the use of the wiki can be based not on the uploaded texts themselves, or on interaction
through the web based medium, but on face-to-face talk surrounding the texts. Thus, an important value of the wiki
lies in the  visualization   and   sharing of   work,   and the    ongoing conversations    about  work    facilitated by that
visualization. Distributed groups of learners are not necessarily distributed all of the time, but to the extent that they
are, CSCL could offer accessory discourse contexts by which their work is tied together and more easily shared and
referred to in instructive talk among students and teachers. The results of this study suggest a set of interesting
functionalities of    this simple  platform,    addressing   issues  concerning    peer-to-peer  learning,   the  pedagogical
availability of curricular   content, and   the  teachers'  task  of designing  their conduct   in  relation to  the students'
developing   competencies.     Students'   reports on   how  they   discussed  and developed    norms  of    good practice  in

                                                               483                                                   CSCL 2007
ethnography, and brought field notes in line with each other, point to interesting venues of continuing research,
providing further details of the actual practices of wiki use. Researching more into these areas would, we argue, be
beneficial to developing an understanding within CSCL of the pedagogical potentials of wikis and similar systems.

References
Arias, E. G., Eden, H., Fischer, G., Gorman, A., & Scharff, E. (1999). Beyond access: informed participation and
        empowerment. In Proceedings of the 1999 Conference on Computer Support For Collaborative Learning
        (Palo Alto, California, December 12-15, 1999).
Argyris, C., & Schön, D. (1974). Theory in practice: Increasing professional effectiveness. San Fransisco, CA:
        Jossey-Bass.
Baker, M. J., & Lund, K. (1997). Promoting reflective interactions in a computer supported collaborative learning
        environment. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 13, 175-193.
Brereton, M., Donovan, J., & Viller, S. (2003). Talking about watching: Using the Video Card Game and wiki-web
        technology  to   engage   IT  students in  developing  observational  skills, In   Proceedings    of  the Fifth
        Australasian Conference on Computing Education.
Brown, A.   L.  (1992).  Design   experiments:  Theoretical  and  methodological    challenges  in creating   complex
        interventions in classroom settings. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 2(2), 141-178.
Bruffee, K. (1973). Collaborative learning: Some practical methods. College English, 34(5), 634-643.
Bruns, A., & Humphreys, S. (2005). Wikis in teaching and assessment: The M/Cyclopedia Project. WikiSym '05,
        (San Diego, CA, USA, October 16-18).
Castanheira, M. L., Crawford, T., Dixon, C. N., & Green, J. L. (2001). Interactional ethnography: An approach to
        studying the social construction of literate practices. Linguistics and Education, 11(4), 353-400.
Da Lio, E., Fraboni, L., & Leo, T. (2005). TWiki-based facilitation in a newly formed academic community of
        practice. WikiSym '05, (San Diego, CA, USA, October 16-18).
Dyson, A. (1999). Transforming transfer: Unruly children, contrary texts, and the persistence of the pedagogical
        order. Review of Research in Education, 24, 143-171.
Gaved, M.,  Heath, T.,   & Eisenstadt, M.  (2006). Wikis  of locality:  Insights from the  open guides.   WikiSym   '06
        (Odense, Denmark, August 21-23, 2006).
Girgensohn, A., & Lee, A. (2002). Making web sites be places for social interaction. In Proceedings of the 2002
        ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work (New Orleans, Louisiana, USA, November
        16-20, 2002). New York, NY: ACM Press, 136-145.
Goodwin, C. (1994). Professional vision. American Anthropologist, 96(3), 606-633.
Goodwin, C. (1995). Seeing in depth. Social Studies of Science, 25, 237-274.
Goodwin, C. (1997). The blackness of black: Color categories as situated practice. In L. B. Resnick, R. Säljö, C.
        Pontecorvo, & B. Burge (Eds.), Discourse, tools and reasoning: Essays on situated cognition (pp. 111-
        140). Berlin, Heidelberg, New York: Springer.
Goodwin, C. (2007). Participation, stance and affect in the organizations of activities. Discourse and Society, 18(1),
        15-73.
Gruber, S., Peyton, J. K., & Bruce, B. C. (1995). Collaborative writing in multiple discourse contexts. Computer
        Supported Cooperative Work, 3, 247-269.
Hindmarsh,  J., & Heath,   C. (2000).  Sharing the tools of  the trade: The interactional  constitution of   workplace
        objects. Journal of Contemporary Ethnography, 29(5), 523-562.
Huppertz, P.,   Massler, U.,  & Ploetzner, R.  (2005). V-share:   Video-based    analysis and  reflection  of teaching
        experiences in (virtual) groups. In T. Koschmann, D. D. Suthers & T.-W. Chan (Eds.), Computer support
        for collaborative learning: The next 10 years (pp. 232-236). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Höyrup, S. (2004). Reflection as a core process in organisational learning. The Journal of Workplace Learning, 16,
        442-454.
Järvinen, A., & Poikela, E. (2001). Modelling reflective and contextual learning at work. The Journal of Workplace
        Learning, 13(7-8), 282-289.
Kirk, D. S., & Fraser, D. S. (2005). The effects of remote gesturing on distance instruction. In T. Koschmann, D. D.
        Suthers & T.-W. Chan (Eds.), Computer support for collaborative learning: The next 10 years (pp. 301-
        310). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Koschmann,  T.   (2001).  Revisiting the paradigms  of instructional   technology. In G.   Kennedy,  M.    Keppell, C.
        McNaught & T. Petrovic (Eds.), Meeting at the crossroads. Proceedings of the 18th Annual Conference of
        the Australian    Society for  Computers   in  Learning  in  Tertiary Education.   (pp. 15-22).    Melbourne:
        Biomedical Multimedia Unit, The University of Melbourne.

                                                         484                                                  CSCL 2007
Koschmann, T. (2002). Dewey's contribution to the foundations of CSCL research. In Proceedings of CSCL 2002
        (pp. 17-22).
Kreijns, K., Kirschner, P. A., & Jochems, W. (2002). The sociability of computer supported collaborative learning
        environments. Educational Technology & Society, 5(1).
Leuf, B., & Cunningham, W. (2001). The wiki way: Quick collaboration on the web. Boston: Addison Wesley.
Lindwall, O., & Ivarsson, J. (in press). Differences that make a difference: Contrasting the local application of two
        technologies in a kinematics lab. In S. Ludvigsen, A. Lund, I. Rasmussen & R. Säljö (Eds.), Learning
        across sites: New tools, infrastructures and practices Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Lindwall, O., & Lymer, G. (2005). Vulgar competence, ethnomethodological indifference and curricular design. In
        T. Koschmann, D. D. Suthers & T.-W. Chan (Eds.), Computer support for collaborative learning: The next
        10 years (pp. 388-397). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Lindwall, O.   &  Lymer,  G. (2005b).  Theoretical constructs  and concrete  work: Making   mechanics   visible in a
        physics   lab. Paper  presented at  the European  Association   for  Research on  Learning  and  Instruction
        (EARLI) conference (Nicosia, Cyprus, August 23-27, 2005).
Lund, A., & Smördal, O. (2006). Is there a space for the teacher in a WIKI? WikiSym '06 (Odense, Denmark August
        21-23)
Lundin J. (2005). Talking about work. PhD Thesis. Gothenburg Studies in Informatics. Report 34.
Lundin, J., & Nuldén, U. (2007) Talking about tools ­ Investigating learning at work in police practice. Journal of
        Workplace Learning. 19(4).
Macbeth, K. (2004). The situated achievements of novices learning academic writing as a cultural curriculum. PhD
        Thesis. Ohio State University.
Morrison, D., & Dennis, B. (2005). MetaLab: Supporting social grounding and group task management in CSCL
        environments through social translucence. In Proceedings of the 2005 conference on diversity in computing
        (Albuquerque, New Mexico, USA, October 19-22, 2005). New York, NY: ACM Press, 20-22.
Mühlppfordt,   M.,  &  Wessner,  M.  (2005). Explicit  referencing  in  chat supports collaborative learning. In   T.
        Koschmann, D. D. Suthers & T.-W. Chan (Eds.), Computer support for collaborative learning: The next 10
        years (pp. 460-469). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Nonaka,   I., &   Takeuchi, H. (1995).  The  knowledge-creating   company:    How  Japanese  companies   create  the
        dynamics of innovation. New York, NY: Oxford University Press
Orr, J. E. (1996). Talking about machines: An ethnography of a modern job. Ithaka, NY: Cornell University Press.
Reinhold, S. (2006). WikiTrails: Augmenting wiki structure for collaborative, interdisciplinary learning. WikiSym
        '06 (Odense, Denmark, August 21­23, 2006).
Schwartz, L., Clark, S., Cossarin, M., & Rudolph, J. (2004). Educational wikis: Features and selection criteria. The
        International Review of Research in Open and Distance Learning, 5(1).
Scribner, S., & Cole, M. (1981). The psychology of literacy. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Stahl, G. (2002). Rediscovering CSCL. In T. Koschmann, R. Hall, & N. Miyake (Eds.), CSCL 2: Carrying forward
        the conversation (pp. 169-181). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
ten Have, P. (2003). Teaching students observational methods: Visual studies and visual analysis. Visual Studies,
        18(1), 29-35.
Thomas, J. C., Kellogg, W. A., & Erickson, T. (2001). The knowledge management puzzle: Human and social
        factors in knowledge management. IBM Systems Journal, 40(4), 863-884.

Acknowledgements
This research   has been financially supported  by the Knut    & Alice  Wallenberg Foundation, Wallenberg     Global
Learning Network II. It was carried out mainly within the context of the Linnaeus Centre for Research on Learning,
Interaction,  and Mediated  Communication    in Contemporary    Society (LinCS), and  the Network   for Analysis   of
Interaction and Learning (NAIL). Additional support was received from the Kaleidoscope CSCL SIG.

                                                          485                                                CSCL 2007
