                  Patterns of Collaboration in Design Courses:
             Team dynamics affect technology appropriation,
                      artifact creation, and course performance

              Heidy Maldonado, Brian Lee, Scott R. Klemmer, Roy D. Pea
                          HCI Group, Computer Science Department, and
                              Stanford Center for Innovations in Learning
                                              Stanford University,
                  heidym, balee, srk@cs.stanford.edu; roypea@stanford.edu

          Abstract: In a collaborative task, group dynamics have been shown to affect students'
          grades, motivation     to    pursue a   topic or   subject,  documentation     of the    experience,
          learning, enjoyment     of   a project,  and  relationships   with their classmates.     The results
          presented   in this paper    illustrate the effect  team  dynamics    also have   upon   technology
          appropriation, by combining proven data-collection strategies and the use of a system that
          augments    paper   sketchbooks     with   multimedia     capture  and  sharing   capabilities. We
          analyze   the  relationships    between     students'   design  notebooks,    questionnaires,   and
          interview   responses,  class  observations,   and   course  performance.   Our   study  found  that
          students' use  of   collaborative   tools  increases  when   they  believe their  teammates    to be
          equally engaged     and involved    in  the project.  Moreover,   students engaged    in successful
          collaborations    are  likely  to  take  fewer    notes  than  those  involved    in  conflict-filled
          collaborations, and students with considerable experience working in groups may bypass
          critical steps in creating joint problem-solving spaces with each new group.

Introduction:
       Team   collaboration     and   innovation  in  design  are emerging   as decisive  factors  in  determining   and
maintaining   global  competitiveness     for  firms  and   countries  (Agustine,  2005).   Yet   design education   has
been considered   "the   top  drawer     of Pandora's   box   of  controversial  curriculum    matters"  (Evans  et  al.,
1990), perhaps because of the challenges in establishing hallmarks of good design across situations and
contexts. Or perhaps, as a group of engineering design professors suggest, because the collaborative, open-
ended, creative nature of design collides often with the convergence required of engineering departments in
which  it is taught   (Dym    et al.,  2005). While   some   firms  have  succeeded   at instructing   recruits in  their
design process    and tenets    (e.g., Kelley,   2001;  2005),   academia   seems  to lag   behind  in   replicating the
success of these small corporations (Dym et al., 2005). Recently, however, an interest in evaluations of
design education at the collegiate level has begun to percolate (e.g. Song et al., 2004; Mabogunje, 2003).

       Meanwhile, research on collaboration in educational settings traditionally has focused on short-term
collaborative episodes and concrete tasks, where there are a limited number of acceptable solutions (e.g.,
Barron, 2003); and collaboration scripts, where roles are predefined and structured (e.g., O'Donnell, 1999;
Dillenbourg et al., 2006). Recently, there has been an increased interest towards considering longer-term
collaborations (e.g., Goldman et al., 2004, Mercier et al., 2006). The research we report in this paper is at
the confluence of these two developments: we focus on longer-term collaborations where students engage
in creative, open-ended projects. Our findings are drawn from analyzing weeks-long collaborative projects
in two courses on interaction design: an undergraduate introductory course, and a design studio.

       Our   evaluation   methods      similarly  combine   strategies  from collaboration     and design   research. A
significant  fraction of  the   collaboration    literature centers on  video  analysis  of students'    utterances  and
gestures, (e.g. Barron, 2003; Mabogunje, 2003); others consider the unit of analysis to be the students' use
of representations (e.g. Yang, 2003; Song et al., 2004). Collaborations have traditionally been considered
successful   according   to the  groups'    performance,    measured   in terms  of  grades    or number    of solutions
reached.  In contrast,   some    studies  consider   what   students  themselves   value in  collaborative     endeavors
(Mercier et al., 2003; Gillies, 2004; Levesque et al., 2001) ­ which may not correlate with their instructors'
assessment. Our analysis for this paper draws insights from class and group observations; interviews of

                                                            486                                                    CSCL 2007
selected students; as well as pre- and post-experience questionnaires measuring attitudinal, self-reported
behaviors, and experiences within the groups. We also discuss findings from quantitative analysis of each
student's design notebook, associated coursework, and performance metrics.

        Design notebooks are deeply embedded in the discipline and teaching of design (Verplank & Kim,
1986; Klemmer et al., 2005; Chen et al., 2005). In the design studio course we analyzed, these notebooks
typically account for 30% of the students' final grade. Their importance is also reflected in the professional
field, where    they are considered  valid sources  for patent  disputes.  Also   known  as  Idea Logs,  the     design
notebooks provide a space for individual ideation and documentation, reflection, and organization of any
project's elements: students take class notes, record team meetings, and sketch, write down, and paste in
observations, ideas, and inspiration (typical Idea Logs appear in Figures 1 and 2).

       This paper begins by summarizing the implementation framework of the Ideas learning ecology, for
which Idea Logs are the starting point, barriers to adoption of such an augmented paper system, and usage
and  performance     metrics. We  concentrate   on the  effects of  group   dynamics  on  the  appropriation      (Pea,
1992; Leontiev, 1981) and usage of the system, as well as the students' enjoyment and performance in the
course.  Hardware     and  software  can   provide incentives   and barriers   to collaboration,  yet our       findings
indicate   that group  dynamics  may    have as powerful   an  effect -- if not  more -- on   both adoption      of  the
collaborative tools and on performance metrics. We find that the type of content and frequency of writing
in their Idea Logs, both paper and electronic, correspond with the team's dynamics.

          Figure 1. Students during group meetings using the Ideas ecology; the Ideas digital pen and notebook.

The Ideas Learning Ecology:
           The  quantitative  analysis  of the  students'  Idea Logs   we   discuss  was     made  possible      by  the
introduction of the Ideas ecology, which aims to fluidly bridge the digital and physical world of artifacts
used and created by design students. We use the term ecology (Barron, 2004) to recognize that students
actively   engage  in learning  through  a wide  variety  of social resources,    practices, and  tools. To     capture
written content, design students use the Anoto digital pen system (http://www.anoto.com). For the study
deployments,    we   used  Nokia SU-1B     and  Logitech  io2  digital pens. When    used    with an  Anoto      digital
notebook, the pens record time-stamped vector graphics of each stroke the students make, along with the
page   number.   Students  may  upload   and  view  their digitized notes   by  synchronizing  with   a  PC.     Unlike
purely digital systems, the Anoto digital pens also act as normal ballpoint pens: should the pen digitizer fail
(e.g., if the pen runs out of battery power), users may continue taking notes and sketching as if they were
writing with normal pen and paper. Similarly, the digital version provides a backup should the physical
notebook   become     lost or unavailable.   Students can import   digital  images  into Ideas,   allowing      them to
document fieldwork with digital cameras or camera phones, as well as material downloaded from the web.

        The Ideas ecology has been in use for over six months, by more than 56 design students, authoring
over 4,000 pages of content in the course of their class work. Users interact with captured Ideas content
through the ButterflyNet browser (Yeh et al., 2006), which integrates digitally captured paper notes with
photographs and other media through a faceted metadata browser (see Figure 2). Notebook pages currently
in focus are displayed in the content panel on the left; the browser offers the ability to zoom in/out and
display  multiple    pages at a time via   a drop-down    menu.  The   context  panel on  the  right  automatically
presents data related to the pages in focus, such as images taken around the time the page was written. At
the top of the browser, a timeline visualization allows the students to jump to content by date. The height of
each   bar represents  the  amount   of content  written  on  that  date.  Flags  representing course    milestones,
indexed by date, provide links to course web pages while simultaneously providing a visual aid for students

                                                         487                                                       CSCL 2007
searching for content related to a given milestone. Exporting notebook pages as images to other programs
allows students to complete common tasks such as pasting sketches into documents or sharing their design
content through email without the burden of scanning.

          The Ideas system supports collaboration among teammates by enabling users to create, join, and
leave groups. Members of a group can directly view the notebook pages of other users in the group through
the digital browser. Group members can comment on each other's work via highlighting and annotating
interesting pages through tags (text labels of pages) and annotations (text or image labels of page areas).
These tags and annotations are indexed and searchable for later retrieval. As the Idea Logs are collected,
reviewed,  and   evaluated several  times  throughout  the quarter, we also     added  features  to facilitate  these
tasks for the course instructors and teaching assistants, such that they have access to aggregate views of the
entire class, as well as the ability  to  view and  annotate any notebook.       In  addition to supporting     design
practice, the Ideas ecology    is a powerful instrument  for studying  the     practices and   behaviors    of design
students. Digitally augmenting      paper lowers the threshold for  acquiring     aggregate    metrics   of notebook
activity, time-stamped ink strokes enable us as researchers to ask finer-grained questions, and the digital
copy allows researchers to examine content without taking the notebooks away from the students at any
time.

          Figure 2. Left: Pages 1 and 2 from an Idea Log recoding observations during a Farmer's Market.
 Right: The same pages viewed in the ButterflyNet browser. Notebook pages with their photo and text annotations are
presented in the left-hand content panel, while contextual data (e.g., related images, search results) are presented in the
right-hand panel. Above, a timeline shows class milestones along with a bar graph visualization of the amount of notes
                                    collected on days throughout the quarter.

Study Method:
          We review the different methods and evaluations strategies employed, in both the pilot and central
study reported, the students' positive evaluation of the technology, and their usage of the Ideas system. In
the next section we concentrate on the educational and collaboration findings, and their relationship to the
usage metrics.

Technology Probe:
          The pilot study ran during the fall quarter of 2005, when we deployed parts of the Ideas ecology to
selected sections of the undergraduate introductory HCI design course at our university. Eighteen students
used the pens, notebooks and browser, authoring a total of 550 pages over 10 weeks. In the post-experience
questionnaire, participants rated the Ideas system as significantly useful, easy to understand, and easy to
learn (median 4, 5-point scale). For exporting and sharing design content, students preferred using Ideas to
traditional means such as copiers and scanners (median 6, 7-point scale), and commented on the value of
the ability to share notebook content quickly and fluidly (exporting the page image to office productivity
and email  applications),  the browser's   capacity to display multiple       pages, visualize a timeline    of when
pages were created, and view pages within a calendar.

          One of our concerns was the added weight and encumbrance of the pen introduced by the digital
capture instrumentation, which could discourage usage. We did not discover an impact of the pen's form

                                                       488                                                       CSCL 2007
factor on content production: the students using Ideas filled an equivalent number of pages to those using
traditional pen   and paper   (40   full  pages  on  average,  when   accounting    for notebook    size differences). .
Notably, several students used Ideas for classes in addition to the one under study; we hypothesize this is
because they found a digital mirror to be useful.

The HCI Design Studio Experience:
         Informed by these findings, we conducted a whole-class deployment the subsequent quarter. As
with the pilot, we chose this studio course, for its focus on collaborative project work: students' grades are
based on their group projects and individual Idea Logs. Moreover, both courses employ the studio critique
method for formative assessments.

         All 48 students enrolled in the HCI Design Studio course (Klemmer et al., 2005) during winter
quarter were asked to participate in the evaluation of the Ideas ecology; of these, 38 (10 female, 28 male)
agreed. Participating students were provided with the study's consent form, a pre-experience questionnaire,
Anoto digital pens, and A5-sized notebooks (approximately 137 mm × 203 mm). At the end of the quarter,
students were     asked  to fill in a  post-experience   questionnaire   and  return the  filled  notebooks  and   pens.
Paper copies of their notes were provided for the students who requested them. An additional eight students
chose to participate in the surveys without using the technology. The survey questions were drawn from
earlier studies'  findings   about   collaboration,   feelings of  belonging   to  a group,    interpersonal closeness,
friendships among teammates, satisfaction with project outcomes, group interactions and learning, among
others  (e.g., Hinds  et al.,    2004; Bailenson,   2006; Mercier     et al., 2003). Questions    about   technological
proficiency, experience with the Ideas tools, and prior workgroup experience or experience in maintaining
logbooks--including Idea Logs, blogs, and journals--were also included.

         Participants were predominantly engineering students, the majority pursuing degrees in Computer
Science and Symbolic Systems, and evenly split between undergraduate and graduate programs. As was the
case with the technology probe, no explicit remuneration--whether monetary or in terms of grades--was
given to encourage the use of the system, although the Idea Logs themselves were graded for the courses.
Students were free to use the technology as much or as little as they desired. The electronic versions of the
students' notebooks were not used for grading unless the students requested it.

Results and Discussion:
         We evaluate the results of the study by first covering a general overview of the experience and
reported barriers to adoption of the Ideas system, the content analysis of the Idea Logs, and the findings on
collaboration illuminated through the survey instruments. We then analyze the ways in which the team's
interactions moderate usage of the Ideas learning ecology: the type of content and frequency of writing in
their Idea Logs, both paper and electronic are impacted by the group's dynamics.

         During the 10 weeks of the quarter in the second study, the 38 students using the Ideas system
entered  3,637    pages, predominantly     working    on them   during   weekdays    outside   of class.  Each student
contributed approximately 1.4 pages per day, although students varied greatly in the frequency and amount
with which they wrote into their Idea Logs: one student wrote as many as 267 pages (an average of 5.3
pages   per day!).  Students     cited as particularly welcome     the   automatic  digital copy   with  the additional
information    of the timestamp,    as   well as  the  ability to  quickly and   fluidly insert   excerpts  from paper
notebooks into digital documents. The timeline and the ability to annotate and import related images were
also mentioned favorably.

Idea Logs:
         We analyzed both the server-logged timestamp data for the 38 students who participated in the
study and the content of the 46 students' Idea Logs (including those that did not use the Ideas system). Idea
Logs accounted for 30% in each student's final grade for the HCI Design Studio course; their evaluation by
the course  instructors  and     teaching assistant  emphasizes    the   need to  ideate and   iterate frequently, thus
rewarding   quantity    and  scope   of   ideas. Therefore, it  is not   surprising  to  find  a large  and  significant
correlation  between    the  students'    performance  in the   class  and the   quantity   of their Idea  Log   entries
(Pearson    r=0.589,  n=46,   p<0.01).    Figure   3  shows    the appropriation    pattern   using  the server-logged

                                                           489                                                     CSCL 2007
timestamp data through sparklines representing the number of pages each of the 38 students filled daily.
The trend towards a decrease in note-taking that Figure 3 highlights at the end of the 10-week period may
stem from the better fit of notebooks and pens to the ideation and iteration that characterize the early parts
of the course, as the last weeks of the quarter are focused on implementation (programming).

         Our results indicate a clear need for a digital repository of design content for students; the Ideas
system seems to have at least partially addressed that need. Seven of the most frequent and prolific users of
Ideas were invited to interview, andthey repeatedly mentioned the highFigure 3. Sparklines showing the number of pages each student completedeach day during Study 2, with the values for each student's maximum daily
value      in      quickly        sharing       pages, and total number of pages filled throughout the quarter. Note that
information among teammates. The                 three groups are easily distinguishable: those that quickly adopted and
perceived value proposition for the             continued using the technology throughout the quarter (approximately 11students), those that stopped in the weeks when programming demands
students   was   twofold:   the  ease of       took over (10 to 15 students), and those that only gave the technology an
sharing    visual    ideas;   and     the      early try (approximately 12 students). The paired vertical lines correspond
lessening of the need to document               to deadlines for projects and, two days later, for turning in the Idea Logs.
the   same       materials    as    their            Continuous Use        Ideation Use          Early Use
teammates,       particularly     during
meetings.     Earlier  we     discussed
other    benefits      that      students
perceived in continued usage of the
Ideas ecology; now we address the
system's   shortcomings       that  may
further  account   for the  differential
patterns of usage.

         Some     of   the  barriers  to
adoption   of the  Ideas   ecology    are
intrinsic to the current incarnations
of  the technology     in the available
pen,  notebook,    and    synchronizing
interface.  The    girth   of   the  pen
(23mm × 20mm), battery life, and
lack  of   ink   color    variety   were
mentioned         throughout          the
interviews    and  free-form      survey
responses.    It  seems     likely  that
future versions of augmented paper
technology    will    overcome      these
limitations,  and  in  fact   new    pen
models   (such    as   the  Magicomm
model    http://www.originote.com/)
seem to be addressing the size and
girth    concerns.     To     determine
whether    the     digital    pen   was
primarily     responsible     for     the
barriers   encountered        in    these
studies, we   compared     the   number
of pages written in the notebook to
the number of pages synchronized
to  the  computer.     Not    all  pages
students  wrote   were    transferred to
the browser    via synchronization:    an  average  of  186  pages written to 98  synchronized (some  were    not
written  with  the Anoto    pen   ­ perhaps  due to its form-factor or qualities, to the students' preference  or
forgetfulness; others were not recorded, because the pen ran out of battery during note-taking or meetings).
The sheer quantity of pages synchronized ­ almost 4,000 in the three months under consideration ­ would
seem to indicate that most students are able to get beyond the ergonomic shortcomings of the pen. We are

                                                         490                                                 CSCL 2007
interested in exploring this gap further, as the categorization of the content of the notebooks may lead us to
determine whether the students preferred the pens for note-taking and related tasks, and a different set of
instruments (markers, colored pencils) for tasks requiring greater line control (such as artistic renderings of
their interfaces).

         Other barriers for our audience are not solvable through off-the-shelf components; for example,
the  Anoto   notebooks    also  drew  a few   complaints.   Videotaped   interviews     with  students  and   teaching
assistants suggest that lined paper discourages freeform content in favor of textual content. To see if this
anecdotal frustration was pervasive, we used the pilot data to compare the number of drawings present in
unlined notebooks to those in lined notebooks, finding only a small correlation (Pearson r=0.153, n=79). As
the heft and quality of the paper of the commercially available Anoto notebooks also proved disappointing,
we are currently purchasing custom-printed, unlined Anoto sketchbooks with better quality paper.

Analyzing Team Variables and their Interactions:
         Analysis    of the  survey data   highlights some   characteristics  that correlate  with these   differential
usage patters. What other factors influence students' decision to record their thought processes in their Idea
Logs? From the survey analysis, we found the number of total pages written in each student's Idea Log to
be negatively correlated with the students' reported satisfaction in their current team interactions (Pearson
r = -0.32,  p < 0.05).   Besides   providing   an   enjoyable    working     environment,    satisfaction  with  team
interactions  correlated  with   the  team's   project   grade (r = 0.376,   p < 0.05).  From    the  perspective  of
curriculum development, given the equal importance in the final grade measurements of the individual Idea
Logs and group project grades, the link between unhappy or conflicted groups and additional contributions
to their individual Idea Log raises concerns on the potential causes of such a relationship.

         Barron    (2003)   points out  that  "research  on motivation   suggests   that the  more   competitive   the
environment,   the   more    students   focus  on   finding   ways  to  document     and  protect    their individual
competences". It is plausible that fear of not receiving credit for their contributions when working among
strangers, or  in  a competitive   environment,    motivates   students  in  these teams  to  document     their ideas
frequently.  This  conjecture   may  also  explain, why   we   found that    friendship  with teammates    negatively
correlated with the number of pages each student synched to the Ideas system (r = -0.326, p < 0.05). From
these findings, it would seem that those teams where teammates were satisfied in their interactions and/or
were  friends  before   the  experience  felt less of  a need  or  urgency   in  recording   and   documenting   their
thought process. On the other hand, it may be that friends met more often synchronously, and saw less of a
need  to share  their   documents   asynchronously.    An   alternative explanation   comes    from   comprehension
theorists, who  suggest   friends  have  more   "shared  semantic   fields"  and   therefore  feel less of  a need  to
document these shared perspectives and understandings (Sabelli & Pea, 2004).

         The   interesting   dynamic    of working    with  friends  deserves    further attention   and   evaluation.
Research has shown that "friends are used to building joint problem-solving spaces and are consequently
more  familiar with   the prior  knowledge,   communicative      strategies, and thinking  styles  of their partners"
(Barron, 2003). Establishing joint problem-solving spaces and creating shared meanings are behaviors that
have been shown to be at the center of successful collaborations (Roschelle, 1992). We were particularly
interested in evaluating the impact that working with friends had on the students' graphical output, since
graphical representations have been linked to the construction of a joint problem-solving space (Brown et
al., 1989)  and    making   the students'  thinking   visible  (Barron,  2003).  Moreover,    quantity    and type of
graphical  content   in Idea Logs   has been  shown   to correlate  with product   and   process   outcome  measures
(Song et al., 2004; Yang, 2003).

         We set out to code the graphical output of the students, which proved particularly challenging. We
experimented   with   coding   the diagrams   and  sketches   as units, reducing   human   error   by involving   four
coders working independently. As interpretations of the boundaries between sketches led to inaccuracies,
we evolved to considering the quantity of the pages that the diagrams covered as the unit of analysis. Two
coders, working independently, analyzed the Idea Logs for their graphical content, counting an average of
62 pages filled with sketches and diagrams during the 66 days of the quarter. The class does not require
drawing proficiency, yet some students had as many as 134 pages filled with sketches and diagrams, and no

                                                         491                                                     CSCL 2007
student had fewer than 11 pages devoted to graphical content. This measure, however, is biased towards
large size sketches and heavily correlated with the number of pages written by the students. To address this
potential imperfection in our measurements, we are developing an "ink counter" for the electronic versions.
We   hope  this tool  will compensate     for differences   in  detail and size  across  students'  sketches, although
accounting for paper-only sketches will, by necessity, remain challenging and prone to human error.

           Using pages filled with graphical content as a measure, we found a negative correlation between
prior friendship with teammates and the graphs in students' Idea Logs (r = -0.30, p < 0.05). Then, given the
measuring challenges mentioned above, we calculated the frequency of graphical content as a fraction of all
pages written by each group. We contrasted this frequency with a team identity measure, obtained through
a seven-point   pictorial  scale of interpersonal    closeness.    This scale has   been shown    in earlier studies to
correlate with feelings and behaviors reflecting interconnectedness (Hinds et al., 2004). We validated the
scale using six items from Bailenson (2006) on group cohesiveness ("entitativity" items with a Cronbach's
alpha of   0.81), and found   the  two    measures  to be   positively  correlated  (r = 0.489;   p < 0.01). Individual
ratings for interpersonal closeness were averaged across the team, and a large negative correlation emerged
once again between the team's interpersonal closeness and the frequency of graphical content aggregated
across the team's Idea Logs (r = -0.581, p < 0.01). These findings seem to indicate that ease of establishing
joint problem-solving spaces translates into a decreased dependency on graphical representations to convey
meaning and strategies. As working with friends or in a highly interconnected group facilitates the creation
of shared meaning, the survey responses suggest that the need for technological and pedagogical support
for creating a shared space, such as that fostered by the Ideas ecology, would be stronger in groups where
the teammates are not friends at the beginning of the project.

           Lastly, as part of the post-experience questionnaire, students were asked to rate on a 5-point Likert
scale their agreement or disagreement with 45 statements (divided in five sections) on their feelings about
group interactions, group goals, common group challenges, learning outcomes and their satisfaction with
the  final product  design,  their  learning  experience    throughout    the project,   and  their collaboration.  The
number     of pages   individual   students   synchronized      to  the browser     correlated  negatively   with  their
agreement to the survey question about group members "that did not take the work as seriously as everyone
else" (r = -0.33,   p < 0.05).   A  likely explanation      for the disjoint  between    written   and synched     pages
emerges    when   we  consider   that students  in  unsatisfying    collaborations   are more   likely to  individually
record and reflect in their Idea Log. Yet these same students may remain reticent to synch and use the Ideas
system, because of the potential sharing of their insights with their conflictive teammates. Support for this
differential pattern in documenting vs. sharing also appears in the other direction: the total number of pages
synched    by  each  group  correlates    with  the  project    grade   (r = 0.363, p < 0.05)  which,   as   mentioned,
correlates with satisfaction with team interactions (r = 0.376, p < 0.05). Consequently, it would seem that
although students in a successful collaboration ­ or in a team with friends ­ are likely to take fewer notes
than those involved in conflict-filled collaborations, students are more likely to share and synchronize their
notes when they believe that their teammates are equally engaged and involved in the project.

           Friendship may   not  be   the  only factor   influencing    students'   ability to quickly  establish  joint
problem spaces and create shared meaning; our survey results suggest that this ability may be developed
through continued collaborations across teams and courses. Colbeck's interviews of college students (2000)
suggested   that  interdependence     (Johnson  et  al., 1998)     seemed  to develop    more   in  project  teams  that
included students with prior group experiences than in teams whose members had little or no prior group
experiences.   We   had   expected    the differences    in usage   patterns  to  be  related  to  expertise and   prior
experience with regularly documenting and recording thought processes. However, our analysis showed a
relationship to the students' prior experience with groupwork in related activities ("Outside of this class,
how often have you participated in technology-based or design group projects, whether for courses or as
part of your   job (group   projects  involve   3 to 5   persons   working   together)?"),   rather than to  their prior
experience in maintaining notebooks, journals or blogs ("Outside of this class, have you ever kept a journal
or diary, whether private or public? Please include blogging experience in answering this question.").

           Students' answers to the frequency with which they have worked in technology-based or design
group projects were negatively correlated to both the number of graphs in students' Idea Logs as well as the
number of pages synched with the system (respectively r = -0.317, p < 0.05; and r = -0.576, p < 0.01). It

                                                            492                                                    CSCL 2007
would seem that expertise in the domain and with group interactions could have as large an effect as that of
prior friendships among teammates on a group's ability to quickly create shared meaning. Colbeck et al.,
(2000) found that prior experience with collaborative teamwork both in and outside school contributed to
the  degree    of   positive   interdependence      developed     within   teams.   We    would     have   expected     this
interdependence     to manifest    itself in performance     gains,  yet this  high   frequency   of prior experience    in
group  projects    may  be   misleading,   as  the  same     questionnaire item   was   negatively   correlated  with   the
group's grade in the project itself (r = -0.304, medium strength non-significant correlation), unlike prior
friendship with teammates. We can speculate that familiarity with groupwork practices could lead students
to underestimate the need for crafting a shared problem space with every new project. Further research is
needed to clarify this complex relationship between prior experience with collaborations and success at a
new collaborative project.

           We should discuss the suitability of using performance metrics in a design course, where objective
evaluations   of projects   tend  to be   difficult to  validate, as the appropriateness     of the  design may   be    best
appreciated by the audience for which the product is intended. The HCI Studio course we followed resolves
this challenge by inviting a panel of expert judges (instructors of design courses in related disciplines and
professionals, among others) to the final project presentations, and adding their evaluation to that of the
course's staff. Yet the question remained as to whether the team's perception of a successful project would
match  the    views and   criteria  of the   course staff  and   expert  judges.  Several  studies   have  suggested    that
grades may not accurately represent a successful collaboration (Song et al., 2004) and raised concerns that
performance metrics may be out of place, both in collaboration studies and courses based on collaboration.
Students in our study filled-in the post-experience questionnaire after their final project presentations and
demonstrations,     after hearing    the  experts'  verbal   feedback   on their  project,   and  before  receiving     their
project's grade. Yet students' belief that their project turned out well correlates highly with their project
grade (r = 0.404, p < 0.01) and their satisfaction with the project (r = 0.531, p < 0.01). Similarly, students'
satisfaction with their team interactions also correlated highly with the students' reported satisfaction with
the  final product   (r   = 0.636,   p < 0.01)   and   as mentioned     earlier, with  their project  grades   (r = 0.376,
p < 0.05). We can therefore conclude that the students' perception of quality accurately reflects that of the
judging panel and course staff, and that performance metrics are acceptable dimensions of evaluation for
this course. Moreover, it is clear that a successful collaboration and a successful product were intricately
linked for this course, even if the multicollinearity between these constructs prevents us from establishing
statistical regressions. The approach of evaluating projects through peer, expert and course staff comments
seems to both encode an objective assessment, and reflect the students' own criteria.

Conclusion and Future Directions:
           In this paper,   we  described    the Ideas  learning  ecology,   and  its appropriation   during both     a ten-
week technology probe, and during the HCI design studio course. We analyzed students' design notebooks,
class observations, questionnaire and interview responses, then discussed how collaboration patterns affect
technology    appropriation,   artifact  creation   and sharing,  and course     performance.   We   found  that students'
use of collaborative tools increases when they believe their teammates to be equally engaged and involved
in the project. Students in a successful collaboration ­ or in a team with friends ­ are likely to take fewer
notes than    those  involved    in  conflict-filled   collaborations,   and   students with    considerable   experience
working in groups may bypass critical steps in creating joint-problem solving spaces with each new group.
Further    research  would     be  needed    to  explore     the  relationship   between   groupwork     experience     and
documentation strategies.

           Analysis of the content of these students' Idea Logs beyond the scope of this paper continues in
three directions:   we  are  interested   in replicating  the  findings  regarding    graphical  content  type   that other
researchers in the area of engineering education have found (Song et al., 2004; Yang, 2003), and extending
these existing     graphical   content    taxonomies      to categorize  textual    content.  Simultaneously,     we    are
evaluating strategies to analyze and make visible the apprenticeship process (Lave & Wenger, 1991) by
which students go from novices to expert designers through the lens of their Idea Logs and their progress
through the college level curriculum, following the practices of Scribner (1986) and Pea (1993). We are
also  looking   forward     to developing    (and   testing)  effective  interaction   strategies for  taking    formative
assessments of evolving patterns of use of the Idea Logs, and for guiding students towards those patterns of

                                                             493                                                      CSCL 2007
most productive use: perhaps there are forms of collaborative scripts (O'Donnell, 1999; Dillenbourg et al.,
2006) that may yield replicable improvements to team processes and outcomes in design settings.

         From an application development perspective, we are designing several innovations for the Ideas
system, including incorporating some of the students' existing digital practices and requests. One of these
efforts is leading us to take advantage of the ease and fluidity of online photo sharing applications such as
Flickr  (http://www.flickr.com).   We  are   also  moving     towards an  implementation   that would   incorporate
display and capture of information on digital whiteboards, as well as the design of group notebooks. Group
notebooks are of particular relevance as they seek to provide an intermediate step for students to highlight
content  for  sharing  asynchronously    before,  or synchronously     during  meetings.  Integrating   physical and
digital tools  also opens up   new    avenues  for  knowledge     building  and reflective activities (Scardamalia,
2002). In addition to providing persistent common ground for groups in the midst of projects, we seek to
create  an  ecology  of augmented     tools  that facilitates the creation  of status updates, project  reports, and
electronic portfolios by highlighting vital content gathered over the course of a project. Such an ecology
can provide the ability both to capture design activity more effectively using physical tools and to better
organize and share design content using digital tools.

References:
Augustine, N. (Chair) (2005) Rising above the Gathering Storm: Energizing and Employing America for a
        Brighter   Economic    Future,  National   Academy     of  Science,    National Academy    of   Engineering,
        Institute of Medicine, National Academy Press, Washington, DC.
Aron,   A.,  E. N.  Aron,   D.  Smollan.    (1992).  Inclusion    of other  in the  selfscale and the   structure of
        interpersonal closeness. J. Personality Soc. Psych. 63, 596­612.
Bailenson,   J.N.   &  Yee,  N.   (2006).   A Longitudinal     Study   of  Task  Performance,   Head    Movements,
        Subjective Reports, Simulator Sickness, and Transformed Social Interaction in Collaborative Virtual
        Environments. PRESENCE: Teleoperators and Virtual Environments, 15(6).
Barron, B. (2003). When smart groups fail. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 12(3), 307-359.
Barron,  B.  (2004).   Learning   Ecologies  for  Technological    Fluency:  Gender   and  Experience   Differences.
        Journal Educational Computing Research, 31(1), 1-36.
Brown, J.S., Collins, A., Duguid, P. (1989) Situated Cognition and the Culture of Learning. Educational
        Researcher. 18 (1), pp. 32-42.
Chen,   H.L.,  Cannon,  D.M.,  Gabrio,   J., & Leifer,  L. (2005,    June). Using  Wikis  and  Weblogs   to Support
        Reflective  Learning   in  an Introductory   Engineering     Design  Course.  Paper   presented at the 2005
        American Society for Engineering Education Annual Conference & Exposition, Portland, Oregon.
Colbeck, C.L., Campbell, S.E. and Bjorklund, S.A. (2000). Grouping in the dark: What college students
        learn from group projects. The Journal of Higher Education, 71(1), 60-83.
Dillenbourg, P., & Jermann, P. (2006). Designing integrative scripts. In F. Fischer, H. Mandl, J. Haake, &
        I. Kollar (Eds.), Scripting computer-supported collaborative learning: Cognitive, computational and
        educational perspectives.
Dym, C., Agogino, A., Eris, O., Frey, D., and Leifer, L., (2005) "Engineering Design Thinking, Teaching,
        and Learning," Journal of Engineering Education, Vol. 94, No. 1, January 2005, pp. 103-120.
Evans, D.L., McNeill, B.W., and Beakley, G.C., (1990) "Design in Engineering Education: Past Views of
        Future Directions," Journal of Engineering Education, Vol. 79, No. 4, pp. 517­522.
Gillies, R.M. (2004) The effects of cooperative learning on junior high school students during small group
        learning. Learning and Instruction, 14, 197-213.
Goldman, S., Pea, R. D., Maldonado, H. (2004). Emerging Social Engineering in the Wireless Classroom.
        In  Y.  Kafai, W. Saldoval,    N.   Enyedy,  A.S.  Nixon,    & F.   Herrera (Eds.) Proceedings   of the   6th
        International Conference of the Learning Sciences (ICLS 2004), 222-230. Mahwah, NJ: LEA.
Hinds,  P.,  &  Mortensen,   M.   (2005)  Understanding    Conflict   in  Geographically   Distributed  Teams:   The
        Moderating     Effects  of  Shared    Identity, Shared     Context,    and  Spontaneous   Communication.
        Organization Science, 16(3), pp. 290-307.
Johnson,   D.  W.,  Johnson,   R. T., &  Smith,   K. A. (1998).   Cooperative   learning  returns to  college: What
        evidence is there that it works? Change, 30(4), 26-35.
Kelley, T., (2001), The Art of Innovation: Currency. 320 pp.
Kelley, T., (2005) The Ten Faces of Innovation: Currency. 288 pp.

                                                          494                                                  CSCL 2007
Klemmer, S., Verplank, B., Ju, W. (2005) "Teaching embodied interaction design practice." In DUX 2005:
      ACM Conference on Designing for User eXperience, San Francisco, CA, November 2005.
Lave, J.  and   Wenger,    E.  (1991)  Situated    Learning:  Legitimate   Peripheral   Participation: Cambridge
      University Press. 138 pp.
Leontiev, A.N. (1981). Problems of the Development of the Mind. Moscow: Progress Publishers.
Levesque, L. L., Wilson, J. M., & Wholey, D. R. (2001). Cognitive divergence and shared mental models
      in   software   development     project   teams.  Journal   of Organizational   Behavior.   Special  Shared
      Cognition, 22, pp. 135-144.
Mabogunje,    A., (2003),  "Towards      a Conceptual   Framework     for Predicting  Engineering   Design  Team
      Performance       Based  on  Question    Asking  Activity   Simulation,"  in Human      Behavior in Design,
      Lindemann, U. (editor), pp. 154-163, Springer-Verlag, London.
Maldonado, H., Lee, B., Klemmer, S. 2006. Technology for Design Education: A Case Study. Work in
      Progress. In Extended Abstracts of the 2006 Association for Computing Machinery's Conference on
      Human Computer Interaction (CHI 2006), 1067-1072. New York, NY: ACM Press.
Mercier, E.M., & Barron, B. (2003, August) Bunnyworld: Experience within a collaborative programming
      project in a college computer science class. Presented at the European Conference for Research on
      Learning and Instruction (EARLI 2003) in Padova, Italy.
Mercier, E., Goldman, S. & Booker, A. (2006) Collaborating to Learn, Learning to Collaborate: Finding the
      balance in a cross-disciplinary design course. In Proceedings of the 7th International Conference of
      the Learning Sciences (ICLS), 467-473. Mahwah, NJ: LEA.
O'Donnell, A. M. (1999). Structuring dyadic interaction through scripted cooperation. In A. M. O'Donnell
      & A. King (Eds.), Cognitive perspectives on peer learning. pp. 179-196. Mahwah, NJ: LEA.
Pea, R. D. (1992). Augmenting the discourse of learning with computer-based learning environments. In E.
      de Corte, M. Linn, H. Mandl, & L. Verschaffel (Eds.), Computer-based learning environments and
      problem-solving (pp. 313­344). New York: Springer-Verlag.
Pea, R.  D.  (1993). Practices  of distributed   intelligence and  designs for education.  In  G.  Salomon  (Ed.).
      Distributed cognitions. pp. 47-87. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Sabelli, N.   H., &   Pea, R.   (2004).    Six  Years Of Knowledge     Networking    In   Learning  Sciences   And
      Technologies. CILT Final Report. Menlo Park, CA: SRI International.
Scardamalia, M. (2002). Collective cognitive responsibility for the advancement of knowledge. In B. Smith
      (Ed.), Liberal education in a knowledge society. pp. 67-98. Chicago: Open Court.
Scribner, S. (1986). Thinking in action: Some characteristics of practical thought In R. J. Sternberg & R. K.
      Wagner (Eds.), Practical intelligence: Nature and origins of competence in the everyday world. pp.
      13-30. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Song, S., and Agogino, A.M., (2004) "Insights on designers' sketching activities in new product design
      teams," Proceedings, 2004 ASME Design Theory and Methodology Conference, American Society
      of Mechanical Engineers, Salt Lake City, Utah. pp. 351-360.
Verplank,   B. and   S. Kim.   (1986) Graphic    invention for  user interfaces: an  experimental  course  in  user
      interface design, ACM SIGCHI Bulletin, vol. 18(3): pp. 50­66.
Yang, M., (2003) "Concept Generation and Sketching: Correlations with Design Outcome," Proceedings,
      2003     ASME     Design  Theory     and  Methodology    Conference,    American    Society  of  Mechanical
      Engineers, Chicago, Ill.
Yeh,  R.  B.,  Liao, C., Klemmer,     S.   R., Guimbretière,  F., Lee, B., Kakaradov,     B., Stamberger,  J., and
      Paepcke, A. (2006) ButterflyNet: A Mobile Capture and Access System for Field Biology Research.
      CHI 2006: ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. pp. 571­80.

Acknowledgements:
For  his assistance  with  the ButterflyNet    browser, we   thank   Ron  Yeh. For  their patience and  assistance
throughout the quarter, we thank the teaching staff of CS147 and CS247: Bill Verplank, Terry Winograd,
Björn Hartmann,      Doantam    Phan,  and     Dan Maynes-Aminzade.       For  their insightful   suggestions  and
discussions, we thank Lars Erik Holmquist, Terry Winograd, Antoine Picard, and Emma Mercier. We are
also appreciative of our undergraduate research assistants, Isabelle Kim and Paz Hilfinger-Pardo. We are
grateful for  the support  of  Nokia  and   the  Wallenberg    Global  Learning  Network,     and thank the  study
participants for their forbearance and cooperation.

                                                         495                                                  CSCL 2007
