     Catalysts to creating representational tools and the benefits for
                                                     learning
              Lee Martin, Daniel L. Schwartz, Stanford University, 485 Lasuen Mall, Stanford, CA 94305
                            Email: lmmartin@stanford.edu, daniel.schwartz@stanford.edu

         Abstract: Thirtytwo undergraduates and six graduate students participated in a medical diagnosis
         task. They received a set of reference cases and diagnosed new patient cases by ordering and
         considering the results of medical tests. Half of the participants faced a memory burden as they
         worked on an initial set of ten new patient diagnoses. Participants then taught a confederate how to
         perform diagnoses. Finally, two new diseases were introduced, and participants diagnosed five
         new   patients. Participants were  allowed  to take notes   throughout   the study.  Both   the memory
         burden    and   the  teaching   demand    led    participants  to   create   external   representations.
         Representations used for initial diagnosis, but not for teaching, carried over into the final diagnosis
         set.  Results   show that creating   a representation   was   initially inefficient, but led    to better
         performance and learning when participants were asked to adapt to new diseases. Also, a much
         greater proportion of graduate students than undergraduates created representations.

Introduction
         Kirsh (1996) notes that "introducing a tool is one of the easiest ways to change an agent's action repertoire,
for now it is possible to do things previously unattainable, or unattainable in a single step" (p. 438). Because the
introduction of a tool fundamentally alters the possibilities for action within a problem space, it is an important
external  adaptation  that changes    one's own   possibilities for action,  thought,   and   communication.   This   study
examines the creation and use of one important class of tools: representational tools, such as trees, diagrams, and
tables. Representational tools are important in the work of many disciplines, and they are important in education as
well. We are interested in the factors that motivate people to make representational tools and in the effects these
tools have on learning and problem solving. Our study is designed around a medical diagnosis task that allows
participants to succeed with or without the use of a representational tool. We focus on two research questions:

1. What factors influence whether or not people create a representational tool?
2. What are the effects of participant created representational tools on problem solving and preparation for future
learning?

         We predicted participants would be more likely to create a representational tool if 1) they could not rely on
the situation to support their "unaided" cognition, and/or 2) they had to teach a confederate to complete the task. We
also predicted that creating a representational tool might initially impair performance, but would prepare people to
learn more quickly when given modified problems.

Design and Procedure
         Thirtytwo    undergraduate   students  with no   medical   training participated in   a medical    diagnosis task.
Participants received a set of twelve reference cases. Each case resembled a simple medical chart, with medical tests
and associated results. The participants' task was to use the reference cases to diagnose new patients with one of the
six diseases represented in the reference cases. For each patient, participants could order a variety of medical tests.
They were told to minimize the number of tests ordered for each patient. Blank paper was available for note taking
at all times.

         Participants were randomly assigned to one of two conditions: the continuous access condition or the
intermittent access condition. In Part 1, Original Case Set, participants solved 10 cases or worked for up to 30
minutes. Those in the intermittent access condition were told that they could look at the reference cases as much as
they wanted    to between  diagnoses,  but   they had to  place  the   reference  cases face  down   while   performing  a
diagnosis. Those   in  the continuous  access   condition were   allowed   unrestricted  access   to the reference  cases.
Otherwise, the conditions were identical. In Part 2, Teaching, participants taught a confederate how to perform
diagnoses. In Part 3, Novel Case Set, two new diseases were introduced, for a total of eight diseases, and participants

                                                           496                                                    CSCL 2007
diagnosed five new cases. The new cases included both old and new diseases. Importantly, for the Novel Case Set
both conditions had continuous access to the reference cases, so it is possible to see if the earlier manipulation would
have a lasting effect even when the condition differences were removed.

            Data sources included the order in which tests were requested, the final diagnosis, the time spent on each
diagnosis, and any representations that were created by the participants. Data on the order in which tests were
requested was further coded to determine the optimality of their search..

Results and Discussion
            Across the conditions, participants created a variety of representations including ordered lists and decision
trees. Representations were coded into three categories: IfThen, when representations included ifthen rules Simple
List, when representations did not include ifthen rules and No Tool, when no notes were made. The contrast
between conditions had an effect on the frequency of representational tool creation or modification (see Table 1).

Table 1: Creation and Modification of Representations by Condition

                                                                         Part of the Experiment
Condition                        Representation         Original Case Set           Teaching       Novel Case Set
                                 No Tool                            13                  6                   13
Continuous Access                Simple List                        2                   0                   2
                                 IfThen                             1                   10                  1
                                 No Tool                            2                   5                   4
Intermittent Access              Simple List                        12                  4                   7
                                 IfThen                             2                   7                   5

            Notably, participants in the intermittent access condition were more likely than those in the continuous
access condition to create or modify a representational tool in Part 3, Novel Cases, even though both conditions had
identical instructions and identical access to resources during this part of the experiment. Those who created tools
for the Original Case Set tended to modify them for Novel Cases, and those who did not create tools for the Original
Case Set     did    not  create     them    for Novel      Cases.   Teaching      a   confederate   led   many      participants      to   create a
representation. However, for those participants in the continuous access condition, creating tools for teaching did not
lead to tool use or creation for the following Novel Case Set. It appears that tools for teaching do not necessarily
translate into tools for doing.

                                    Original Case Set                                                     Novel Case Set

                          No Representation   Made a Representation                              No Representation   Made a Representation

      Start                    1        2     3    4    5   6   78     9  10  End         Start               11    12    13  14    15 End

      Start  1        2    3      4    5    6   7    8   9  10  End                       Start11     12       13      14        15   End

       0        200       400      600      800      1000      1200     1400     1600       0       100       200       300       400       500
                                          Time (s)                                                               Time (s)

                                       Figure 1. Time Course and Creation of Representations

            Problem solving speed gives a rough indication of the implementation cost of creating a tool. Figure 1

                                                                         497                                                               CSCL 2007
                            Weighted Optimality Ratio
shows when participants who did and did not create representations began each diagnosis problem. Participants who
created representations for the Original Case Set were slower to begin the task, and finished later than those who did
not create representations. However the inefficiency of creating a representation was only temporary. Those who
created a representation for the Novel Case Set again began working on the first problem later, but they finished at
approximately the same time as those who did not create representations. That is, despite the initial time cost of
creating representational tools, participants who created representations caught up by the end of the experiment.

       By design,    there                            was   little variation   in   accuracy  across  participants,    but   there  were variations in the
optimality of participants' diagnoses. Each diagnosis was scored with a weighted optimality ratio: a measure of how
close the diagnosis came to a perfectly optimal choice and ordering of medical tests, with a maximal score of 1.0.
The contrast between conditions was not strongly associated with differences on this measure. However, creation of
a representational  tool did                              predict  performance.      Figure  2   shows  participants'     performance    over time,  with
participants grouped by the most structured type of tool that they used for diagnoses. The optimality of performance
was mediated by the presence of a representational tool: those with IfThen tools outperformed those with No Tool
or a Simple List.

                                                                            Performance Over Time

                                                       1
                                                      0.9
                                                      0.8
                                                      0.7
                                                      0.6
                                                      0.5
                                                      0.4                                                        IfThen Structure
                                                                                                                 Simple List
                                                      0.3                                                        No Tool
                                                      0.2
                                                      0.1              Original Case Set                 Novel Case Set
                                                       0
                                                            1   2    3   4   5    6   7   8   9   10      11   12  13  14    15
                                                                                    Diagnosis Number
                                                               Figure 2. Task Performance by Type of Tool

       Finally, data from a sample of six graduate students provides an interesting point of contrast. While only
19% of undergraduates in the continuous access condition created a representation for the Original Case Set, 100%
of graduate students in the same condition did so. Although the underlying cause of this difference cannot be
directly inferred from the data, the result suggests that graduate students may have developed an adaptive form of
representational expertise for dealing with complex information management tasks such as this one.

Conclusion
       These results suggest the power of representational tools, not only for efficient problem solving, but also
for adapting to new problem demands. The experimental contrast influenced problem solving and preparation for
future learning, as mediated by the representational tools that participants created. Surprisingly, tools for teaching
did not necessary translate into tools for doing. Experiences creating and using representational tools increased the
chances of doing so again in the future, both within the context of the experiment, and, we presume, over longer
timescales, as shown by the contrast between undergraduates and graduate students.

References
Kirsh, D. (1996) Adapting the environment instead of oneself. Adaptive Behavior, 4, 415452.

Acknowledgments
This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant SLC0354453. Any
opinions, findings and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation.

                                                                                         498                                                      CSCL 2007
