     ProBoPortable: Does the Cellular Phone Software Promote
            Emergent Division of Labor in Project-Based Learning?

                Toshio Mochizuki, Center for R&D of Higher Education, The University of Tokyo,
                    7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-0033, Japan, tmochi@mochi-lab.net
                           Hiroshi Kato, National Institute of Multimedia Education,
                     2-12 Wakaba, Mihama-ku, Chiba, 261-0014, Japan, hiroshi@kato.com
                  Kazaru Yaegashi, College of Business Administration, Ritsumeikan University,
                      1-1-1 Noji Higashi, Kusatsu, Shiga, 525-8577, Japan, mail@kazaru.jp
               Toshihisa Nishimori, Center for R&D of Higher Education, The University of Tokyo,
                     7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-0033, Japan, nisimori@utmeet.jp
       Yusuke Nagamori, Graduate School of Comprehensive Human Sciences, University of Tsukuba,
                     1-1-1 Tennodai, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, 305-8577, Japan, mail@nagamori.jp
                                   Shinobu Fujita, Spiceworks Corporation,
                 19-13 Aizumicho, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo, 160-0005, Japan, fujita@spiceworks.co.jp

       Abstract: This paper describes the design and evaluation of a cellular phone application called
       "ProBoPortable", which displays information regarding the task status and division of labor in a
       project-based  learning (PBL). The      authors have   developed a cellular  phone application  that
       cooperates   with a Web-based  groupware     to  enhance   the  learners' reorganization of learning
       activity in PBL. The research conducted in an undergraduate course revealed that ProBoPortable
       can enhance awareness regarding the status of learners' collaborations in PBL.

Introduction
       In recent years, the project-based learning (PBL) is being extensively used as a major educational method
in higher education (Gijbels, et al., 2005). PBL is a type of learning activity in which learners study along with
other learners whilst working toward a common goal and collaborating on tasks as a group. Throughout the PBL, the
learners rarely share the same task parallel with that of other learners. They prefer to divide a certain part of the task
into smaller tasks and allocate each task to individual group members.

      Even in cases where the rules for division of labor are institutionalized by a teacher or an organization,
people sometimes cross the borders of the division and coordinate their tasks across the borders with other people as
the occasion may demand. For instance, if the task monitor gives the task performer some instructions when the
monitor notices the task performer's errors, it implies that the monitor becomes involved in performing the task.
Thus, division of labor is reorganized in a more or less ad-lib and ad hoc manner in order to progress the task
uninterrupted and error free. Kato et al. (2004) termed such a cross-over of division of labor as "emergent division
of labor (EDL)." They argued that EDL should provide rich opportunities for learning wherein scaffolding           takes
place naturally, and EDL is subject to occur in open environment where the learners can see what they do each other.

      However, in Japanese universities, undergraduate students get very little time to interact with each other on
campus; for example, they can meet only in the classroom, while eating lunch, etc. Therefore, the authors have
developed a web-based groupware for PBL called "ProBo" (formerly "Project Board"), in order to enhance the
learners' recognition of their EDL in both classrooms and distributed environments. ProBo has been designed to
visualize and allocate tasks among the learners in a group. The practical evaluation revealed that ProBo promoted
the learners to monitor their personal learning activity but the other members' activities in the group. (Nishimori, et
al., 2005).

Design and Development of ProBoPortable
       In order to enhance the awareness among the learners for the EDL, the authors designed and developed a
cellular phone application called "ProBoPortable," which is based on ProBo. ProBoPortable was designed to work
as wallpaper on the learner's cellular phone screen in order to keep them updated as regards to the progress of their
project and stimulate the division of labor as soon as the requirement or inevitability arises. In accordance with the
requirements of the EDL, the authors selected the necessary information to confirm and reorganize the division of
labor, such as the number of tasks to be completed by each learner, the progress of each task, etc. (see Table 1).

                                                          512                                               CSCL 2007
           ProBoPortable describes the learners who have to complete their tasks as warehouse keepers (see Figure 1).
If a learner performs a task, the corresponding box shifts slightly. The other learners can observe this change when
they activate their cellular phones. When two or more learners collaborate to perform a task, the corresponding box
in each of their positions moves. When the learner(s) completes the task, the corresponding box drops down and the
amount     of money   increases; all   the learners  can observe    the    completion of the   task. In accordance       with the
requirements of the EDL, ProBoPortable indicates whether each learner has confirmed his/her status of the PBL via
ProBo or ProBoPortable. Thus, the learners are expected to observe the status of the other members on a daily basis,
perform their tasks, and reorganize their division of labor as and when required.

Table 1: Relationship between Visualized Information on ProBoPortable and ProBo.
Information              Index                Target                          Expression
Member(s)                Each member          Warehouse keepers and           Each of the members is color-coded
                                              their facial colors
Number of Tasks          Number of boxes      Box(es)                         If a new task is added on ProBo, a new box is
                                                                              added from above
Progress of each task    Shift length         Box corresponding to the        If a learner carries forward a task, the
                                              task                            corresponding box shifts slightly
Approaching the time     Color                Corresponding box               If the deadline approaches, the color of the
limit for the task       (normal or red)                                      corresponding box changes to red
Progress of the          Background color     Backgrounds of all the          If the progress of the project shows a lower value
project                  (normal or red)      members of the project          than the benchmark, the color changes to red.
                         Money                Amount of money                 If the task is completed, the amount increases
Whether or not each      Background color     Relevant learner(s)             If the learner has not confirmed the status of EDL
learner has confirmed    (of relevant                                         via ProBo/ProBoPortable, his background color
the status               learner(s))                                          changes to black

                    Figure 1. ProBoPortable Interface (displayed on the cellular phone screen)

Evaluation of ProBoPortable in an Undergraduate Course
           The research was conducted in an undergraduate course taught by one of the authors as an adjunct lecturer
at a university in Japan. The research took place between June 5 and July 10, 2006, during which each section met
six times.    The common objective of each group was to conduct a presentation on the current situation and the
prospects of one of the various topics associated with information communication technology. Each group had to
conduct a survey on the assigned topic and make suggestions on the topic for future society. A total of 94 students
participated in the course. The students were divided into 20 groups, each group comprising 4 to 6 individuals.

           This research was formulated using the split-class design (Carver, 2006) to evaluate the software being
used in the classroom with respect to the context of the course taught in the classroom. At the beginning of the
evaluation, the authors announced that students taking the class could participate in this evaluation. Based on the
group   structure   and the preferred    topics, the  authors     selected 11 students   from  those  who  applied       for their
cooperation in the research. ProBoPortable was installed in each of these 11 students' cellular phones, which they
had been using from before. ProBoPortable worked and appeared in the background color of their cellular phone
throughout the four-week period starting from June 12. They also used ProBo with other students.

                                                              513                                                        CSCL 2007
         The authors analyzed the operation log of all the students operating ProBo and ProBoPortable from June 12
when they started using the ProBoPortable through July 10. In addition, the questionnaire was administrated after
the final class; this contained self-evaluation of PBL regarding the awareness of division of labor during group work.

Results: Does ProBoPortable Promote Awareness among Learners for EDL?
         In order to accurately confirm the effect of ProBoPortable, the Mann-Whitney U-test was administered to
examine the differences between students who used ProBoPortable (n = 11, hereafter referred to as "Experimental
Group") and those who did not (n = 83, hereafter referred to as "Control Group"), with regard to the students' self-
evaluation of their PBL on a 5-point Likert scale (1: strongly disagree ­ 5: strongly agree).

         According to the test results, significant differences were observed in items as "I was aware of the progress
of each task undertaken by the other members" (Experimental Group ave.= 4.55, Control Group ave.= 3.17, U =
138.0, p < .001), "I think that the other group members were also aware of the progress of my tasks" (Experimental
Group   ave.= 3.72,  Control  Group   ave.=   2.75, U  =  172.5,  p < .01), and   "I have  adjusted the  pace   of my  task
according to the others' pace, which I monitored" (Experimental Group ave.= 3.45, Control Group ave.= 2.43, U =
233.0, p < .01). These results indicated that the ProBoPortable was effective in not only understanding others' task
status but also confirming whether or not the others were aware of one's progress in the task, and to flexibly adjust
one's own task as necessary by a continuous monitoring of others' status as well as one's own.

         On   analyzing  the  operation  log  (the  number   of   people accessing   each  function  per   day) of  ProBo,
significant differences were observed between Experimental Group and Control Group with regard to the access of
the ToDo  list, which    structures the PBL   tasks, (the  Experimental  Group    averaged   0.175  times,  Control Group
averaged 0.101 times, U = 273.5, p < .05) and the Scheduler, which confirms the prospects of PBL (Experimental
Group   averaged 0.357   times,  Control  Group   averaged  0.142   times,  U  =  311.0, p <  .05). The  group   using the
ProBoPortable   also  exhibited  higher   points  with regard    to the  number   of  accesses to   the profile of  a  task
(Experimental Group averaged 1.11 times, Control Group averaged 0.86 times) and the number of times to a task
was   modified  (Experimental   Group    averaged    0.12  times, Control   Group    averaged  0.08  times),  although  no
significant statistical difference was observed. Therefore, the results suggest that ProBoPortable promoted the self-
review of the entire PBL task structure.

         Furthermore, significant differences or trends were observed with regard to items such as "From time to
time, I wanted  to  talk with other  member(s)    outside  the  classroom  to  negotiate the protocol   for further project
proceedings" (Experimental Group ave. = 4.09, Control Group ave.= 3.39, U = 250.0, p < .05) and "I frequently
contacted other  group   member(s)   outside  the   classroom  in connection   with  the group activities"  (Experimental
Group   ave.=  2.73, Control  Group     ave.= 2.02,  U   = 274.0,   p <  .10). It suggests   that ProBoPortable    presents
opportunities to generate learning activities and mutual adjustment outside the classroom.

         These results demonstrate that the mutual confirmation of the task status by using ProBoPortable stimulates
the relative evaluation of one's own task status and encourages one to perform ones own tasks.

References
Carver S.M. (2006). Assessing for Deep Understanding. In R. K. Sawyer (Ed.) The Cambridge Handbook of the
         Learning Sciences (pp. 205-223), New York: Cambridge University Press.
Gijbels, D., Dochy, F., Van den Bossche, P. & Segers, M. (2005). Effects of Problem-based Learning: A Meta
         Analysis from the Angle of Assessment. Review of Educational Research, 75(1), 27-61.
Kato, H., Mochizuki, T., Funaoi, H. & Suzuki, H. (2004). A Principle for CSCL Design: Emergent Division of
         Labor, Proceedings of ED-MEDIA 2004 conference (Lugano, Switzerland, June 2004), pp.2652-2659.
Nishimori, T., Kato, H., Mochizuki, T., Yaegashi, K., Hisamatsu, S. & Ozawa, S. (2005). Development and Trial of
         Project-Based Learning Support System in Higher Education. Japan Journal of Educational Technology,
         29(3), 289-297 (in Japanese)

Acknowledgments
A part of this research has received assistance of Grant-in-Aids for Scientific Research (B) (Subject No. 16300280,
representative: Hiroshi   Kato),    and for Young    Scientists   (B) (Subject   No.  17700607,    representative:  Toshio
Mochizuki), from the Japanese Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology.

                                                            514                                                  CSCL 2007
