                  The integration of synchronous communication
                              across dual interaction spaces

                Martin Mühlpfordt, Fraunhofer IPSI, Darmstadt, martin.muehlpfordt@ipsi.fraunhofer.de
                       Gerry Stahl, Drexel University, Philadelphia, gerry.stahl@drexel.edu

        Abstract: Dual interaction spaces--that combine text chat with a shared graphical work area--
        have been developed in recent years as CSCL applications to support the synchronous construc-
        tion and discussion of shared artifacts by distributed small groups of students. However, the sim-
        ple juxtaposition of the two spaces raises numerous issues for users: How can objects in the shared
        workspace be referenced from within the chat? How can users track and comprehend all the vari-
        ous simultaneous activities? How can participants coordinate their multifaceted actions? We pre-
        sent three steps toward integration of activities across separate interaction spaces: support for deic-
        tic references, implementation of a history feature and display of social awareness information.

Introduction
        The construction, modification, annotation and arrangement of shared artifacts are key activities in many
collaborative learning settings. Software systems now exist that permit synchronous coordinated manipulation of
such shared artifacts even for geographically distributed users, by providing a shared graphical workspace. A shared
workspace in a collaborative environment is an area of the software interface that allows a participant to construct
and manipulate a graphical object so that the object and the effects of the manipulation appear in the corresponding
area of the other participants' interfaces, essentially in real time. These shared workspaces may be used for creating
and using external representations of knowledge (Whittaker, 2003), for collaboratively completing design tasks (Re-
imann & Zumbach, 2001), for working together with simulations (Landsman & Alterman, 2003; Jermann, 2004), or
for  solving math  problems  (Stahl, 2007). The  design   of  shared workspaces is  an  important topic in computer-
supported collaborative learning (CSCL).

        Learning at a distance requires a medium of communication. The medium can be auditory, audio-visual or
text-based. For collaborative learning, textual synchronous communication with chat has two main advantages over
audio and even face-to-face: For the chat poster, writing encourages a more careful planning of one's contribution; it
fosters reflection on the discourse. For the recipient, the communication is persistent and available in symbolic form
that "may    be searched, browsed,   replayed, annotated, visualized,  restructured and recontextualized"  (Erickson,
1999).

        The combination of a shared workspace with chat makes two regions for interaction available to a group in
the form of a dual interaction space (Dillenbourg & Traum, 2006). The chat provides a medium of communication
for the exchange of textual messages; the shared workspace allows for the collaborative construction and manipula-
tion of shared artifacts that are relevant to the task at hand. In most groupware systems for synchronous distance
learning, the chat and graphical workspace simply appear next to each other as two visually distinct areas of the ap-
plication that are largely functionally independent of each other. This introduces a number of problems for the users
(Suthers, Girardeau & Hundhausen, 2003; van Bruggen, 2003; Pata & Sarapuu, 2003). For instance, if a group of
students want to create a concept map in the shared workspace consisting of arguments pro and con and their rela-
tionships to each other, this raises the following questions:
        1.    How can objects and relationships within the workspace be referenced from a posting in the chat area?
        2.    How can the participants grasp and understand the relationships among each other of the activities and
              messages that are part of a single collaborative interaction but are distributed across the two interaction
              spaces? E.g., how can one establish that the message, "I agree," is a response to the introduction of a
              particular new node in the argumentation graph?
        3.    How can the participants coordinate their actions in the graphical workspace and in the chat with each
              other? E.g., when and by whom should an argument introduced in the chat be added to the concept
              map?

                                                          518                                                 CSCL 2007
       A better software integration of chat and workspace is needed to overcome such difficulties (Dimitracopou-
lou, 2005; Suthers et al., 2003; McCarthy & Monk, 1994). But from the perspective of a software developer the
question, which functionalities must be provided to support the collaboration in dual interaction spaces, is unan-
swered; the claim for better integration is too general to guide the design of the learning environment. This became
apparent in the workshop "Dual interaction spaces" at CSCL 2005 in Taipei organized by Pierre Dillenbourg and the
CSCL SIG of Kaleidoscope.

       In this paper we    propose integration measures    for  three relevant aspects of the connection of chat and
shared workspace:
·   deictic referencing,
·   coordinating simultaneous activities, and
·   understanding of past interactions.
These problems are analyzed in the next section. In a third section we will describe the integration measures. Then
in a section on experiences with ConcertChat, a collaboration environment that implements these measures will be
presented, before we conclude with questions for future work.

       For the sake of simplicity this papers describes our development of the integration measures as a linear
process starting with problem analysis that leads to certain functionalities. As we know from CSCL research, this
idealized development seldom holds. Our system was developed during the last 5 years. We started with assump-
tions of what is needed by the users, developed first prototypes and used them in serious learning settings. The
analysis of those real collaborations provided us insights into the complex nature of mediated collaborative meaning
making in dual interaction spaces. Our focus gradually shifted from an individual point of view (what is needed by a
user) to a group cognition (Stahl, 2006) perspective taking into account the creative, simultaneous, interwoven inter-
actions among the team members.

Problems in combined interaction spaces
       A shared workspace can play at least two contrasting roles within a collaborative session. It can, for in-
stance, provide the central location for the joint activity of the participants, with the chat playing a supportive role in
discussing and disambiguating the activities that take place in the workspace. Conversely, the chat discourse can
dominate, with the graphical workspace serving as a resource for clarification or for illustrating things that are hard
to articulate in words. Which way communication is divided between the dual spaces depends upon the current task,
the meta-communicative skills of the participants and the respective affordances of the two media (Pata & Sarapuu,
2003; Dillenbourg & Traum, 2006). The activities in the chat and the shared workspace are typically intimately in-
terrelated. To the extent that the technology supports it, participants may coordinate their use of the dual spaces in
creative and subtle ways (see e.g., Stahl et al 2006).

       A prominent characteristic of chat is the delay between the production of a message by its author and its
presentation to others when it is complete. This has two main advantages: that the author can revise the message
before sending it (Clark & Brennan, 1991) and that several people can be producing messages at the same time,
unlike in spoken conversation. However, it also leads to the constant danger of sequential incoherence, which forces
the participants to work additionally on explicitly coordinating the content and structure of their interactions. The
problem is that, unlike in conversation, in chat the appearance of responses often do not immediately temporally
follow the messages to which they are responding. The coherence of interaction is highly dependent upon the re-
sponse structure between messages. But in the time it takes for someone to prepare and send a response to one note,
a note from someone else can be posted, causing "interrupted turn adjacency" (Herring, 1999). A number of specific
communication strategies may be evoked to deal with this (Fuks, Pimentel, & de Lucena, 2006; Lonchamp, 2006;
Murray, 2000). In order to minimize the delay in responding, mistakes in syntax and wording are accepted and many
abbreviations or acronyms are used (Garcia & Jacobs, 1999). Cohesive devices like explicitly naming the addressee
of a contribution (Nash, 2005) are used to make references explicit.

       The fact that several people can be producing messages at the same time means that the common conversa-
tional rules of turn-taking do not apply (Sacks, Schegloff, & Jefferson, 1974). The resulting parallelism can scarcely
be avoided, and must particularly be taken into account when multiple topics are discussed simultaneously (1). This
problem is eased by the fact that the flow of chat is documented in the persistent transcript, which is visible--at least
for the last several postings. The chat window serves not only as the location of communications, but also as a repre-

                                                           519                                                CSCL 2007
sentation of the temporal order of the messages. In contrast, the graphical workspace usually only shows the current
state. All information about the actions and actors who brought about this state is ephemeral.

       These problems resulting from the visual and functional juxtaposition of chat and workspace have the con-
sequence that it is hard for users to track and specify relations of content and sequentiality between the textual con-
tributions and the graphical activities. Specifically, there are three major problems:
·   Deictic references. An important means of communicative expression during collaboration with shared work-
    spaces is deixis (Barnard, May & Salber, 1996; Clark & Wilkes-Gibbs, 1986)--the referencing of objects, rela-
    tions and actions in the shared visual environment. When chat is used as the communication medium, deictic
    referencing is associated with high production costs and potentially also higher levels of ambiguity because ges-
    tural pointing is not possible. Purely textual descriptions of the object or of its specific position are obvious so-
    lutions, but there is no guarantee that such a description will be intelligible to others when they receive it be-
    cause another user of the shared workspace may have moved or even deleted the object in the meantime.
·   Decontextualization of actions and messages. When collaborating in a dual interaction space, participants inter-
    act with each other through chat messages and modifications to artifacts in the workspace. Whereas the persis-
    tent chat history represents the complete sequentiality of the discursive contributions, the same does not hold for
    the workspace. Both the ordering and the intermediate results of actions in the shared workspace are fleeting.
    This has two direct consequences. First, the necessary context for interpreting messages that reference artifacts
    in the workspace can quickly disappear. This defeats the important advantage of the persistent discourse history,
    which can support retrospective reflection. Second, the phenomenon of interrupted turn adjacency, described
    above, is heightened. During the time it takes for one person to respond, others can not only insert new mes-
    sages but also modify referenced graphical artifacts.
·   The coordination of communication and interaction. In a dual interaction space, different participants can si-
    multaneously be typing and posting chat messages or producing objects in the workspace. In collaboration,
    these various activities are interrelated: a message can announce or comment upon an action in the shared work-
    space and a workspace action can respond to or clarify a chat message. The awareness of the activities of the
    other people is a prerequisite for the construction of common ground (Dillenbourg & Traum, 2006). In chat, the
    chat history documents the sequence of discursive activities of the participants and the usual system messages
    when someone enters of leaves the room provide basic information about who is present. A series of interface
    features have been established to support coordination in shared workspaces (Gutwin & Greenberg, 2002), help-
    ing with turn taking and the anticipation of actions by other participants. For instance, objects that were just se-
    lected by users might be color-coded to indicate who is using them and the location of the user's mouse can be
    indicated (Stefik, Bobrow, Foster, Lanning & Tatar, 1987). Similarly, many chat systems display a message
    near the chat input area if someone is typing. However, if all these awareness techniques are combined in an
    environment with dual interactions spaces, then they can overwhelm the limited attentional abilities of humans.
    The fleeting awareness messages scattered across the interface require users to pay constant attention to their
    whole screen.

Support through integration
       People collaborating in a dual interaction space are exposed to a series of problems that derive from the
visually and functionally separated nature of the chat and workspace components. Three software mechanisms will
now be presented that integrate these components with each other:
       1.  An explicit referencing tool that makes possible deictic references from the chat to the workspace.
       2.  An integrated history function that documents the on-going collaboration process consisting of the ac-
           tivities in the chat and in the shared workspace, and lets users review it.
       3.  A visually integrated social awareness display that supports the perception of the simultaneous activi-
           ties of the multiple participants in both areas.

       To illustrate these integration measures, a shared whiteboard will be described as a common workspace for
the collaborative creation of drawings, concept graphs and mind maps. See Figure 1 for an example showing the
most important interface elements.

Mechanism 1: Explicit References
       The concept of explicit references (2) addresses the difficulty of deictic referencing in the textual medium
of chat. Pointing gestures are frequently used in face-to-face conversation (Bekker, Olson & Olson, 1995), for in-

                                                          520                                                  CSCL 2007
stance to identify objects and to clarify relationships among objects. Similarly, explicit references in chat allow one
to associate a chat contribution with objects in the shared workspace and with other chat messages using graphical
connectors. A graphical reference to a chat message can point to the whole message, a single word or some portion
of the message. A reference can also point to an object or a region in the workspace. In the simplest case, one might
want to point to a particular object, but in other situations to just a specific part of the object or else to a spatial con-
stellation of several objects. So a number of different forms of referencing must be supported.

                                                                              Notice of activity

                                                                                                       Indicator of activi-
                                                                                                       ty in the shared
                                                                                                       whiteboard

                                                                                                       Indicators of ex-
                                                                                                       plicit references to
                                                                                                       other messages or
                                                                                                       to the whiteboard

 Slider for exploring
 the artifact history

                                                                 Explicit graphi-                      Notices of activity
                                                                 cal reference to
                                                                 an object

Figure 1. This screenshot shows the state of the ConcertChat interface after the posting of a message with an explicit
reference to a textbox in the shared workspace. Rtoledosj is currently working on the large textbox while Euclid is
typing a chat message. The interface features for showing explicit references, the workspace history and awareness
messages have been annotated.

        For summary statements in the chat--e.g., "These two arguments contradict each other"--multiple refer-
ences can be made      to relevant messages and objects. Just   as  with gestural  pointing, the  effective meaning     of  a
graphical reference is given only once both the gestural and verbal messages are given. Thus, a reference can be
used to clarify a "response-to-that-message" relation as well as to indicate a "related-to-this-object" relation.

        The usability of an explicit referencing tool depends upon its effect on the media-dependent costs of pro-
duction and reception (Clark & Brennan, 1991). In order to keep these costs low, appropriate interaction possibilities
must be available for the easy production of references and for the visualization of references.

        In order to maintain the chronological order of the chat history--rather than threading it--with the associ-
ated advantages for retroactive reflection, a reference is represented by a graphical arrow going from the referencing
chat message to the referenced object or message. As soon as the referencing message is displayed, the accompany-
ing reference arrow is also displayed, as illustrated in Figure 1.

                                                            521                                                  CSCL 2007
Mechanism 2: Artifact history
       In collaboration in dual interaction spaces, the actions in the shared workspace and the messages in the chat
are but two facets of a single activity. While the chat displays a persistent history of the collaborative discourse,
there is no corresponding history display for the workspace, let alone an integrated history for the whole collabora-
tion. In technical terms, an artifact history of the objects in the workspace is a chronological collection of the vari-
ous different versions or circumstances of the workspace resulting from the manipulations of the participants. In a
shared whiteboard, every creation, movement and editing of an object changes the state of the workspace (3). The
provision of an artifact history has two goals: to preserve the workspace context at various times and to represent its
evolutionary process. The context of the workspace at the time when a chat message was being produced is impor-
tant to know in order to interpret the message­particularly if the message explicitly references artifacts in the work-
space. The artifact history permits the reconstruction of that context and encodes that context in the software repre-
sentation of the reference. As needed, the historical context corresponding to a message of interest can be recon-
structed and displayed. The other goal is to allow the normally fleeting artifact history to be replayed. The chrono-
logically ordered developmental steps can be played back like the frames of a film, making possible reflection on the
whole collaborative construction. Reflection in the group discussion is facilitated by the combination of being able
to review the past developmental stages of the shared workspace and being able to point to a particular stage with an
explicit reference.

Mechanism 3: Integrated activity awareness
       The integration of activity displays has the goal of making it easier to be aware of the simultaneous activity
of the other participants. Awareness of these activities is a prerequisite for constructing and maintaining a mutual
understanding of the chat messages and the changes to the graphical artifacts--and therefore provides a necessary
foundation for collaboration. In a chat environment, the chat history documents all the activities--both the individ-
ual messages and information about participant presence. This chronological documentation of activity suggests that
it could serve as a representation of all activity within a dual interaction space as well.

       With chat, the process of producing a message is not directly perceivable by the other participants. The ex-
tent to which a long lasting and cognitively strenuous activity in a shared workspace is observable for the other par-
ticipants depends upon the nature of the workspace and the granularity of the operations that are displayed for eve-
ryone. For instance, the editing of a textbox annotation in the shared workspace may only become visible for the
others when the edit is completed. Activity awareness notifications have been established to support the coordina-
tion of activities like joint editing, so someone knows not to try to edit an object that someone else is currently edit-
ing. In a dual interaction space, however, it is necessary to visually integrate these notices that are associated with
the locations of different individual activities. If one participant wants to post a chat message in response to a contri-
bution from another (such as responding to an annotation in the shared workspace with: "I would say that differ-
ently"), then she might hold off doing this if she is informed that he has just begun to make a change in the work-
space that might very well serve to clarify his original contribution. Conversely, if he is informed that she is typing a
chat message, he may delay his change in anticipation of a new objection. Both cases of course presume that the
information about the activities is perceived. This can be supported by displaying the awareness information at the
appropriate location (see Figure 1).

Integrated dual interaction spaces in use
       The described integration measures are implemented in a system called ConcertChat (4). It was developed
during the last 5 years. Since 2004, the Virtual Math Teams Project (5) has been using a collaboration environment
based on ConcertChat for the discussion and solution of mathematical problems by small groups of students. A de-
tailed case study of how deictic referencing was conducted in this context using the ConcertChat functionality in the
dual interaction space is presented by Stahl et al. (2006). Further studies of the use of ConcertChat's explicit refer-
encing tool are reported by Mühlpfordt & Wessner (2005). These provide some evidence that the participants were
able to employ effective communication strategies with the help of the explicit referencing.

       For researchers, the persistence of all activities in a dual interaction space provides the possibility of con-
ducting fine-grained analyses of group interaction, as illustrated by Stahl et al. (2006). To support this, a replay ver-
sion of ConcertChat has been developed that allows all the activities to be repeatedly reviewed, with the chat and
workspace histories precisely coordinated. As mentioned in the introduction, the in-depth analysis of collaborative

                                                          522                                                   CSCL 2007
meaning making of groups learning together in the ConcertChat environment provided us insights in how the func-
tionalities are used. The next three examples illustrate that.

       All examples are       taken from  Spring     Fest 2006     of the Virtual Math  Teams        (VMT)  service      at
http://mathforum.org. The collaborative context was set by organizing a contest: members of the most collaborative
teams would win prizes. Students were recruited globally through teachers who were involved in other Math Forum
activities. The teams in the excerpts consisted of students from Singapore (example 1) and from the US (example 2
and 3), as well as a facilitator from the Math Forum, who provided technical assistance. At the beginning of the first
sessions the facilitators briefly explained the functionalities of the learning environment to the groups. Pedagogi-
cally, the topic for discussion was an open-ended exploration of geometric patterns. An initial pattern of squares
formed from sticks was given. The students were to figure out the formulae for the number of squares and the num-
ber of sticks at stage N first, and then explore other patterns that they or other teams invented.

                                                                                                           Question

                                                                                                           Textual
                                                                                                           reference

                                                                                                           Translation
                                                                                                           into explicit
                                                                                                           reference

Figure 2. Explicit referencing must be learned. Clarice2 "imitates" an explicit reference to a textbox ("<----"), and
Amanda2 is actually doing it.

       Example 1 illustrates how the referencing tool is established by the group to ease deictic references. Figure
2 shows a screen shot of a VMT session with 4 participants, Amanda2, Clarice2, Wang, and Dshia. In that situation
the group reflects on what aspects of the mathematical problem at hand they already solved. Wang asks "so how
many formulas have we come up with huh?" and both Amanda2 and Clarice2 respond in the subsequent messages.
Here the interesting response is from Clarice2: "<----". With that she textually simulates an explicit reference. In
contrast to other group members Clarice2 has never used the referencing tool before, so it might be that she does not
know how to create one. Wang's reply with two question marks ("??") indicates a lack of understanding. Also
Amanda2, while providing an interpretation ("I think she meant look on the left at the text box?"), closes the mes-
sage with a question mark. With her subsequent message ("in the text box") Clarice2 again tries to establish a refer-
ence to the textbox on the shared whiteboard. Amanda2 finally translates this into a posting with an explicit refer-
ence to the textbox with all the collected formulas.

       While Clarice2 is a novice in using the referencing tool, Bwang8--in a second example--uses it creatively
to incorporate a formula written on the shared whiteboard into his explanation of a derived formula (see Figure 3)
for the number of white squares in the rectangular pattern on the left. In a first step he refers to an already found
formula for the number of squares in one corner ("we can use the equation from session 1" and "n(n+1)/2"). Then in
a second step he extends that to the number of squares in all four corners. This number must be subtracted from the
number of all squares in the pattern. The group already found a formula for the latter number and documented that in
a textbox on the whiteboard ("big square: (2n-1)/2"). Bwang8's posting of the final formula (number 4 in Figure 3)

                                                          523                                                   CSCL 2007
is linked to that box. In that case the referencing tool is used not merely for a deictic reference, but for incorporating
an intermediate step in his formula derivation (6).

                                                                                                               1. Number of
                                                                                                                 squares in
                                                                                                                 one corner

                                                              3. Number ofall squares                          2. Number ofsquares in allfour corners

                                                                                                               4. Number of
                                                                                                                 all white
                                                                                                                 squares

                                                      Pattern

Figure 3. Bwang8 uses an explicit reference to integrate an element of the whiteboard in his/her argumentation.

         The third example is from the same group (see Table 1 for the excerpt of the chat log) and shows that for
the groups it is sometimes not trivial to choose the appropriate interaction space. In line 1516 Aznx invites the others
to "simplify their formula" (he is actually referring to a formula published by another group) and after Bwang8's
request ("how did you simplify it", line 1525) he posts 5 chat messages describing the transformation of the formula.
But  his team   members   Quicksilver and   Bwang8       seem   not  to understand   that ("im lost",  line 1533).  Aznx    now
switches to the whiteboard ("I'll do it on the board", line 1536) and uses it for writing down the derivation. Figure 4
shows a screen shot of his final drawings. It also shows that Aznx's drawings (each drawing step is indicated by a
small square in the chat history on the right side) are interwoven with chat postings, even from himself (line 1542).
The  interactions  of the group  are distributed      over both  interaction  spaces,  but highly interrelated.  In  line   1546
("whyd u multiply by the two") we can see, how the referencing tool is used by Quicksilver for establishing referen-
tial identity.

Table 1: A seven minute excerpt of the chat log. Line numbers have been added.

line  time       participant chat posting                            line   time     participant  chat posting
1516  07.43.36   Aznx        simplify their formula                  1532   07.47.14 bwang8       quicksliver
1517  07.43.51   Quicksilver k                                       1533   07.47.19 Quicksilver  im lost
1518  07.43.55   bwang8      what do you mean                        1534   07.47.23 bwang8       did you get the same answer
1519  07.44.30   Aznx        2(n^2+n^2-2n+1)+3n-2                    1535   07.47.30 Quicksilver  no
1520  07.44.34   bwang8      i don't see how you can simplify it     1536   07.47.39 Aznx        i'll do it on the board
1521  07.44.35   Aznx        simply the formula                                Aznx starts drawing on the whiteboard
1522  07.44.40   Aznx        for the number of sticks                1537   07.47.44 Quicksilver yeah
1523  07.44.45   Aznx        so that simplifies to...                1538   07.47.53 Quicksilver i got something totally difrent
1524  07.45.45   Aznx        I stil get the same.                    1539   07.48.36 bwang8      so far i got $4*n^2+3*n$
1525  07.46.20   bwang8      how did you simplify it                 1540   07.48.55 Quicksilver  indranil rite in the box
1526  07.46.27   Aznx        um                                      1541   07.49.17 bwang8      i mean 4n^2-n
1527  07.46.32   Aznx        square the n-1                          1542   07.49.26 Aznx        EXactly
1528  07.46.39   Aznx        then multiply the whole thing by 2      1543   07.49.40 Quicksilver  yea that waht azn x got eralier
1529  07.46.47   Aznx        then multiply the 3 and n               1544   07.50.00 bwang8       holy
1530  07.46.51   Aznx        and add it with that                    1545   07.50.03 bwang8      moley
1531  07.46.57   Aznx        and subtract by 2                       1546   07.50.05 Quicksilver  whyd u multiply by the two

                                                                524                                                  CSCL 2007
Figure 4. Screen shot of the ConcertChat environment after receiving message 1546 of table 1.

Conclusions and future work
        The design of dual interaction spaces for synchronous collaborative learning has to take into account the
dynamic, tightly coupled and interwoven nature of the activities that are scattered across both media: the chat and
the shared workspace. This demands a) support for deictic referencing, b) the as access to an integrated history and
c) integrated activity awareness. We exemplified the advantages offered by such integration measures.

        Software developers like to think in modules, but when combining a shared workspace with a chat into one
collaboration environment we have to think holistically about using that workspace in the context of a chat conver-
sation and chatting in the context of working together in the workspace.

        The experiences with ConcertChat to date suggest a series of further research questions:
1.  The storing of explicit references and the integrated representation of all activities make available additional
    structural and temporal information about the collaborative artifacts in the two interaction spaces. To what ex-
    tent is it possible to use this information to construct a retrospective indexing, documentation or summarization
    of the collaboration that would facilitate future reflection or recall by the participants--for instance, when they
    return to the room for a subsequent session?
2.  An essential difference between a chat window and a shared whiteboard is the persistence of the artifacts (Dil-
    lenbourg & Traum, 2006). While a textbox in a shared whiteboard remains visible indefinitely (unless it is ed-
    ited or deleted by a participant), the same is not true for chat contributions; they scroll out of sight with the ap-
    pearance of the following discourse. Interesting questions arise when the additional possibility of audio com-
    munication offers a non-persistent medium. Can this supplementary mode of communication be substituted for
    chat to the advantage of the participants or will it be used as a secondary addition? What different communica-
    tion strategies would result?
3.  How can the concepts of explicit referencing, integrated activity awareness, and artifact history be applied to
    multiple interaction spaces, in which the collaboration environment provides even more than two primary work-
    spaces?

Endnotes
(1)  Despite the fact that this documentation is characterized by sequential incoherence, participants can apparently read and
     understand the chats amazingly well (Herring, 1999).
(2)  The presentation of the concept of explicit referencing here is an expansion of the discussion by Pfister & Mühlpfordt
     (2002).

                                                              525                                               CSCL 2007
(3)  The granularity of the operations depends of the kind of shared workspace. Imagine, for instance the use of a wiki page as a
     shared material (Haake, Schümmer, Bourimi, Landgraf & Haake, 2004). Then the artifact history would be defined by the
     various versions of the page.
(4)  ConcertChat can be accessed online at: http://chat.ipsi.fraunhofer.de. The project is open source with a BSD-like license and
     can be downloaded at: http://sourceforge.net/projects/concertchat/.
(5)  The Virtual Math Teams project is available online at: http://mathforum.org/vmt.
(6)  In that step Bwang8 also implicitly transforms the different usages of the variable "n": whereas the formula for the corners
     started with level 0, the formula for the overall number of squares started with level 1.

References
Barnard, P., May, J. & Salber, D. (1996). Deixis and points of view in media spaces: An empirical gesture. Behav-
        iour and Information Technology, 15(1):37­50.
Bekker, M. M., Olson, J. S. & Olson, G. M. (1995). Analysis of gestures in face-to-face design teams provides guid-
        ance for how to use groupware in design. In DIS '95: Proceedings of the conference on Designing interac-
        tive systems, (pp. 157­166). New York, NY, USA: ACM Press.
Clark, H. H. & Brennan, S. E. (1991). Grounding in communication. In L. B. Resnick, J. M. Levine & S. D. Teasley
        (Hg.), Perspectives on socially shared cognition, (pp. 127­149). Washington: APA.
Clark, H. H. & Wilkes-Gibbs, D. (1986). Referring as a collaborative process. Cognition, 22:1­39.
Dillenbourg, P. & Traum, D. (2006). Sharing Solutions: Persistence and Grounding in Multimodal Collaborative
        Problem Solving. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 15(1):121­151.
Dimitracopoulou, A. (2005).        Designing   Collaborative Learning        Systems: Current       Trends &   Future Research
        Agenda. In T. Koschmann, D. D. Suthers & T.-W. Chan (Hg.), Computer Supported Collaborative Learn-
        ing 2005. The Next 10 Years! (CSCL 2005). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Erickson, T. (1999). Persistent conversation: An introduction. JCMC, 4(4).
Fuks, H., Pimentel, M., & de Lucena, C. J. P. (2006). R-u-typing-2-me? Evolving a chat tool to increase understand-
        ing in learning activities. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning (ijCSCL),
        1 (1), 117-142. Retrieved from http://ijcscl.org/_preprints/volume1_issue1/fuks_pimentel_lucena.pdf.
Garcia, A., &  Jacobs, J. B.       (1999). The eyes of  the beholder:     Understanding        the turn-taking system in  quasi-
        synchronous computer-mediated communication. Research on Language and Social Interaction, 34 (4),
        337-367.
Gutwin, C. & Greenberg, S. (2002). A Descriptive Framework of Workspace Awareness for Real-Time Groupware.
        Computer Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW), 11(3-4):411­446.
Haake, J. M., Schümmer, T., Bourimi, M., Landgraf, B. & Haake, A. (2004). CURE ­ Eine Umgebung für selbstor-
        ganisiertes Gruppenlernen. i-com Zeitschrift für interaktive und kooperative Medien, 3(2):20­26.
Herring, S. C. (1999). Interactional coherence in CMC. In Proceedings of HICSS-32. IEEE Computer Society Press.
Jermann, P. (2004). Computer Support for Interaction Regulation in Collaborative Problem-Solving. Dissertation,
        University of Geneva, Geneva.
Landsman, S. & Alterman, R. (2003). Building Groupware On THYME. Tech Report CS-03-234, Brandeis Univer-
        sity, Waltham, MA.
Lonchamp, J. (2006). Supporting synchronous collaborative learning: A generic, multi-dimensional model. Interna-
        tional  Journal   of  Computer-Supported        Collaborative        Learning  (ijCSCL),      1  (2).   Retrieved  from
        http://ijcscl.org/_preprints/volume1_issue2/lonchamp.pdf.
McCarthy, J. C. & Monk, A. (1994). Channels, conversation, cooperation and relevance: All you wanted to know
        about communication but were afraid to ask. Collaborative Computing, 1:35­60.
Mühlpfordt, M.  &  Wessner,        M. (2005).  Explicit Referencing       in Chat Supports       Collaborative  Learning. In T.
        Koschmann, D. D. Suthers & T.-W. Chan (Eds.), Computer Supported Collaborative Learning 2005. The
        Next 10 Years! (CSCL 2005). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Murray, D. E. (2000). Protean Communication: The language of computer mediated communication. TESOL Quar-
        terly, 34(3):397­421.
Nash, C. M. (2005). Cohesion and Reference in English Chatroom Discourse. In Proceedings of HICSS '05 ­ Track
        4, (S. 108.3). Washington, DC, USA: IEEE Computer Society.
Pata, K. & Sarapuu, T. (2003). Meta-communicative regulation patterns of expressive modeling on whiteboard tool.
        In Proceedings of World Conference on E-Learning in Corporate, Government, Healthcare, and Higher
        Education 2003, (S. 1126­1129). Phoenix, Arizona, USA: AACE.
Pfister, H.-R. & Mühlpfordt, M. (2002). Supporting Discourse in a Synchronous Learning Environment: The Lear-
        ning Protocol Approach. In G. Stahl (Hg.), Proceedings of CSCL 2002, (S. 581­589). Hillsdale: Erlbaum.

                                                             526                                                       CSCL 2007
Reimann, P. & Zumbach, J. (2001). Design, Diskurs und Reflexion als zentrale Elemente virtueller Seminare. In F.
       Hesse & F. Friedrich (Hg.), Partizipation und Interaktion im virtuellen Seminar, (pp. 135­163). München:
       Waxmann.
Sacks, H., Schegloff, E. A., & Jefferson, G. (1974). A simplest systematics for the organization of turn-taking for
       conversation. Language, 50 (4), 696-735. Retrieved from www.jstor.org.
Stahl, G. (2006). Group cognition: Computer support for building collaborative knowledge. Cambridge, MA: MIT
       Press.
Stahl, G. (2007). Meaning making in CSCL: Conditions and preconditions for cognitive processes by groups. Paper
       presented at the international conference on Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning (CSCL '07), New
       Brunswick, NJ.
Stahl, G., Zemel, A., Sarmiento, J., Cakir, M., Weimar, S., Wessner, M., et al. (2006). Shared referencing of mathe-
       matical objects in chat. Paper presented at the International Conference of the Learning Sciences (ICLS
       2006), pp. 716-722. Retrieved from http://www.cis.drexel.edu/faculty/gerry/pub/icls2006.pdf.
Stefik, M., Bobrow, D. G., Foster, G., Lanning, S. & Tatar, D. (1987). WYSIWIS revised: early experiences with
       multiuser interfaces. ACM Transactions on Office Information Systems, 5(2):147-167.
Suthers, D. D., Girardeau, L. & Hundhausen, C. D. (2003). Deictic Roles of External Representations in Face-to-
       face and Online Collaboration. In B. Wasson, S. Ludvigsen & U. Hoppe (Hg.), Designing for Change in
       Networked Learning Environments. (CSCL 2003), (pp. 173­182). Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
van Bruggen, J. M. (2003). Explorations in graphical argumentation. The use of external representations of argu-
       mentation in collaborative problem solving. Dissertation, Open Universiteit Nederland, Heerlen.
Whittaker, S. (2003). Things to Talk About  When  Talking          About Things. Human-Computer      Interaction,
       18(1&2):149-170.

Acknowledgments
ConcertChat was developed during the last 5 years in a collaborative project at the Fraunhofer Institute IPSI in
Darmstadt, Germany. Involved in the development were among others Axel Guicking, Torsten Holmer, Friederike
Jödick, Martin Mühlpfordt, Christian Stab, Martin Wessner, Bo Xiao. The Virtual Math Teams Project is a collabo-
rative effort at Drexel University. The Principal Investigators are Gerry Stahl, Stephen Weimar and Wesley Shumar.
A number of Math Forum staff work on the project, especially Annie Fetter and Ian Underwood. The graduate re-
search assistants are Murat Cakir, Johann Sarmiento, Ramon Toledo and Nan Zhou. Alan Zemel was a post-doc.
The following visiting researchers have spent 3 to 6 months on the project: Jan-Willem Strijbos (Netherlands), Fatos
Xhafa (Spain), Stefan Trausan-Matu (Romania), Martin Wessner (Germany), Elizabeth Charles (Canada), Martin
Mühlpfordt (Germany) and Weiqin Chen (Norway and China). The VMT project is supported by grants from the
NSDL, IERI and SLC programs of the US National Science Foundation.

                                                         527                                               CSCL 2007
