      Effects of synchronous and asynchronous CMC on interactive
                                            argumentation

    Lisette Munneke, Jerry Andriessen, Paul Kirschner, and Gellof Kanselaar, Research Centre of Learning in
                                 Interaction, Utrecht University, The Netherlands.
            E.L.Munneke@uu.nl, J.E.B.Andriessen@uu.nl, P.A.Kirschner@uu.nl, G.Kanselaar@uu.nl

        Abstract: This study examined how different types of computer-mediated communication (CMC)
        influences the way pre-university students argue about genetically modified organisms. A total of
        39 dyads discussed the topic using either synchronous (chat) or asynchronous (discussion board)
        CMC, after which they collaboratively wrote an argumentative text in a synchronous groupware
        environment.   It was  hypothesized that synchronous   CMC  would    stimulate deep argumentation
        because of feedback immediacy while asynchronous CMC would stimulate gathering arguments
        because it allows increased reflection time. Finally, the study sought to determine if students who
        argue well during a discussion also wrote better argumentative texts. The results obtained partly
        confirmed the expectations. Students using synchronous CMC argue in a more elaborated way
        than students using asynchronous CMC. However, in contrast to the hypothesis, students using
        asynchronous CMC produced more accurate argumentative texts. This study sheds light on how
        synchronous and asynchronous CMC will be suitable for specific collaborative learning processes.

Introduction
        Computer-mediated communication (CMC) is undoubtedly an important part of everyday life for many
preadolescents and adolescents. Valkenburg and Peter (2006) found that 88% of Dutch adolescents aged 12 to 16
years use online communication - mainly Instant Messaging - with friends. CMC is fast becoming an increasingly
common means of communication in everyday life, and parallel to this there is also an observable increase in use of
CMC in education, especially in the field of computer-supported collaborative learning (CSCL). This approach to
online collaboration seems to justify using CMC as cognitive tool to facilitate and promote collaborative knowledge
building (Lehtinen, Hakkarinen, Lipponen, Rahikainen, & Muukkonen, 1999). However, CMC is a very broad term
and comprises many types of communication including chat rooms, MOOs, Instant Messaging, videoconferencing,
e-mail, and discussion boards.

        There are many approaches to CMC where both the success and the failure of interactions in CSCL are
explained by the same characteristics. For example, some researchers explain unequal student participation during
CSCL by the lack of non-verbal cues in CMC which causes depersonalisation of the communication (Kreijns, 2004).
On the other hand the lack of non-verbal cues is thought to stimulate elaboration and force students to explicate their
thoughts, leading to positive learning outcomes (Veldhuis-Diermanse, 2002). The choice of justification depends on
the perspective taken on whether CMC stimulates or constrains collaborative learning processes (McAteer, Tolmie,
Duffy, & Corbett, 1997). Two issues are very important here. First, it is important to distinguish between different
CMC technologies and their specific affordances and constraints. A major distinction can, for example, be made
between synchronous and asynchronous CMC. Synchronous CMC occurs in real time and requires simultaneous
participation while asynchronous CMC does not occur in real time and participants can communicate whenever they
choose. Differences between asynchronous and synchronous CMC can account for different effects on collaborative
learning such as differences in reflection on the content and coherency of the communication. Second, it is important
to distinguish between different goals and characteristics of the learning context in which CMC is used. Branon and
Essex (2001) show that    educators have clear ideas about   the appropriate fit between  learning tasks and  CMC
technologies. Asynchronous communication was reported to encourage in-depth discussion in which all students had
equal chances to participate. Synchronous communication was seen by the educators to facilitate quick problem-
solving, brainstorming, and creating a sense of presence which is absent in asynchronous communication. Also,
several researchers in the field of CSCL and communication research conclude that asynchronous systems should be
preferred when the goal is critical thinking and deep learning (e.g., McGrath & Hollingshead, 1993).

        However, despite the assumed lack of fit between synchronous communication and `deep learning' tasks
involving negotiation, argumentation, and   complex  problem   solving, much  CSCL     research aimed at promoting

                                                         528                                                CSCL 2007
reflective discussion is carried out with chat tools (e.g., Baker & Lund, 1997; Veerman, Andriessen, Kanselaar,
2002; Walker, 2004). This raises the question as to whether using synchronous CMC for deep learning tasks is really
ineffective when   compared    to  asynchronous   CMC.    This  contribution   tries to answer  the question of whether
synchronous CMC, compared to asynchronous CMC, has characteristics that create opportunities for collaborative
learning processes such as discussion and negotiation.

Discussion with CMC ­ Interactive Argumentation
        Chinn and Anderson (1998) describe the ideal collaborative learning situation as a conversation between
participants in which there is a collective searching for different positions, reasons, and evidence in an infinite space
of debate. They call this interactive argumentation. The aim of interactive argumentation is not to establish truth or
win an argument, but rather to explore an issue at stake. Nussbaum (2003) defines this as a co-constructive style of
argumentation. Munneke, Andriessen, Kanselaar, and Kirschner (2007) present different opportunities for coupling
interactive argumentation and learning. A first learning opportunity is justifying claims which can promote cognitive
learning processes such as self-explanation and elaboration (Baker, 2003). A second opportunity is giving counter
arguments which stimulates knowledge building since participants must both examine their own views and initial
arguments   as well as negotiate   with each  other  about  the meaning  of   concepts   and information  (Leitão, 2000).
Students, while arguing about a topic, can then reach a broader and deeper understanding of the topic (Munneke et
al.;Van Amelsvoort, 2006). Broadening deals with gathering information from different points of view, and with
assembling different subtopics and associated arguments, while deepening deals with different points of view, using
evidence, counterarguments and rebuttals, and achieving convergence on different pieces of information.

        But    what  are   the effects  of  synchronous   and   asynchronous    CMC     on  the discourse of  interactive
argumentation?  There  is  little research  that has attempted  to compare    different modes   of communication   during
interactive argumentation. Veerman (2000) compared the results of different experimental studies and concluded
that discussions mediated by synchronous CMC contained more rebuttals and counterarguments and included more
social talk than discussion that was mediated by asynchronous CMC. There was more indirect argumentation in
asynchronous CMC, students were more critical of evidence there, and the discussion contained more constructive
activities such as adding, explaining, evaluating, summarizing, or transforming information. Her explanation for
these differences lies mainly in the temporality of asynchronous CMC which give students opportunities to take time
for reflection. However, Veerman compared different studies with different learning goals, contexts, and topics. The
question arises whether her results hold for other situations in which asynchronous and synchronous CMC are used
for argumentation.

Approaches to CMC
        A classical approach to the effects of media on communication is social presence theory (Short, Williams,
& Christie, 1976), which laid the groundwork for subsequent theories such as media richness theory (Daft & Lengel,
cited in Carlson & Zmud, 1999). Media richness refers to a medium's ability to communicate information in such a
way that message uncertainty or equivocality is minimized (i.e., the task or topic under discussion is unambiguous).
The richness of a medium is based on: (1) immediacy of feedback, (2) transmission of multiple cues such as non-
verbal signals and voice tone, (3) use of natural language, and (4) conveyance of personal emotions. Based upon
these criteria, face-to-face communication is richest due to the availability of immediate feedback and the use of
multiple cues. CMC is a `lean' medium because of its lack of non-verbal signals and quick responses which lead to a
depersonalization  effect. Media   richness  theory  argues  that  difficult tasks with  a high level of uncertainty and
equivocality do not fit lean media like CMC because of this depersonalization (Carlson & Zmud; Walther, 1995).

        However, this theory has been criticized on the grounds of its technology-driven approach (Tanis, 2003).
Fulk (1993),   for example,    argues  that the  effects of information and    communication    technologies (ICTs)   are
determined by the interaction between users, technology, and context and not solely by media characteristics. In this
context Carlson and Zmud (1999) and Walther (1995) accentuate the importance of the amount of experience a user
has had with CMC, the sort of task to be accomplished, and the time users may need to communicate effectively via
CMC. Along with this, Herring (1999) argues that despite a lack of immediate feedback and incoherent interactions
many users are attracted by CMC because its features enable different kinds of interactions than does face-to-face
conversation. Grounding theory (Clark & Brennan, 1991) takes the CMC user into account, arguing that people can
effectively communicate using various types of media because they always seek to establish and maintain common

                                                            529                                                  CSCL 2007
ground.  The    principle of    `least effort  required  to  ground communication'    determines    how  users  deal  with  the
different grounding costs of CMC which makes not all media fit for all types of tasks (Honeycutt, 2001).

          Another approach that takes task types into account is media synchronicity theory (Dennis & Valacich,
1999) which was developed because of the aforementioned criticism of media richness theory. Synchronicity theory
argues  that all tasks   are  composed      of the  communication   processes  conveyance   (i.e.,information  exchange)   and
convergence (i.e., establishing meaning for each piece of information). Conveyance and convergence need different
characteristics of communication media. Dennis and Valacich identify five media dimensions that can affect how
users of media interact with each other, namely feedback immediacy, symbol variety, parallelism, rehearsability, and
reprocessability. Feedback immediacy is the speed of communication and the extent to which users can give rapid
feedback on the messages received. Symbol variety refers to the number of ways information can be communicated,
such as via verbal and nonverbal cues. Parallelism is about the number of simultaneous conversations that can exist
effectively in the same medium. Rehearsability refers to the users' ability to rehearse a message before the actual
communication. Finally, reprocessability refers to the ability to review and analyze sent messages more than once at
different points of time. According to Dennis and Valacich, convergence processes need high synchronicity which
entails high feedback immediacy and low parallelism while conveyance processes need low synchronicity entailing
low    feedback  immediacy      and   high  parallelism. Rehearsability, symbol   variety, and  reprocessability  are  seen as
dimensions which handle the equivocality of a task. When a message is complex and equivocal it is important to
have   time  to  reflect and    to reprocess     a message,  lowering  the   synchronicity of a medium     because   a highly
rehearsable medium, for example, tends to allow less feedback.

Research Questions
          This  contribution    reports    on research investigating the  effects synchronous   and  asynchronous    CMC    on
interactive argumentation in student dyads discussing a complex problem. The theoretical introduction shows that
different ideas about the effects of CMC on communication between people coexist and that there is little research
on  CMC's    effect  on   specific     processes    such  as interactive  argumentation.   Veerman      (2002) indicated   that
asynchronous    CMC,     when   compared      to synchronous  CMC,    is best for students engaged   in  a critical discussion
because of the reflection time that asynchronous CMC allows. However, based upon media synchronicity theory
(Dennis & Valacich, 1999), asynchronous CMC is less advantageous for processes such as negotiation of meaning
(i.e., convergence)  because       of  its lack  of feedback  immediacy    while  more  advantageous     when  students  must
exchange different pieces of information (i.e., conveyance). Translating this to interactive argumentation, this means
that synchronous CMC should stimulate a deepening the space of debate (i.e., elaborating different points of view,
using evidence, counterarguments, and rebuttals) while asynchronous CMC should stimulate broadening the space
of debate (i.e., gathering information from different points of view). In this line of reasoning, the research questions
here are: (1) What is the effect of synchronous and asynchronous CMC on broadening the space of debate? and (2)
What is the effect of synchronous and asynchronous CMC on deepening the space of debate? It is hypothesized that
using synchronous CMC will result in fewer, but longer sequences of argumentation compared to asynchronous
CMC. Comparing synchronous and asynchronous communication is a methodologically complex issue because the
amount   of  time  students   are   communicating      and  what is happening   between    sessions may   considerably   differ
between conditions. To this end, a third research question tries to establish what effect synchronous or asynchronous
discussion has on how students perform on a subsequent writing task. It is thought that optimal support for students
for convergence processes during the discussion phase will help them write argumentative texts with more accurate
argumentation during a subsequent writing phase.

Method

Participants
          Subjects  in   this study    were    104  pre-university  students aged  15-17   (M = 16.1,   SD = 0.72)  from   two
academic    high  schools    in the   Netherlands.   The   schools  were situated  in the  same geographic     area  and were
demographically    comparable,      including    student socioeconomic   background.   Because  of  this comparability,  each
school was assigned to one of two treatment groups instead of carrying out the different treatments in both schools.
This study was carried out in seven parallel groups taught by six different teachers. The teachers collaborated with
the research   team on    the development       of the argumentative  task.  Students worked   on   the task for three weeks,
during classes planned for Dutch language or at home, in their own time, depending on the experimental condition.

                                                                530                                                  CSCL 2007
Design
        A posttest-only, quasi-experimental design with two treatment groups was used to compare argumentation
in two different CMC situations. Students in one condition discussed the topic of genetically modified organisms
(GMOs)  with   the help of synchronous  CMC,   while students    in the  other condition discussed  the topic  through
asynchronous CMC. Due to organisational limitations, it was not possible to randomly divide the students and one
school was assigned to the synchronous CMC condition and the other to the asynchronous CMC condition. The
students collaborated in randomly composed dyads, heterogeneous with respect to gender. To avoid student dyads
that would have problems getting along (the students knew each other and had a collective social history), teachers
were requested to check the dyads with respect to compatibility. Eighteen dyads (10 synchronous, 8 asynchronous)
were excluded from analyses because they missed more than one lessons or because they posted less than three
substantial messages in the asynchronous condition. For analysis, 20 dyads remained in the synchronous condition
and 19 in the asynchronous condition.

Task and Materials
        Dyads    worked on  an argumentative  collaborative   task  in two phases, namely  a discussion  phase  and a
writing phase. These phases were preceded by an introduction to the task in the class and a period of individual
preparation. The difference between the two conditions was created during the discussion phase. During preparation,
students were introduced to the subject of GMOs in the class and instructed about what argumentation entailed.
After this, students received an individual take-home assignment which took approximately 40 minutes to carry out.
They   had to  read eight  popular, easy-to-read sources on     the topic  of  GMOs.   The   discussion  phase in the
synchronous condition consisted of two 45-minute meetings where students were asked to discuss GMOs using the
chat facility in TC3 (Text  Composer,  Computer-supported,     and  Collaborative; see   Figure 1; Jaspers &   Erkens,
2002).

                                          Figure 1. Screenshot of TC3.

        In  the  asynchronous  condition, in which  each student    was   asked to post  six substantial messages   in
Blackboard® (see Figure 2), the discussion phase lasted two weeks. A substantial message was defined as a message
consisting of at least one argument. Students had to post their messages (i.e., work asynchronously) in their own
time. There was one class meeting to help students if they were having a problem with the task and did not post
enough messages. The writing phase was equivalent for both conditions. All dyads wrote an argumentative text

                                                          531                                                CSCL 2007
about GMOs using TC3 and the students communicated synchronously within the dyad via TC3's chat facility. This
writing phase encompassed three lessons (approximately 120 minutes).

                                      Figure 2. Screenshot of Blackboard®.

Measures
Data collection
        The data consisted of all utterances in chat and discussion board. In principle, the unit of analysis in chat
consisted of every separate utterance, marked by pushing `enter' or by turn-taking. When an utterance required more
than one code, the utterance was split. If students pushed `enter' before ending their message, then the two chat
utterances were   subsequently  merged  for analysis.  The   messages in  the discussion board  were   split in units of
meaning. The coding of utterances and actions in the protocols was carried out with the computer program MEPA
(Multiple Episode Protocol Analysis; Erkens, 2002).

Task acts
        A first analysis was carried out in which all utterances were coded on the task-function which consisted of
six main   categories of  task acts: outside activity, social  relation, interaction management,   task  management,
argumentative activities, and conceptual activities. Outside activity consisted of utterances not constitutive of the
interactive space imposed by the researchers. Social relation consisted of utterances about interpersonal relations
related to the task. Interaction management contained utterances about managing the interaction such as checking
presence and turn-taking. Task management was talk about managing the task at hand. Argumentative activities
were utterances containing   argumentative   moves. Conceptual   activities contained  utterances about concepts   that
could not be defined as argumentation. Inter-rater agreement on 10 protocols was .80 (Cohen's Kappa).

Argumentative Interactions
        Argumentative activities were coded with a separate coding system based on Kuhn (1991) in the categories
shown  in  Figure 3.  The place of one  argumentative   interaction within  a sequence   of argumentative    interactions
defines whether it is an opinion, a supportive theory, an alternative theory, a piece of evidence, a counterargument,
or a rebuttal. All codes are accompanied by the label `asking' or `giving'; whether an opinion or argument is asked
for or given by   a student. This  makes clear how     often students question  each  other, a feature of constructive
dialogue. Inter-rater agreement on ten protocols was .82 (Cohen`s Kappa). The coding systems of task acts and of

                                                          532                                                  CSCL 2007
argumentative   activity formed    the basis for a  more extended     analysis   of the breadth  and   depth   of interactive
argumentation. The breadth of the space of debate was defined as the number of argumentative sequences counted,
including all single utterances not followed by argumentative elaboration. To define the depth of an elaboration, the
number of arguments in a sequence of related argumentative activities was calculated. For example, when students
gave a claim, a supportive theory, and evidence for this supportive theory, the sequence was Claim­Supportive­
Evidence and the depth score of three. In this way, all sequences of argument elaboration are tallied for their depth.

                                         Figure 3. Argumentative Activities.

Argumentative text quality
         The quality of argumentation in the argumentative texts written by the dyads was examined in order to
determine whether different modes of communication during the discussion phase resulted in different quality of
argumentation in the text. For this purpose, an instrument was developed which assessed the quality of grounds used
in the text and the conceptual quality of arguments used in the text. The instrument was based on the work of Clark
and Sampson (2005) and Schwarz, Neuman, Gil, and Ilya (2003). The quality of grounds refers to the way students
used evidence   for forming   their opinions. It is comparable     to what  Schwarz   et  al. calls the acceptability of an
argument.  The     conceptual  quality  of   arguments  refers  to    the  conceptual   adequacy    of  the arguments   and
counterarguments    in the context  of  GMOs.    A  driving question   in  this respect was:  Do students    include correct
concepts and information in their argumentation?

         The quality of grounds was measured on a 4-point scale, with 0 indicating no grounds for the argument
used, 1 indicating using a short explanation as a ground, 2 indicating that an elaborated explanation or example was
used as a ground, and 3 indicating explicit reference to empirical data or everyday experiences as a ground. The
conceptual quality of the arguments was also measured on a 4-point scale, with 0 indicating that the argument only
contains  conceptually   incorrect  components   and 4  indicating    that the  argument  contained    several conceptually
correct components.

Results

Task Acts in Discussion
         Figure 4 shows the proportions of the different Task Acts. Because the dependent variables of the Task
Acts were correlated and showed many outliers, Mann-Whitney U-tests were performed. A Mann-Whitney U-test is
the nonparametric counterpart of the independent samples t-test which is robust for outliers and for violation of the
assumption of   normality.  Mann-Whitney     U-tests showed     significant differences   ( = .01;  Bonferroni    correction)
between the chat-condition and the discussion board condition for the variables outside activity (U = 80, p = .00),
social relation (U = 44, p = .00), task management (U = 93, p = .01), and argumentative activity (U = 24, p = .00).
Students  using chat   talked more  about  things  not related  to the    task (M = 0.06, SD = 0.08)    and social  relations
(M = 0.09, SD = 0.09)    during collaboration  than  students   using  the  discussion  board  (M = 0.01,   SD = 0.02,  and
M = 0.02, SD = 0.02, respectively). Along with this, students in the chat condition made more utterances about the
way  they had   to accomplish   the task (M = 0.51,  SD = 0.13)    than   students  using the discussion  board   (M = 0.34,

                                                            533                                                    CSCL 2007
                          Proportions

                                              Outside
                                                      Activity
                                                                 Social
                                                                        Relation
                                                                                   Interaction
                                                                                               Management
                                                                                                            Task
                                                                                                                 Management
                                                                                                                              Argumentative
                                                                                                                                            Activity
                                                                                                                                                       Conceptual
                                                                                                                                                                  Activity
SD = 0.20). For argumentative activity it was the other way around, with students using the discussion board acting
more on the argumentative level (M = 0.44, SD = 0.22) than students using chat (M = 0.14, SD = 0.11).

                                      0,60
                                      0,50
                                      0,40
                                                                                                                                                                               Chat
                                      0,30
                                                                                                                                                                               Discussionboard
                                      0,20
                                      0,10
                                      0,00

                                                                                    Task Acts

               Figure 4. Task acts in proportions for both chat and discussion board condition.

Argumentative Activity in Discussion
        The next step was analysis of the task-act category argumentative activity. Exploration of the different
argumentative   acts showed            that   almost             all             acts          are         non-normally                               distributed                with many     outliers. Transforming
variables did not lead to normality, so Mann-Whitney U-tests were also carried out on these data. The Bonferroni
correction set the alpha value again on .01. Table 1 summarizes the results of these tests. The Mann-Whitney U-tests
showed  that students  who            communicated                      asynchronously                                      using                    the discussion               board produce    significantly more
evidence and alternatives and that there is a trend towards using more rebuttals and verification questions.

Table 1: Results of Mann Whitney U tests between dyads communicating through chat en dyads
communicating through discussion board.

                                           Chat condition                                                        Discussion board                                                    Mann Whitney U
                                              (N = 20)                                                           condition (N =19)
                                      M                         SD                                         M                                          SD                          U         z            P1
claims                                0.13                      0.07                                       0.11                                       0.10                        141.0     -1.377       .09
supports                              0.19                      0.09                                       0.14                                       0.10                        139.0     -1.434       .08
alternatives                          0.09                      0.07                                       0.16                                       0.11                        110.5     -2.235       .01
counterarguments                      0.04                      0.04                                       0.03                                       0.04                        166.5     -0.695       .26
rebuttals                             0.10                      0.11                                       0.15                                       0.10                        129.0     -1.729       .05
evidence                              0.14                      0.09                                       0.22                                       0.10                        108.5     -2.291       .01
verifying                             0.11                      0.10                                       0.06                                       0.06                        121.5     -1.933       .03
agreeing                              0.14                      0.08                                       0.12                                       0.13                        145.5     -1.252       .11
1One tailed significance

Breadth and Depth of Discussion
        Figure   5   shows            the  breadth             and       depth                  of         the              collaborative                                  and individual argumentative      sequences.
Exploration  of  the frequency             of argumentative                                    sequences                    (i.e.,                   breadth)               and  the mean   length  of   argumentative
sequences (i.e., depth)  showed               non-normally                        distributed                               variables                    with               many  outliers. Mann    Whitney    U tests
showed  that   there was no            difference              in       the       total                   number             of             argumentative                       sequences   (i.e., argument   breadth)
between   chat  and  discussion            board,              U = 149.5,                      p = .13,                     while                    the          total      amount  of collaboratively     constructed
argumentative sequences was higher for chat (M = 4.63, SD = 3.27) than for discussion board (M = 2.40, SD = 3.97),
U = 86.5, p = .00. The mean length of the argumentative sequences                                                                                     (i.e., argumentative depth) in the chat condition
was significantly longer (M = 2.52, SD = 0.84) than in the discussion board condition (M = 2.52, SD = 0.84), U = 98,

                                                                                                             534                                                                                             CSCL 2007
           frequency

                           breadth
                                   collaborative
                                                    breadth
                                                            individual
                                                                           breadth total
                                                                                                                    mean

                                                                                                                               depth
                                                                                                                                     collaborative
                                                                                                                                                      depth
                                                                                                                                                            individual
                                                                                                                                                                           depth total
p = .01. This         difference                   was                 mainly             due to    the significant   difference                   between              chat           (M = 3.44,  SD = 1.57)   and
discussion board (M = 1.74, SD = 1.86) in the length of the collaborative sequences, U = 102.0, p = .01.

                     12                                                                                                  3,5
                     10                                                                                                    3
                      8                                                                                                  2,5
                      6                                                                        Chat                        2                                                                 Chat
                      4                                                                        Discussionboard           1,51                                                                Discussionboard
                      2                                                                                                  0,5
                      0                                                                                                    0

                                                 sequences                                                                                         sequences

  Figure 5. Frequency of argumentative sequences (breadth) and mean length of argumentative sequences
                                                                                              (depth) in discussion phase

Quality of Grounds and Concepts in the Argumentative Texts
         To detect the differences on the quality of grounds and concepts of the texts a MANOVA was performed
on the two conditions and on the variables quality of grounds and quality of concepts. This analysis revealed an
overall significant difference, F(2, 38) = 2.50, p = .05, ² = 0.12 which was due to a univariate effect on the quality
of concepts          (F(1, 39) = 5.13,                                 p = .05,            ² = 0.12).   Students   in    the discussion                     board         condition            wrote  conceptually
better texts (M = 1.56, SD = 0.42) than students in the chat condition (M = 1.31, SD = 0.30). Another MANOVA on
the quality of concepts in the different argumentative acts, supportives, alternatives, counters, and rebuttals revealed
an overall           significant                 difference,                F(4, 36) = 2.10,             p = .05,  ² = 0.19          and            univariate             statistics          showed   significant
differences on the variables supportives (F(1, 39) = 3.23, p = .04, ² = 0.08) and rebuttals (F(1,39) = 3.78, p = .03,
² = 0.09). Students using a discussion board used more correct concepts in their supportives (M = 7.62, SD = 3.07)
and rebuttals (M = 5.33, SD = 3.02) than students using chat (M = 6.55, SD = 4.00; M = 4.95, SD = 5.22).

Conclusion and Discussion
         Synchronous and asynchronous CMC was compared with respect to their influence on the way students
argue in dyads. It was hypothesized that synchronous communication supports students in convergence processes or,
in other words,          on        supporting                           the              processes  of collaboratively    deepening                  a      subtopic                   in the space of debate.  An
asynchronous mode of communication was thought to support conveyance processes, which is seen as broadening
the space of debate, searching for different points of view. The results confirmed the first hypothesis. Despite more
argumentative activity and the occurrence of more alternative theories and use of evidence in the discussion board
condition, the analyses of depth of discussion showed that students in the chat condition have longer argumentative
sequences, thus that they elaborated more on the same supportive or alternative theory. The second hypothesis was
not confirmed by the results; the students using a discussion board did not talk about more topics and perspectives
than the students using chat. On the contrary, the results showed an opposite effect with students using chat being
broader in their discussions than students using the discussion board. The third research question on whether there is
a  difference         between                    students               in  the            synchronous     and  the asynchronous                     CMC                conditions            on  the quality  of  a
subsequently written argumentative text. The hypothesis was that students who discuss more deeply will write texts
with a higher quality of evidence and will more accurately use concepts. The results showed the opposite for the
quality of concepts in the argumentative texts. Students who discussed the subject of GMOs using a discussion
board used more correct concepts in their arguments than students who discussed the subject using a chat box.

          In contrast to earlier findings that synchronous CMC is not conducive to deep learning and is not really
beneficial for carrying out complex communication tasks, these results show that synchronous CMC does have the
ability to stimulate both a broader and deeper discussion when compared to asynchronous CMC. It appears that the
affordance of immediate feedback - the possibility of reacting directly to what another student is saying - stimulates
students to negotiate and argue with each other. Nevertheless, despite a broader and deeper conversation between
synchronously           communicating                                   students            this   did not lead to  more     accurate                concepts              in           the argumentative    text. It

                                                                                                               535                                                                                        CSCL 2007
appears that students communicating via a discussion board have a better and more accurate understanding of the
different concepts relating to the topic of GMOs, indicating that they have achieved a better understanding of the
meaning of the different pieces of information. However, it is possible that it is not the discussion between the
students that is responsible for this more accurate understanding of the concepts, but rather the fact that students
using the discussion board had more time to process information and verbalize it in their individual messages.

          Some possible limitations of this study should be considered. First, the results raise some interesting issues
concerning how students use different media. It is possible that students use media in such a way that they do not
make optimal use of CMC's affordances. Van der Pol (2002), for example, shows that it is difficult for students to
react in a specific and relevant way to messages of other students in a discussion board, despite the time available
for reflection due  to the asynchronicity     of this type  of  communication.    There   is little research relating to  how
students rehearse and reprocess in asynchronous CMC environments. It appears that rehearsability helps students to
process information in a message, but questions remain as to whether they take the time available to reflect on the
messages of others and on what kind of thinking processes take place during such reflection. A second limitation
involves whether comparing synchronous and asynchronous CMC is an adequate and valuable approach. Johnson
(2006)  concludes   in her review    of recent  research on  synchronous    and asynchronous    text-based   CMC   that   both
forms of online discussion have advantages and that there is evidence that both forms contribute to student learning
outcomes.  She   argues   that systematic    and  objective  research   on  how   synchronous       and asynchronous   online
discussion can  be   combined     is needed.  It is possible that  the effectiveness   of different   media  is  mediated  by
individual difference variables, such as the student's experience with synchronous and asynchronous CMC. The fact
that students in our study argue both broadly and deeply in synchronous CMC could be due to the experiences that
they have had with chatting in general. Finally there are some methodological issues that need to be mentioned. In
this study, the quality of argumentation during discussion is measured by the breadth and depth of the argumentative
sequences. However no correlations were found between the breadth and depth of the sequences during discussion
and the argumentative quality of the final product. This raises the question as to whether breadth and depth are
sensitive to differences   in the quality  of  argumentation    or are they  just measuring   frequency    differences in  the
argumentative sequences. Future research should, thus, also to look at the quality of the grounds and concepts in the
argumentative sequences and try to determine whether students construct specific sequences in different forms of
CMC.

References
Baker, M. (2003). Computer-mediated argumentative interactions for the co-elaboration of scientific notions. In J.
          Andriessen,  M.  Baker,     &  D.  Suthers  (Eds.),   Confronting  cognitions:     Arguing    to learn (pp.  1­17).
          Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Baker, M., & Lund, K. (1997). Promoting reflective interactions in a computer-supported collaborative learning
          environment. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 13, 175­193.
Branon, R. F., & Essex, C. (2001). Synchronous and asynchronous communication tools in distance education: A
          survey of instructors. TechTrends, 45, 36-42.
Carlson, J. R., & Zmud, R. W. (1999). Channel Expansion Theory and the experiential nature of media richness
          perceptions. The Academy of Management Journal, 42, 153-170.
Chinn,  C. A.,  &   Anderson,  R.    C. (1998).  The  structure of discussion   that promote   reasoning.    Teacher  College
          Record, 100, 315­368.
Clark, H.  H., &    Brennan,   S. E.  (1991).  Grounding    in  communication.    In L.B.    Resnick,   J.M. Levine,  &   S.D.
          Teasley.(Eds.),  Perspectives   on   socially  shared   cognition. (pp.  127-149).Washington,       DC:  American
          Psychological Association.
Clark, D. B., & Sampson, V. D. (2005). Analyzing the quality of argumentation supported by personally-seeded
          discussions. In T. Koschmann, T. Chan, & D. Suthers (Eds.), Computer-supported collaborative learning
          2005: The next 10 years! (pp. 76-85). Tapei: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Dennis, A. R., & Valacich, J. S. (1999). Rethinking media richness: towards a theory of media synchronicity System
          Sciences, 1999.  HICSS-32.     Proceedings    of the  32nd Annual   Hawaii   International    Conference   on,  Vol.
          Track1 (1999), 10 pp.
Erkens, G.   (2002).   MEPA.   Multiple   episode   protocol analysis  (Version   4.8) [computer     software].  Utrecht, The
          Netherlands: Utrecht University.
Fulk, J. (1993). Social construction of communication technology. The Academy of Management Journal, 36, 921-
          950.

                                                              536                                                    CSCL 2007
Herring,  S.  C.  (1999).  Interactional   coherence   in   CMC.   Journal  of  Computer-Mediated     Communication,    4.
         Retrieved October 5, 2006, from http://jcmc.indiana.edu/vol4/issue4/herring.html
Honeycutt,   L.   (2001). Comparing      e-mail    and synchronous    conferencing   in   online peer   response.   Written
         Communication, 18, 26-60.
Jaspers, J., & Erkens, G. (2002). VCRI. Virtual collaborative research institute (Version 1.0) [Computer software]
         Utrecht, The Netherlands: Utrecht University.
Johnson, G. M. (2006). Synchronous and asynchronous text-based CMC in educational contexts: a review of recent
         research. TechTrends, 50, 46-53.
Kreijns,  C.  K.  (2004).  Sociable    CSCL    environments:     Social affordances,   sociability, and  social   presence.
         Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Open University, The Netherlands.
Kuhn, D. (1991). The skills of argument. Cambridge, MA: University Press.
Lehtinen, E.,   Hakkarainen,   K., Lipponen,    L., Rahikainen,   M.,   & Muukkonen,    H. (1999).   Computer    supported
         collaborative   learning:   A review  of   research  and  development.  Netherlands:    University   of Nijmegen,
         Department of Educational Sciences. (J. H. G. I. Giesbers Reports on Education, 10).
Leitaõ, S. (2000). The potential of argument in knowledge building. Human Development, 43, 332­360.
McAteer,  E.,   Tolmie,   A., Duffy,   C., &  Corbett,   J. (1997). Computer-mediated     communication     as   a learning
         resource. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 13, 219-227.
McGrath,  J.  E., and  A.  B.  Hollingshead.    (1993).   "Putting the  `group' back   in group   support  systems:   Some
         theoretical Issues about dynamic processes in groups with technological enhancements," In: L. M. Jessup
         and J. S. Valacich (eds.), Group support systems: New perspectives (pp. 78­96). New York: Macmillan.
Munneke, L., Andriessen, J., Kanselaar, G., & Kirschner, P. (2007). Supporting interactive argumentation: influence
         of representational tools on discussing a wicked problem. Computers in Human Behavior, 23, 1072-1088.
Nussbaum,    E. M. (2005).    The  effect  of goal  instructions and  need  for cognition  on  interactive  argumentation.
         Contemporary Educational Psychology, 30, 286­313.
Schwarz, B. B., Neuman, Y., Gil, J., & Ilya, M. (2003). Construction of collective and individual knowledge in
         argumentative activity. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 12, 219-256.
Short, J., Williams, E., & Christie, B. (1976). The social psychology of telecommunications. New York: Wiley.
Tanis, M. (2003). Cues to identity in CMC: The impact of person perception and subsequent interaction outcomes.
         Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
Valkenburg,   P.  M., &   Peter,  J. (in   press). Preadolescents'  and   adolescents'  online communication      and their
         closeness to friends. Developmental Psychology.
Van Amelsvoort, M. A. A. (2006). A space for debate: how diagrams support collaborative argumentation-based
         learning. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Utrecht University, The Netherlands.
Van der Pol, J. (2002, January). Identifying and modeling variables in complex CSCL-situations. Case study: The
         use of asynchronous electronic discussions. Paper presented the Workshop on Designing Computational
         Models of Collaborative Learning Interaction at CSCL2002, Boulder, CO.
Veerman, A. L. (2000). Computer-supported collaborative learning through argumentation. Unpublished doctoral
         dissertation, Utrecht University, The Netherlands.
Veerman, A. L.., Andriessen, J. E. B., & Kanselaar, G. (2002). Collaborative argumentation in academic education.
         Instructional Science, 30, 155-186.
Veldhuis-Diermanse, A. E. (2002). CSCLearning? Participation, learning activities and knowledge construction in
         computer-supported      collaborative     learning in higher    education.  Unpublished     doctoral dissertation,
         Wageningen University, The Netherlands.
Walker, S. A. (2004). Socratic strategies and devil's advocacy in synchronous CMC debate. Journal of Computer
         Assisted Learning, 20, 172­182.
Walther,  J. B.  (1995).  Relational aspects  of   computer-mediated    communication:    experimental  observations  over
         time. Organization Science, 6, 186-203.

                                                             537                                                   CSCL 2007
