                    Toward collaborative technologies supporting
                                 cognitive skills for mutual regard
                                                           Tom Murray
                            Perspegrity Technology, Westhampton, MA, tommurray.us@gmail.com

          Abstract: In this paper I elaborate on a promising link between ethics, thinking skills, and online
          collaborative tools. Cognitive tools used for communication and collaboration can be designed to
          support  and  scaffold ethically-relevant skills such  as: cognitive   empathy,  the   ability  to take
          multiple perspectives, the ability to reflect on one's  biases and  emotional   state, a tolerance  for
          uncertainty, ambiguity, and change, and the ability to reflect upon the quality of a communication
          that one is involved in. These thinking skills contribute to the quality of knowledge building and
          decision making.   I argue that an opportunity now exists to source this large body of related work
          to create a coherent R&D focus.

Introduction
          Can   technology  help people develop  ethical and   moral skills  and sensibilities?  The question  itself    may
seem alien or meaningless--technological innovations are usually assumed to be value neutral.             Though it is true
that a technology can be used to support any set of values, including both ethical and non-ethical means to an end,
almost  universally  technology  is  designed to support   values such   as productivity, efficiency,     accessibility, and
connectivity.    Can technology be not only be used to support ethical ends but be explicitly designed to support
values such as mutual regard and self-awareness and enhance ethical ways of being?

          In this paper I will elaborate on a promising link between ethics, thinking skills, and online collaborative
tools. My treatment of "learning environments" will be geared to life-long learning contexts and communities of
practice engaged in knowledge building and decision making (however, the principles are easily applied to student
learning communities).     By ethics I mean the simple moral concept of individuals or groups treating each other with
mutual recognition and regard.     My argument can be summarized as follows: (1) in the modern (or post-modern)
world, being ethical/moral involves (not exclusively but importantly) a set of cognitive skills, including: the ability
to put oneself in another's shoes (cognitive empathy), the ability to take multiple perspectives, the ability to reflect
on one's biases and emotional state (a type of metacognition), a tolerance for uncertainty, ambiguity, and change (a
type of epistemological understanding), and the ability to reflect upon the quality of a communication that one is
involved in (meta-dialog).   (2) Online collaborative software (or "cognitive tools") can be designed to support these
skill  sets by   embedding   certain protocols,  structures, prompts,    and  other scaffolding    devices   into existing
communication media.       (3) More strongly ethical modes of collaboration improve the quality of knowledge building
and decision making.

          A broad interdisciplinary set of research projects and results can be seen as relevant to this thesis, but very
few describe what they are doing in terms of this ethics/thinking-skills/collaborative-tools relationship.    My purpose
for writing this paper is to suggest that more can be done to bring these threads (ethics/thinking skills/cognitive
tools) together and spark new R&D that could lead to technologies that demonstrably support mutual regard at both
small (among individuals) and large (inter-group) scales.    (Note: an extended version of this brief paper is available
at [Murray 2007]; and also see the related Workshop description for "Technology Supporting Cognitive Skills for
Ethics  in Collaboration and Communication" in these proceedings.)

Ethics, knowledge building, cognitive skills, and online tools
          Ethics and knowledge building. There are important links between ethical ways of being and knowledge
building. As more and more of society's work (and individual's play) revolves around information, knowledge, and
learning,   the quality of knowledge  building  and organizational   learning becomes  more     critical.  In his work on
communicative action and "discourse ethics" philosopher Jürgen Habermas claims that for collaboration to move us
in the direction of more adequate (if still tentative) truths it must have certain properties that are fundamentally
ethical/moral (Habermas 1993, 1999). These properties include: that sufficient mutual understanding regarding key
concepts and assumptions is established; that all important or relevant points are heard; that dissenting opinions are

                                                           538                                                   CSCL 2007
sincerely considered; that speech is honest and without hidden agenda; that the power dynamics of the situation are
reflected upon;  and that participants  actively engage in opening  up    to the sometimes   unsettling world  views   of
others. Problems in any of these areas can result in systematic bias or distortion in the outcomes of knowledge-
building. Thus, moral constructs such as freedom, equality, empathy, sincerity, inclusivity, reciprocity, integrity and
mutual regard are deeply entangled with the knowledge building processes of discovering ever more adequate truths.

          If we move beyond the scope of human endeavors implied in "knowledge building," we can find scholars
studying an array of interdisciplinary concerns including business success, civic vitality, and psychological health,
who make links to ethics-related constructs and the skills of care-full communication and collaboration.    We will not
go into these works further in this short paper, but simply summarize by stating the assumption that skills, habits,
and attitudes related to basic ethical orientations are fundamental to individual and social success in numerous areas.

          Ethics and cognitive skills. Exercising ethical capacities such as mutual regard involves a combination of
intellectual, perceptual, emotion, motivational, and attitudinal elements.   We use the broad sense of "cognitive" to
cover all of these areas (as opposed to the narrow sense of "cognitive vs. affective").   The full spectrum of ethical
considerations includes an ability to perceive the ethically relevant aspects of a situation (Vetlesen 1994); empathic
capacities (Goleman 1995); and the desire, commitment, and will to act on ethical values (Taylor 1991).       Thus, it is
impractical if not impossible to try to operationally separate rational skills from emotional/social skills in this area,
as both are so interdependent.  The thinking and communicating skills/habits we are interested in include capacities
to:  1) consider or  try on the  perspectives of others ("cognitive empathy");    2)  engage in productive dialogs of
inquiry to build mutual understanding; 3) reflect on one's thoughts, values, biases and emotional states; 4) tolerate
uncertainty, ambiguity,   paradox,  and  change  in knowledge   and circumstances;   5) reflect upon    the quality of  a
communication that one is involved in.

          Elsewhere (Murray 2003) I have described ethical modes of interaction in terms of two general categories
of skills/habits: perspective and integrity. The list of skills above are perspective taking skills. Perspective taking
includes the abilities to  "step out" to reflect on one's own thoughts or ideas, "step in" to (try to) see the world
through another's eyes, and "step back" to take a systemic perspective on an entire situation.  Integrity involves such
things as transparency, responsibility, and accountability, which are essential to have a full account of being ethical.
Integrity can be defined as follows in terms of maintaining congruence between: one's words and actions (doing
what one says they will do); one's words from one situation to another (not saying contradictory things in different
contexts); and one's inner beliefs/intentions and ones words (being honest and authentic).

          This description of ethical modes of interaction is not meant to be exhaustive.  It is given to sketch out the
scope of the skills/habits I refer to as important to ethical ways of being. In this paper I will not define these skills
precisely in an operationalized and measurable way, though such precision would be a prerequisite to empirical
research and theory building.   Metacognitive and epistemological sophistication are clearly woven into the skill sets
mentioned above (and see [Basseches 2005] on dialectical thinking, [Kegan 1994] on subject-object theory, King
and Kitchener [1994] on reflective judgment).

          Technologies and contexts supporting ethics-relevant skills. The working hypothesis of this paper is that
features can be added to existing forms of online tools (discussion forums, web sites, decision support tools, etc.)
that will scaffold and prompt for the use of ethical skills/habits, and will thus support the learning and adoption of
those skills/habits. Software can enforce or promote behavioral protocols and can reify (make explicit) social values
and conceptual frameworks related to ethics.     There are two complimentary types of outcomes.        First, technology
can enforce or structure interactions and communications so that users follow some protocol (but do not necessarily
learn anything  in the process).  Second, technology  can  also  support  an internalization of skills  and values, thus
scaffolding learning as well as behavior.

          Socially conveyed and intentional forms of learning are mediated through designed artifacts (Jonassen &
Rohrr-Murphy 1999, Vygotsky 1978).        Digital technologies afford unique opportunities to consciously tailor the
medium/environment of communication to support certain values and habits in collaborative work (Winograd &
Flores 1986).  The ethics-supporting software features alluded to here are seen as most applicable to well-defined
groups with sufficient shared goals or values.    Such groups might include: employees of a company that orients
strongly  around ethical  values; a community    of scholars   furthering some field of knowledge;  participants    in an
international diplomatic deliberation; civic deliberation or conflict resolution forums; and fact-gathering volunteers

                                                           539                                                 CSCL 2007
in an  NGO.     If those  in a group's  leadership   role  want to encourage    certain  values   in  the group,   and    there is
sufficient  buy-in   from group   members     to engage    in the learning    curve of  trying something      new,    then these
collaborative technologies can play a pivotal role in transforming or sustaining ethically-sound thinking/practices in
a group.

         People do not always live up to their own expectations, standards, or competence levels in terms of ethical
behavior.   Depending on the context, the dynamics of group behavior can create least-common denominator results
(such as crowd mentality) where group interactions lead individuals to act in cognitively and/or ethically degraded
ways, or, alternatively, can lead to positive synergetic effects in which group interactions lead individuals to act with
higher  overall  cognitive   and/or ethical   capacities  (Surowiecki   2004).    Key   ingredients    to creating    "collective
intelligence" as opposed to collective inanity are shared intention and a supportive environment or culture, which
includes a group's communication artifacts and procedures.

         Related Research and Projects. Research related to our concerns falls into several categories, such as:                1)
Research    in  cognition and  epistemology,     including  the   unavoidable   indeterminacies    in  concepts    and    models;
research   into so-called   "bounded   rationality;"  and  developmental      studies of   epistemic   sophistication     and   its
relationship to ethical reasoning.     2)  Research  in  communication    theory  and   social linguistics    related  to mutual
understanding, mutual agreement, and mutual regard. Including research in applied hermeneutics, meme evolution,
and argumentation integrity and fairness.      3) Research on human emotional and social capacities, both from brain
science and from psychology.       This research is important because of the strong emotional factors in developing
relationships of high trust (with its concomitant vulnerabilities),     attachment to tightly held beliefs, and tolerance and
resilience to cognitive dissonance.       4) Research   in cognitive    tools supporting  dialog,  knowledge      building,   and
epistemic   sophistication,  including research   on  fostering   metacognition,  self-regulated   learning    skills, reflective
reasoning skills, "cognitive flexibility," and multiple perspective-taking.       Online tools for democratic debate and
public deliberation (so-called cyber-democracy and e-deliberation) are also being tested, and other projects study
how trust, reputation, and credibility are built and measured in online environments.             Finally, immersive virtual
reality and role playing games are being developed on ethics-related themes.

         Further reading and next steps.         In [Murray   2007]   I describe  more   specifically  some    of  the  software
features alluded   to here,  give numerous    references   to related research,  and  describe    orienting   directions  for the
emerging field of technology for ethics-related thinking skills.

References
Basseches, M. (2005).  The Development of Dialectical Thinking as an Approach to Integration.  Integral Review (1), 2005.
Goleman, D. (1995). Emotional intelligence. New York, NY: Bantam Books.
Habermas, J. (1993). Justification and application: Remarks on discourse ethics (Cronin, Ciaran, Trans.). Cambridge, MA: MIT
       Press.
Habermas, J. (1999). Moral consciousness and communicative Action (C. Lenhardt & S. W. Nicholsen, Trans.). Cambridge, MA:
       MIT Press.
Jonassen, D. & Rohrer-Murphy, L. (1999). Activity theory as a framework for designing constructivist learning environments.
       Educational Technology, Research & Development, 47 (1), 61-79.
Kegan, R. (1994). In over our heads: The mental demands of modern life. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
King, Patricia M. and Kitchener, Karen S. (1994). Developing reflective judgment: Understanding and promoting intellectual
       growth and critical thinking in adolescents and adults. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass Publishers.
Murray, T. (2003). Toward supporting information quality in rhetorical, dialogic, and collective on-line communication. In
       Proceedings of Workshop on "Metacognition and Self-regulation in Learning with Metacognitive Tools," R. Azevedo
       (Ed.).
Murray,  T.  (2007). Extended  version of: Toward   collaborative technologies  supporting cognitive   skills for mutual   regard.
       Available at www.pespegrity.org.
Surowiecki, James (2004). The wisdom of crowds. New York: Doubleday.
Taylor, C. (1991). The ethics of authenticity. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Vetlesen, A. J. (1994). Perception, empathy, and judgment. University Park, PA: Penn State Press.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher psychological processes. M. Cole, V. John-Steiner, S.
       Scribner, & E. Souberman, (Eds.). Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Winograd, T. & Flores, F. (1986). Understanding computers and cognition: A new foundation for design.       Norwood, NJ: Albex
       Publ.

                                                              540                                                      CSCL 2007
