                      Process- and context-sensitive research on
                                  academic knowledge practices:
                            Developing CASS-tools and methods
 Hanni Muukkonen, Kai Hakkarainen, Kari Kosonen, Satu Jalonen, Department of Psychology, University of
        Helsinki PO Box 9 Siltavuorenpenger 20 D FIN-00014, Finland, firstname.surname@helsinki.fi
 Annamari Heikkilä, Kirsti Lonka, Department of Applied Sciences of Education, University of Helsinki P.O.
                             Box 9 FIN-00014, Finland, firstname.surname@helsinki.fi
 Katariina Salmela-Aro, Department of Psychology, University of Jyväskylä P.O. Box 35 FIN-40014, Finland,
                                            firstname.surname@psyka.jyu.fi
    Juha Linnanen, Kari Salo, EVTEK University of Applied Sciences, Vanha Maantie 6, FIN-02650 Espoo,
                                         Finland, firstname.surname@evtek.fi

          Abstract:  The    Contextual   Activity Sampling   System   (CASS)     methodology     and CASS-
          Query tools have been developed for the investigation of learning and working            practices.
          The  CASS-methods       and tools  provide  contextualized  data  that  allow  the  analyzing   and
          modeling of within-person changes across time. This paper describes a pilot study with 3G
          mobiles used by eight engineering students. Students answered questionnaires concerning
          their ongoing study projects, academic emotions, and collaboration, with a mobile phone
          five times  a day   for a  period  of  two weeks   (70  queries  per  person).   Variation in their
          emotions   were  examined    by time-series   analysis. Students  were   also  interviewed  before
          and after the CASS-query period. Interview and query data were used to form a picture of
          the variation of daily routines, challenges, and reflections of one's own activities related to
          engagement    in  academic   tasks  or leisure.  The  study reports   results regarding   students'
          experiences   of  the   CASS-methodology,        emotional  experiences  during     the  two-week
          follow-up,  their objects   and activities related to   personal  study projects    they undertook
          during this period.

Aims
          Traditional methods of learning research are usually individually oriented, focus on the participants'
beliefs and other discursive entities rather than their practices as they occur. Therefore such methods provide a
frozen picture    of  students'   behavior    rather than   address   sustained   processes   of   individual and   social
transformation.   The participants   are  often  asked  to provide  retrospective  global  assessments    (Reis  & Gable,
2000) of their beliefs and conceptions of learning that are assumed to determine the nature of their concrete
approaches  to  learning.   There are   few  empirical  studies linking  students' predispositions   to   actual practices,
other than studies where students have been asked to report how strongly they prefer various study strategies.
Several learning researchers (e.g.,     Engeström, 1987; Marton and Trigwell, 2000; Säljö, 1997; Wegner, 1998),
argue, by contrast, that social practices play a central role in learning and instruction. Further, Gale (2002) and
Quinn  (2004)   point   to the  sociocultural   explanations of   students' difficulties   in higher education.   Overall,
everyday  institutional    practices of  working  with    knowledge--    taking courses,   reading,  writing, presenting,
interacting with other students, as well as the structuring of activity in space and time, by the curriculum --
appear to be in a central position in determining also individual practices of learning. Evidently, these variables
are interacting with  students'   personal  dispositions.  However,   understanding     of the contextualized    factors of
learning, which   are cross-time,    cross-situational, and  multilayered,  is  currently  rather  primitive  (Alexander,
2002). In short, research on sociocultural dynamics of learning and instruction appears to require transformation
of available research tools.
          One  of the central   aims  of  the present  investigation  is to develop and    validate  contextual  tools   for
longitudinally analyzing transformation of university students' knowledge practices, i.e., processes, routines, or
procedures of working with knowledge. Knowledge practices represent socially constituted, rather than merely
individual activities (Hakkarainen et al, 2006). Background for methodological development is provided by the
Ecological Momentary       Assessment    (EMA)    (Bolger,  Davis,  & Rafaeli,   2003;  Reis   &   Gable, 2000;  Stone   &
Shiffman, 2002) and Experience Sampling Method (ESM) (Csikszentmihalyi & Larson, 1987) which provide
methods of assessing participants' contextual activities, events, and personal experiences. Whereas ESM focused
originally on capturing elusive flow experiences, EMA is more broadly oriented toward recording mundane and

                                                            541                                                  CSCL 2007
routine everyday activities that constitute social practices. The participant is asked to assess only one situation in
time and generalizations are made by researchers by aggregating observations or modelling changes across time.

Developing and validating The Contextual Activity Sampling System (CASS)
         The   CASS-query   tool   is a Java-application  for collecting process-  and  context-sensitive data.  The
system is implemented on 3G mobile devices (e.g., Nokia N93) with Symbian operating system, MP3, video,
GPS, wlan.    The CASS    system   provides generalizable  tools in open-source   terms (i.e., adaptable and  free of
charge)  that  can, in  a flexible way,   be tailored  and elaborated   for particular  needs  and   requirements  of
researchers and users.

Basic functionalities of the CASS-Query tool include:
         ·     Administrator tool (XML-editor) enables the construction of queries, defining questions and types
               of responses (open text, Likert-scale, audio- or videorecording, picture) (figure 1).
         ·     Queries are customizable to each user.
         ·     The application connects to the Internet and downloads the intended query from the server.
         ·     Responses are returned to server database.
         ·     Data are transferrable to statistics software SPSS.

                           Figure 1. Screenshots from the CASS-query tool.

         A pilot study was carried out with eight third-year students at EVTEK in November 2006. The students
were interviewed    individually after  and before the pilot. They   were introduced   to the  CASS    data-collection
procedure, queries, and mobile phone in an introductory session; a feedback session was held after the pilot. The
actual pilot consisted of 14 days, during which the students were asked to answer to five queries each day. A
daily set of questionnaires included morning query, three identical day queries and an evening query. The time
spent in the morning and evening was approx. 5-7 minutes per query and for the day 2-3 minutes per query.

         Examples    of issues  addressed   were the  objects (What  are  the  personal projects defined  as  papers,
exams, work, hobbies), self-efficacy and flow (How absorbed are you in what you do?, How competent do you
feel?), stress (see Elo et al., 2003)   (Do you  feel stress?), affects (e.g., enthusiastic, nervous), social context
(where, with whom), social sharing (Are you interacting with someone else?), obstacles and constraits (what
hampers or restrains your activities). In analyzing the data, we will apply multi-level models, such as the time-
series models adapted to repeated measures data.

Findings
         The students in the pilot study considered the tool very easy to use, they became accustomed after two
or three queries. The pilot study provided evidence that the sampling was able to show both within-person and
between-person variation in the affect and motivation questions. We discovered, e.g, very different rhythms
(some study from 8-4, while others start in the afternoon and continue late into the night), range in the number

                                                         542                                                CSCL 2007
and type of personal study projects, type of constraits they experiences, and types of networks students were
active in.

Theoretical and educational significance
       It appears that the contextualized CASS-sampling provides investigators a novel type of information on
learning and working practices. In future, a combined use of both within person (time-series) and cross-sectional
(between groups) analyses appears feasible to extend understanding of knowledge practices beyond single
individuals (Schmitz, 1990).

References
Alexander, P.A. (2002). In the year 2020: envisioning the possibilities for educational psychology. Educational
       Psychologist, 39, 149-156.
Bolger, N., Davis, A., Rafaeli, E. (2003). Diary methods: Capturing life as it is lived. Annual Review of
       Psychology, 54, 579-616.
Csikszentmihalyi, M. & Larson, R. (1987) Validity and reliability of the Experience-sampling method. The
       Journal of the Nervous and Mental Disease, 175, 526-536.
Elo, A-L., Leppänen, A., & Jahkola A. (2003). Validity of a single-item measure of stress symptoms.
       Scandinavian Journal of Work Environment Health, 29(6), 444­451.
Engeström, Y. (1987). Learning by expanding. Helsinki: Orienta-Konsultit.
Gale, T. (2002). Degrees of difficulty: an ecological account of learning in Australian higher education. Studies
       in Higher Education, 27, 65-78.
Hakkarainen, K., Ilomäki, L., Paavola, S., Muukkonen, H., Toiviainen, H., Markkanen, H., and Richter, C.
       (2006). Design Principles and Practices for the Knowledge Practices Laboratory (KP-Lab) project. In
       W. Nejdl and K. Tochtermann (Eds.), Innovative Approaches for Learning and Knowledge Sharing.
       Proceedings of the first European Conference on Technology- Enhanced Learning, EC-TEL. Lecture
       Notes in Computer Science (pp. 603-608). Berlin, Germany: Springer.
Marton, F & Trigwell, K. (2000). Variatio est mater studiorum. Higher Education Research, 19, 380-395.
Quinn, J. (2004). Understanding working-class "drop-out" from higher education through sociocultural lens:
       cultural narratives and local contexts. International Studies in Sociology of Education, 14, 57-74.
Reis, H. T., Gable, S. L. (2000). Event sampling and other methods for studying daily experience. In H. T. Reis
       & C. Judd (Eds.), Handbook of research methods in social and personality psychology (pp. 190-222).
       New York: Cambridge University Press.
Schmitz, B. (1990). Univariate and multivariate time-series models: the analysis of intraindividual varaibility
       and intraindividual relationships. In A. von Eye (Ed.) Statistical methods in longitudinal research, Vol.
       II (pp. 351-386). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Säljö, R. (1997). Talk as data and practice - a critical look at phenomenographic inguiry and the appeal to
       experience. Higher Education Research and Development, 16, 173-190.
Wenger, W. (1998). Communities of practice: Learning, meaning, and identity. Cambridge: Cambridge
       University Press.

                                                        543                                             CSCL 2007
