Exploring Embedded Guidance and Self-efficacy in Educational Multi-
                                      user Virtual Environments
      Brian C. Nelson, Arizona State University, PO Box 870611, Tempe, AZ 85287, Brian_Nelson@asu.edu
   Diane Jass Ketelhut, Temple University, Ritter Hall 444, 1301 Cecil B. Moore Ave., Philadelphia, PA 19122,
                                                    djk@temple.edu

         Abstract:   In this paper,   we   present the  results  of   an exploratory  study  into   the relationship
         between   student self-efficacy   and guidance   use   in a  Multi-User  Virtual  Environment     (MUVE)
         science curriculum project. We examine findings from a group of middle school science students
         on the combined effects on learning of student self-efficacy in science and use of individualized
         guidance  messages.  In   addition,  we   report on  findings   that demonstrate   the interplay    between
         levels of self efficacy   in science  and  use   of an  embedded     guidance  system   in an  educational
         MUVE.

Problem
         In this paper, we describe a study probing the possible relationship between students' guidance use in an
educational multi-user  virtual environment    (MUVE)      and   their self-efficacy in  science,  as well   as the combined
impact on learning of guidance use and self-efficacy level in an educational MUVE designed to teach scientific
inquiry skills and experimental design to middle school students.

         Our study centers on the River City graphical MUVE. In River City, small teams of students develop and
test hypotheses about why residents of the town are ill.     During a 12 session curriculum, students experience a year
of virtual time in River City. Students first gather information over the course of four seasons in River City.       This is
followed by  classroom-based    experimental   design     group  work.     Students  then  re-enter River  City  to  test their
hypothesis in "control" and "experimental" worlds, which differ by one factor chosen by each team based on its
experimental design.    Students then write to the town mayor describing their hypothesis, experimental design, and
results (Nelson, Ketelhut, Clarke, Bowman, & Dede, 2005).

         Self-efficacy in scientific inquiry refers to a student's belief that they can conduct scientific inquiry; it is a
measure  of their  confidence in   conducting  inquiry    activities. Researchers   have  investigated  both  the origin  of a
person's self-efficacy and its effect on behavior.  Of particular interest to this study is whether there is a relationship
between self-efficacy and accessing guidance.       Evidence     for  this relationship is equivocal    with studies showing
widely divergent results regarding whether high or low self-efficacy students are more likely to show help-seeking
behaviors and whether this behavior is beneficial for learning or not (Pajares, 2004).

         To explore the relationship between science self-efficacy and guidance use in River City, an embedded
guidance system    was  added   to the MUVE.     The   system    monitors   student  activities to  display  text-based   hints
designed to assist them in understanding data found in the MUVE.

         Use of the guidance system in River City relies on students' willingness to make use of it. Consequently, it
is likely that use of the embedded guidance reflects the research on self-regulated learning and thus indicates that
students with high self-efficacy would be more likely to access the guidance messages than students with low self-
efficacy in science.

Research Questions
         The research questions in this study are:
1.  Do  students  with  low  self-efficacy in  science view   fewer    guidance messages    within  a   MUVE-based    science
    curriculum than students with high self-efficacy in science?
2.  Do  students   with low  self-efficacy in  science  who   view    guidance  messages   within   a MUVE-based      science
    curriculum perform as well on content tests as students who report high self-efficacy in science?

                                                             544                                                     CSCL 2007
Population
          This study presents results of a 2004 implementation with 102 seventh-grade students who were provided
access to embedded guidance in the River City MUVE.

Procedures
          Students had access to a guidance system featuring continuously updated links to hints. Students could
view three hints per pre-defined information object in River City. Whenever students clicked on a specially tagged
object inside the MUVE, the guidance system flashed alternating colors to signal that new hints were available. To
view messages, students clicked on the hint buttons, allowing us to track when students viewed guidance messages
and which messages they saw.

Measures
          Qualitative and quantitative  data were   collected.    Pre-  and post-intervention,    students completed   an
affective measure adapted from three surveys; Self-Efficacy in Technology and Science (Ketelhut, 2005), Patterns
for Adaptive Learning Survey (Midgley, 2000), and the Test of Science Related Attitudes (Fraser, 1981).         To assess
science inquiry skills and biology knowledge, we administered a 30 question content test, pre- and post-intervention
with an internal consistency reliability of .80 in a middle school population.

          Students' self-efficacy in scientific inquiry  was    measured  using  a subscale   in  the affective measure
containing 12 items, each rated on a scale from 1 (low) to 5 (high) (Ketelhut, 2005). Overall scores are computed by
averaging the student's responses across the twelve subscale items, with high scores representing high self-efficacy.
The measure has an estimated internal consistency reliability of .86.

Findings
          In answer to our first research question, we found that students with low initial self-efficacy in scientific
inquiry viewed significantly fewer guidance messages (p<.05) than their higher self-efficacy peers. For example, a
student with an initial self-efficacy score of 1 would view approximately 14 fewer messages on average than a
student with a self-efficacy score of 3. In addition, it was found that boys viewed significantly fewer messages than
girls (p<.05) overall, and across a range of initial science self efficacy scores (p<.05).

          To assess the second research question, we first regressed student post-test scores on levels of guidance
system use and pre-test scores. In this analysis, we found that viewing guidance had a significant positive impact on
post-test scores (p<.01). In other   words, holding    pre-test scores constant, students   who   viewed   more guidance
messages out-performed students who viewed less. To investigate whether low self-efficacy students who viewed
guidance performed as well as students with higher self-efficacy, we added initial level of self-efficacy in science to
our model. We discovered that self-efficacy also predicted for post-test content scores in a model with guidance
views (p<.05).

Conclusion
          This exploratory study indicated that (a) students with low self-efficacy in science view fewer guidance
messages embedded in an educational MUVE than students with higher self-efficacy, and (b) students who view
more guidance messages outperform those who view fewer, with high self-efficacy students outperforming lower
self-efficacy students across a spectrum of guidance use. With well-designed educational MUVE-based curricula
incorporating embedded guidance and engaging inquiry, we hope that all learners can better understand and apply
principles of real-world science inquiry.

References
Fraser, B.   (1981).  TOSRA:  Test   of   Science Related  Attitudes.  Australian  Council    for Educational   Research,
          Hawthorne, VIC.
Ketelhut, D.J. (2005, April). Assessing Science Self-Efficacy in a Virtual Environment:      a Measurement Pilot. Paper
          presented at the National Association of Research in Science Teaching Conference, Dallas.
Midgley, C., Maehr, M. L., Hruda, L. Z., Anderman, E., Anderman, L., Freeman, K. E., Gheen, M., Kaplan, A.,
          Kumar, R.,  Middleton,  M.  J., Nelson,  J., Roeser,   R., & Urdan,  T.  (2000).  Manual    for the Patterns of
          Adaptive Learning Scales (PALS), Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan.

                                                           545                                                  CSCL 2007
Nelson, B., Ketelhut, D., Clarke, J., Bowman, C. & Dede, C (2005). Design-based Research Strategies for
         Developing a Scientific Inquiry Curriculum in a Multi-User Virtual Environment. Educational Technology
         45 (1): 21-34.
Pajares,  F.  (2004).  Psychometric  Analysis  of  Computer     Science  Help-Seeking  Scales.  Educational  and
         Psychological Measurement, 64(3), 496-513.

                                                         546                                                CSCL 2007
