   The Fourth Man ­ Supporting Self-Organizing Group Formation in
                                          Learning Communities
                      Nils Malzahn, Andreas Harrer, Sam Zeini, University of Duisburg-Essen
                                          {malzahn;harrer;zeini}@collide.info

         Abstract: In this paper we propose an approach based on social network analysis facilitated by
         ontologies for the support of learning group formation in computer supported collaborative and
         blended learning scenarios. This approach allows us to generate new ties between learners who are
         interested in similar topics. The identification of similar topics is elaborated dynamically by using
         a shared workspace environment which supports visual editing and modeling of topic relationships.

Introduction
         In recent years  blended   learning is   getting more  and  more   important    in the day-by-day   teaching  and
learning at Universities, in further education and even at schools. Course materials are available online as well as the
exercises, and the students are expected to work on the particular topic in a self-responsible manner. Many learning
scenarios and courses try to combine collaborative and blended learning (e.g. Harrer et al. 2005) ­ especially in the
online phase of the blended learning setting. While even for strict presence learning scenarios the choice of the most
adequate group formation mechanism to achieve the learning goal at hand may be a problem, although learners and
teachers know each other, e.g. in classroom scenarios, the online phase often adds the problem of not being aware of
each other. In a classroom it is obvious if a student has not found a group to work with, because he or she will not be
sitting at a group desk. In an online scenario the natural overview on the group formation is reduced and at most
visible to the teacher, since persons not assigned to a group should not be exposed to the whole learning community.
Although the teacher may be able to intervene in such a group formation situation, we think it would be better to
help the students themselves to solve the group formation problem since the self-organization of the students is often
a sub goal of the collaborative task.

         Systems   that explicitly target group   formation  (Ikeda et al., 1997; Mühlenbrock,       2005)  usually require
information about user profiles. These are usually domain specific and not easily transferable. On the other hand
software products  or   web-based   education  installations usually   provide  one   or more   communication    channels
enabling the students to discuss with each other. One of the analysis approaches for such communication is Social
Network Analysis (SNA; Wasserman & Faust 1994). It has pointed out the impact of group structure for the learning
processes and outcomes (Reffay & Chanier, 2003; Harrer et al. 2005; Martínez et al. 2006). This kind of awareness
about group structure is the first step to recommendations addressing group formations. Currently known approaches
usually do not support the explicit recommendation of learning partners while protecting the privacy of the students
to avoid open social conflicts at the same time. In this paper we propose an approach (Malzahn et al., 2005) based
on SNA   and  facilitated by ontologies   (Gruber, 1992)    for the support  of learning    group formation   in computer
supported collaborative (distance) learning scenarios. In the next sections we will sketch the approach and provide
an example for the formation of such a group in a University course with more than 100 students which had to form
groups for a software project. The paper closes with a conclusion based on the experiences made so far and the
description of further scenarios.

The Approach
         Web  portals   and discussion    forums  are currently  a  main source   for communication     and  exchange   of
expertise both in academia and communities of practice. Popular forums like phpBB2 or FLE3 can be divided into
categories to structure these threads. These categories are built of more or less broad topics. If the forum is large, i.e.
concerning the amount of writers and categories, most persons know only a subgroup of persons directly involved in
topics where they write themselves. Other persons might be interesting to get to know because they share similar
interests or they are known as experts in other parts of the forum. In the case that a forum consists of subgroups
which do not know or do not communicate with each other except through a small number of persons belonging to
both groups, traditional social network analysis will fail to identify the important persons to get to know. Thus
persons behind these cut points (Wasserman & Faust, 1994) will be invisible to the investigating person. This is
even more emphasized when there are no boundary spanners, i.e. if the communities have no overlapping members.
It is easily conceivable that persons who have similar interests participate in different parts of a large forum without
having any  direct or   indirect connection in  a communication-network.     To  be   able  to  find a link between  those

                                                            547                                                  CSCL 2007
persons an additional network-structure must be used. We propose that ontologies should be used to add missing
links between persons who   should      be  aware of  each other. How  this combination    of a social network and an
ontology is done can be found in Malzahn et al., 2005.

Example: Searching for ,,The Fourth Man"
        Our approach was tested for validity in the context of a university course about ,,Software Engineering" for
undergraduate students of computer science. The course was organized as a blended learning scenario with presence
lectures and exercises and extensive online materials manifested in a web portal with discussion forums, wiki etc.
Carrying out a software project in groups of 3-5 students was required to pass the course (Harrer et al., 2005). The
group formation was handed to the students themselves so that they had to self-organize the composition of the team.
Some of the users used the discussion forum to find partners for completing their team. Interestingly this resulted in
3 fragmented threads (s. fig. 2 left) that were all about the search for ,,The Fourth Man" of the team, but that were
not connected with each other directly by joint discussants. They were not even organized in the same forum area.
Our approach enables the user to connect the three threads related to students seeking project partners conceptually
by creating an ontological relation. This can either be done by e.g. a teacher looking at the threads' topics or by an
intelligent agent applying machine learning techniques such as text clustering. The algorithm combining the social
network and the ontology produces a network where the students interested in the same topic are visible to each
other across the thread's boundaries.

                Figure 1. Original Network ­ Groups searching for the fourth man are highlighted

        The original network      (cf. fig. 1.) shows 3 groups,   searching for additional members.    For example the
student using the nickname Malibu (fig. 1, lower right) posted once, asking for a fourth person to join his group but
received no answer. So he was displayed as an isolated node in the original network. After linking the related topics
he is now included in a bigger network. The network on the right of figure 2 shows only the differences between the
original network and the resulting one focusing those students with a similar problem as Malibu. In previous courses
we had to support this matchmaking manually, while the proposed mechanism makes it possible to support self-
organization of the students and contribute to their own responsible acting. The smaller network on the left of figure
2 shows the "ontology" used to establish the relations between Malibu and the other students. The design of this
network is an important step to the success of the proposed approach. As stated above the relations can be either set
by a software agent relieving the teacher from this work especially in lectures with a high number of students or they
can be facilitated by the teachers. This allows them to influence the group formation process as needed to reach
the particular learning targets.

                                                            548                                                CSCL 2007
                                         Figure 2. Emerging Relationships

Perspective and Conclusions
         In this paper we showed how a collaborative blended learning scenario can be supported by the means of
ontology  facilitated social network analysis.  We    discussed  how  the teacher can create the relations between the
forum topics to stimulate the group formation process. Another promising option might be to enable the students
themselves in certain   scenarios to relate the topics    to each  other to get a recommendation   for partners in the
collaborative scenario. This may have two effects: the students have to structure the domain of the task at hand,
which might be a learning target in itself, and the students get a feedback of their own position in the group without
touching the privacy of the others, because they will only get the information of their personal network. Looking
onto the promising results with forums we expect that the concept of integration of ontologies into social networks
can be extended to shared information spaces on a general level. This can be done by generalizing the concept of
forum topics to learning process artifacts. Artifacts are used in different domains like learning environments (as
Learning Object). Thus the same algorithm enables users of complex learning environments to
reflect their position within the particular network.

References
Gruber, T. (1992). Ontolingua: A mechanism to support portable ontologies. Technical report, Technical Report
         KSL91-66, Stanford University, Knowledge Systems Laboratory.
Harrer, A., Zeini, S., Pinkwart N. (2005). The effects of electronic communication support on presence learning
         scenarios. In Proc. of the CSCL'05, Taiwan.
Martínez, A., Dimitriadis,   Y.,  Gómez-Sánchez,      E., Rubia-Avi,  B., Jorrín-Abellán, I. &  Marcos, J.  A.  (2006).
         Studying participation networks in collaboration using mixed methods in three case studies. International
         Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 1(3). 383-408.
Ikeda, M., Go, S., Mizoguchi, R. (1997). Opportunistic group formation. In Proc. of AIED 97, pages 167-174.
Malzahn, N., Zeini, S., Harrer A. (2005). Ontology facilitated community navigation -- who is interesting for what I
         am interested in?. In Modeling and Using Context, pages 292­303, CONTEXT 2005, Springer.
Mühlenbrock, M. (2005). Formation of learning groups by using learner profiles and context information, Proc. of
         AIED 2005 pages pp. 507-514, IOS Press.

                                                             549                                               CSCL 2007
Reffay, C. & Chanier, T.  (2003): How  Social Network Analysis     can hep to measure cohesion  in Collaborative
        Distance Learning. In Wasson, B., Ludvigsen, S., Hoppe, U. (eds.): Proceedings of Computer Support for
        Collaborative Learning. Kluwer, Academic Publishers, Dordrecht.
Wassermann,  F. & Faust  K. (1994). Social Network Analysis:     Methods and  Application. Cambridge University
        Press, Cambridge.

                                                         550                                               CSCL 2007
