                                           A Tale of Two Formats

                Angela M. O'Donnell, Nicole Di Donato,Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey
                               Email: angelao@rci.rutgers.edu, tiggernd12@yahoo.com

          Abstract:   The study    examined  one   teacher's perspective on teaching   the same    material  in  an
          online format and in a face-to-face format. The instructor's reactions varied in part as a function of
          the topic being taught. Some topics were seemed to be suitable in either format whereas others
          were better in one format or the other.    The instructor noted that the class who had face-to-face
          interaction changed dramatically when they began these modules.

          Given the tremendous investment in computer technology in higher education during the past 20 years, it is
of considerable  interest  to  investigate students'  learning   outcomes  when   technology  is   an integral   part of the
teaching-learning process. Much of the research related to online courses has been devoted to demonstrating that
students in a distance-learning course perform as well as those in a traditional course. Russell (2002) identified 355
studies that found no significant difference in student outcomes for traditional versus online instructional formats.
However, Joy and Garcia (2002) conclude that much of the research is flawed. Among the problems they note are
the failure to control for time on task, confounded treatments, selection problems, and small samples.        In one study,
for example, students who selected to take an online course in computer programming were older, less likely to be
involved in a traditional undergraduate program, and worked more than those who chose the face-to-face version of
the same course (Dutton, Dutton, & Perry, 2002).      Comparisons of outcomes in the two versions of the course were
confounded by the differences in the student populations involved.

          Other studies   that compared    learning  in traditional,  face-to-face, classroom-based    ("lecture")    college
courses with learning in computer-based, distance education ("Web") courses have yielded inconsistent results. The
mixed  pattern  of   learning  outcomes  may   stem   from   individual  differences  in  ability, attitude, or  personality
associated with selection effects and/or a failure to have equivalent levels of structure across course formats (Maki
& Maki, 2002). Online courses may include proven instructional treatments that are not present in the comparison
instruction. For example, in Maki and Maki's comparison of web-based and lecture-based instruction in psychology,
students using the web-based instruction were required to complete mastery quizzes on the web and were provided
with immediate feedback. The students in the lecture class did not have these opportunities for practice testing or
feedback. Thus, it is difficult to separate out the effects of the format from the effects of particular instructional
activities.

          Relatively little attention has been paid, however, to the experience of the instructor in an online format or
in a face-to-face format. The present study examined the experiences of an instructor who taught the same course
content and used the same activities in two different formats.        We  used  the   same instructional   activities in two
different   formats. Half of   the students  completed   the  entire  semester in   a traditional  format.   The other   half
completed the first half of the semester in the traditional format and the second half of the semester using Web-
based curricula materials and assignments ("hybrid" format).

Method

Participants
          The course was a junior level educational psychology course. The instructor, Patti, taught two sections of
the course, each with 35 students. Patti was a certified classroom teacher and had taught fourth grade for four years.
She had also served as a supervisor for student teaching and had a master's degree in Educational Administration.

Materials
          All students (irrespective of course format) had access to a course website on which outlines of assigned
readings,   practice  quizzes,  links to   related materials   (e.g., research  articles,  newspaper   reports,   activities,
organizations) were available. The senior members of the research team also designed special curricula materials
(five units, 1  per  week) to  be  used  for students after  the  midterm. The  units   were based    on key   instructional
problems that teachers face in classrooms and were intended to promote students' integration of theory and practical

                                                             554                                                  CSCL 2007
issues. These materials were to be used in either the hybrid sections (online) or by the regular sections (in class). For
example, a series of videotape segments of cooperative learning in classrooms was made available online for those
in the hybrid section and the same videosegments were shown in the regular classrooms.

Procedure
         Student     teams were  formed  during    the first seven  weeks  of  the course and these   teams  continued
throughout the semester. The groups shared ideas, engaged in discussions, completed exercises, and commented on
one another's work. During the first 7 weeks of the course, the emphasis was on teaching basic concepts related to
educational psychology and providing the theoretical background for these concepts. The materials available on the
course websites supported this function. To facilitate a true comparison of the effect of the hybrid format and regular
class, it was important that all students have exposure and competency with technology. The instruction in all of the
sections involved the use of web-based instruction as demonstrations in class but also as homework assignments in
the initial course period.

        After the midterm, the focus was on integrating theory and practice. In the hybrid version of the course, this
was accomplished      online while the traditional class continued   to meet.  In the traditional classroom, instructors
introduced the content     and students worked  in   small   groups  and engaged   in discussions, produced  materials,
commented on one another's work. In the hybrid sections, students completed the same activities as those completed
by students in the traditional classroom but did so asynchronously. The key differences between the two formats
were in the timing of students' contributions and the potential in the hybrid sections to revisit materials as needed.
All participants took the same examinations constructed by a member of the team who did not teach a section of the
course.

        Patti taught the same content and used the same activities in the two sections of the class (online, face-to-
face). Each week, the first author interviewed Patti about her experiences in teaching the two versions of the class.
There were a total of six interviews, each lasting approximately 30 minutes. Five of the interviews related to specific
content taught and the sixth interview was a review of the entire experience. The interviews were transcribed and
analyzed using NVIVO qualitative software.

Results

Reaction to the Online Format
        Patti had many positive comments to share about the online format. Features of Webct such as the
ability to track the amount of time students' contributed to the online discussions allowed Patti to quantify
students' participation. Patti felt the students were engaged and provided detailed, well- supported answers.
Another positive feature of the online environment was students were able to view the video as often as
needed.  Not only did this give students more time to view each clip, it also relieved any pressure to "get it
all" the first time.

         Being able to re-watch the video clips also raised the level of accuracy of students' responses.    By having
the video clips available online, students were able to re-watch the videos to check the accuracy of their own as well
as other students' responses.  This improved the overall quality of the students work.    Finally students were able to
use the Internet as   a resource to research relevant   background   information.  This improved the quality of their
responses. While Patti had many positive comments about the online format, over the duration of the course, she
became overburdened by the amount of time the online class required.       Patti spent hours responding to individual as
well as group responses.

    Another limitation of the online environment was the lack of immediate reaction. Essentially students had an
entire week to post their responses.   This created periods of little posting and response to others students' critiques.
Students' procrastination limited the interaction between the group members and produced rushed work.

Reaction to the In-Class Format
        When asked about the positive features of the in class format, Patti elaborated on the instantaneous
interaction between her and the students and to the material.      Patti was also impressed by the amount of
work students were able to produce given the small number of students in each group coupled with the

                                                             555                                               CSCL 2007
limited amount of time they were given to complete the assignment.       Patti noticed a dramatic change occur
within the in-class cohort between the first two sessions.   Attendance increased, the students were prepared
for class and were applying the material at a deeper level.   Overall Patti felt more connected to the students
and  enthusiastic about working    with   the groups.  Thus increased   attendance and participation led  to an
overall  higher   interaction between     the students.    This fueled  more    productive and   well-informed
discussions.  The in class format allowed Patti to respond instantly to concerns and questions and guide the
discussions in the appropriate direction.   Patti was pleased at how the lesson planning activity progressed in
the in class format. Students' actively participated and provided detailed, well-supported responses.     Patti
also enjoyed   the opportunity    to  give  immediate   feedback   to students'  questions  and  clear up  any
misconceptions that may arise.

         It is clear that Patti values learning and enjoyed the opportunity to clear up misconceptions immediately
and be a part of students interacting. She even began posting feedback for the in class group on WebCt to allow for
more discussion time in class.    Patti is truly enjoying the classroom atmosphere.    Patti feels the interaction of the
class will help students on the essay part of the final exam. She asserted that she enjoyed having the opportunity to
lecture some of the material to the in-class group, which she stated was a real benefit. Patti also acknowledged that
the group lessons and assessment tasks were easier to create in class, again due to immediate reactions.

         When asked about the limitations of the in class format, Patti expressed disappointed by the lack
of information regarding time students' contributed to the material.      WebCt allowed Patti to track each
students' time and contribution to the group summaries, while the nature of the in class format made it
difficult to determine who was contributing what.      In other words, because students' efforts weren't easily
identifiable and  measurable   it was  difficult to assess who  was   doing the work.  Patti also felt that the
pressure to  complete  all the activities   with the  90-minute class period was   a limitation of the in class
format.  Students in the in class format were not able to view the clips multiple times for accuracy like the
online group. Finally, Patti commented on how difficult it is to know whether students have read before
class and are prepared to contribute to the assignments.    She also elaborated that there was insufficient time
to complete all the activities effectively.

Discussion
         Patti's reactions to the two formats varied in part as a function of the topic being taught. She felt that some
topics (the Pupil Assistance Committee exercise) worked better in class because of the utility of the spontaneous
interaction of classmates to one another's judgments of the video they saw.     The structure of the in class format
lends itself to active discussion of the video clips. She felt it was difficult to have that interaction in the online
format.  Patti felt the mood of the online group was rejuvenated from the lesson planning activity.    Students enjoyed
viewing and critiquing other groups' work.     Patti noticed that when students enjoyed the activity they provided more
detailed and timely responses on Webct.       Patti admits that at first she was hesitant of the dedication of the in class
group, but witnessed a dramatic difference in the students performance from when they began these modules.             In
fact, at the start of this project Patti was concerned with her lack of control over the in class group, but as time
progressed, she felt that she had more control with the in-class group then over the online group because she could
guide the discussions and answer students questions as they arise.    She also felt that the online group lacked the
social interaction that was fueling the progress of the in class group. Patti enjoyed how the assessment activity
worked with the online group.     They had a higher quality of responses, used the text to support their ideas, spent
more time with the material, and had the benefit of being able to re-watch the videos a second time.   The results will
be further discussed at the conference.

References
Dutton,  J., Dutton,  M.,  &   Perry,  J. (2002).   How  do online students  differ  from  lecture students? Journal        of
         Asynchronous Learning, 6(1). Retrieved July 27, 2002, from http://www.aln.org/alnweb/journal/jaln.htm.
Joy, E. H., & Garcia, F. (2000). Measuring learning effectiveness: A new look at no-significant difference findings.
         Journal of Asynchronous Learning, 4(1).      Retrieved July 27, 2002, from
         http://www.aln.org/alnweb/journal/Vol4_issue1/joygarcia.htm.
Maki, W. S., & Maki, R. H. (2002). Multimedia comprehension skill predicts differential outcomes of web-based
         and lecture courses. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Applied, 8, 85-98.
Russell, T. L. (2002). The no significant difference phenomenon. Retrieved July 29, 2002,
         from.http://teleducation.nb.ca/nosignificantdifference/.

                                                            556                                                CSCL 2007
