  The impact of 3-D based group interactions in an on-line problem-
                                      based learning environment

                   Nicholas Omale, Wei-Chen Hung, Lara Luetkehans, Jessamine Cooke-Plagwitz
                                      Northern Illinois University, DeKalb IL 60115
                   Email: nomale@niu.edu , whung@niu.edu, luetke@niu.edu,            jpcooke@niu.edu

         Abstract: The purpose of this article is to present the results of a study conducted to investigate
         how the attributes of 3-D technology influence the group interactions toward problem solutions
         and how it impacts the instructional practice in on-line PBL. Results suggested that the attributes
         of  3-D  technology,   if used  properly,  would   promote   students' social presence and  their meta-
         cognitive awareness.

Introduction
         One   of the   recent trends in research   on cyberinfrastructure   focuses on 3-D   based  on-line communities
where the emphasis is to promote community participants' social presence and collaborative inquiry. (CRA, 2005;
Dalgarno, 2002; Dickey 2005; Jones, 2004; Jones, Morales, & Knezek, 2005).           Learners in such environments often
have the opportunities to experience real lifelike social interaction while at the same time, engaging in meaningful
learning activities. For instance, Barab et al. (2005) created a 3-D multi-user virtual environment (3-D MUVE),
Quest Atlantis, to support participant-centered collaborative inquiry by providing interactive quests and social games
through animated avatars and virtual scenes. The resulting 3-D real life interaction metaphor, pedagogical driven
quests, and   on-line collaborative   features incorporated  in  this 3-D MUVE     provide  learners and  instructors with
opportunities for community building and for engaging in meaningful educational activities.

         The characteristics of collaborative inquiry and animated social interaction appear to make them ideal for
problem   or  inquiry based    learning (PBL).  PBL    is structured  around problems   or challenges that   the learner is
motivated to solve. There is an emphasis on the process of learning rather than the acquisition of facts. PBL as an
instructional  strategy is increasingly  being  used   for on-line learning  (Garrison &   Anderson,  2003;  Orrill, 2002;
Uribe, Klein, & Sullivan, 2003)

         The purpose of this study was to investigate the effects of 3-D based on-line group interaction in an on-line
problem-based learning environment from the lens of Garrison and Anderson's (2003) community of inquiry model
which aims to build a cohesive on-line community of participants and instructors. The model's main components are
cognitive presence, social presence, and teaching presence.        The community of inquiry model helps us understand
students' higher  levels   of  thinking during  online collaborative   learning by  providing indicators   for interpreting
outcomes of online discussions.

         The element of cognitive presence within the community of inquiry model contains four main categories.
These   are: triggering event;  exploration;   integration; and  resolution. In the  PBL   process, these  categories may
support findings related to problem identification, problem analysis, and performance presentation, since PBL is an
instructional strategy that engages learners in critical thinking. The element of social presence within the community
of inquiry model has three main categories. These include affective, open communication, and group cohesion. In
PBL, these categories of social presence may help to support data related to all the PBL stages of group formation,
problem identification, problem analysis, and performance presentation, since PBL as an instructional method is
intended to engage learners in collaborative problem solving. The final element of the community of inquiry model,
teaching presence, is broken down into the categories of design and organization, facilitating discourse, and direct
instruction.  In PBL,   the indicators  from   this element  may   help  to  support findings related to   the role  of the
facilitator.

         Garrison and Anderson (2003) suggest that PBL activities are a part of assessment activities which could be
supported by the community of inquiry framework. However, for PBL activities to be successful in online learning,
Garrison and Anderson state that "since most PBL activities are structured to allow group investigating, the needs
for supporting group synchronization, document management, discussion, and task assignment must be supported"

                                                             557                                                 CSCL 2007
(p. 100). If these design concerns are taken into account, 3-D MUVEs may be a suitable platform for collaborative
online PBL group activities.

          Research Questions:   How do 3-D attributes such as avatars and bubble dialogue chat boxes (LDHRG,
1992) impact students' social interaction and presence at the early stage of problem solving activity (i.e., group
formation and problem analysis) and how does this interaction impact their later stage of problem solving activity
(i.e., action planning and presentation)?

Methods
          Exploratory  Case  Study  methodology     ­ Case   studies  "identify problems  of  practice"  by  providing a
"holistic account"  of  the phenomenon    under  investigation   (Merriam  1998;   Yin, 1994).   The study used online
observation, interviews and transcript analysis to collect data.

Participants and Procedure
          The participants in this study consisted of 2 groups of 8 graduate students in a 500-level, three-credit hour
introductory instructional technology course at a mid-western university.

          The 3-D virtual environment used in this study is called ActiveWorlds®, an online virtual community where
users can appear as a 3-D based "avatar", that is, a graphical representation of the user (Dickey, 2005). Participants
travel (either by foot or time travel) to various virtual regions, and interact socially with other avatars. Participation
in the online PBL activity using ActiveWorlds® was entirely voluntary and the participants who took part in this
study gave   consent  to use ActiveWorlds®    for   their online group discussion.   The  course  instructor divided  the
students into 2 groups.

          Participants who agreed to use ActiveWorlds® were asked to use the system over the course of four weeks,
as often  as  they desired.   A follow-up    group  interview    occurred after  the four week   period  to  explore  the
participants' willingness and ability to use the system and the system's potential to enhance their problem-solving
performance.   The focus  group   discussion was  transcribed   and  coded into  3 three  thematic findings. Transcripts
generated  form  the participants' ActiveWorlds®    interactions  were analyzed    and  used to reflect and  validate the
interview findings. Interviews with the course instructor were also conducted to elicit the instructor's perspectives
and outcomes of using ActiveWorlds® as a tool to support on-line collaborative inquiry.

Findings
          1. The 3-D based communication metaphor enhanced the students' on-line social interaction experience
and promoted better on-task discussion at the beginning of the problem solving process.

          2. The   embedded   bubble   chat  box  along   with  the  3-D  scene  provide  an  authentic  and  non-linear
collaborative  environment   allowing  students  to better organize   discussions  and  respond to questions  prompted.
Therefore students have a greater opportunity to reflect on the issues and problem to be solved.

          3. Potential barriers to using the 3-D virtual environment:
While all subjects had a positive reaction to using Active Worlds, they expressed concerns about the use of the
system's technical features. Its limited functionality (i.e., avatar gestures, sitting, and so on) caused the avatar to be a
minimally used system function. Similarly, some students found the background sounds to be distracting while some
reported that aimless movement by their colleagues sidetracked their discussion.

Discussion
          The online experience may become realistic in the sense that it mimics a face-to-face experience whereby
learners interact with other avatars synchronously online. The focus group data revealed that the bubble dialogue
chat box allowed some learners to reflect on their problem-solving process.

Sounds, animations, colors, movement etc
          Sounds,  movement    in  the 3-D   environment    may   overwhelm     learners  as they  interact  in the   3-D
environment.

                                                            558                                                 CSCL 2007
Adult Learners and the design of the 3-D environment
         If an online collaborative activity is intended for adult learners, designers of 3-D MUVEs should take adult
learning principles into consideration so as to make the online experience meaningful for adult learners.

Conclusion
         The  study   findings suggested that 3-D     virtual environment   have the potential   to become   a usable
collaborative tool for the participants. Areas for improvement: (1) Provide instruction and feedback so learners can
fully exploit more advanced system features (e.g., provide participants prompts or wizard function), (2) a facilitator
to guide the process of the collaborative inquiry to ensure all voices are heard, and (3) a problem support repository
either embedded in or exist outside of the 3-D virtual environment to allow learners to access, track, and present
their problem analyses and ideas solving during the discussion.

References
Barab, S., Thomas, M., Dodge, T., Carteaux, R., & Hakan, T. (2005). Making learning fun: Quest Atlantis, a game
         without guns. Educational Technology Research and Development, 53 (1), 86-107.
Computer Research Association. (2005). Cyberinfrastructure for education and learning for the future: A vision and
         research agenda. Retrieved September 14, 2005 from
         http://www.cra.org/reports/cyberinfrastructure.pdf
Dalgarno,  B. (2002).  The  potential of 3D   virtual learning  environments:  A  constructivist analysis. Electronic
         Journal of   Instructional Science   and Technology,     5   (2), 1-19.  Retrieved April    15,  2005  from:
         http://www.usq.edu.au/electpub/e-jist/docs/Vol5_No2/Dalgarno%20-%20Final.pdf
Dickey, M. D. (2005). Three-dimensional virtual worlds and distance learning: Two case studies of Active Worlds
         as a medium for distance education. British Journal of Educational Technology, 36 (3), 439-451.
Garrison, D. R., & Anderson, T. A. (2003). E-Learning in the 21st century: A framework for research and practice.
         New York, NY: RoutledgeFalmer.
Jones, J. G. (2004). 3D on-line distributed learning environments: An old concept with a new twist. Proceedings of
         the  Society for Informational  Technology    and    Teacher Education,  Atlanta:  GA,  507-512.   Retrieved
         September 7, 2005 from:
         http://courseweb.unt.edu/gjones/pdf/Jones_SITE_FP_04.pdf
Jones, J. G., Morales,C., & Knezek, G. A. (2005). 3-Dimensional online learning environments: Examining attitudes
         toward  information   technology   between   students   in internet-based 3-dimensional     and  face-to-face
         classroom instruction. Educational Media International, 42 (3), 219-236.
Language Development and Hypermedia Research Group. (1992). Bubble dialogue: A new tool for instruction and
         assessment. Educational Technology Research and Development, 40 (2), 59-67.
Merriam, S. B. (1998). Qualitative research and case study applications in education. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Orrill, C. H. (2002). Supporting  online PBL:  Design   considerations  for  supporting distributed  problem solving.
         Distance Education, 23 (1), 41-57.
Uribe, D., Klein, J.D., & Sullivan, H. (2003). The effect of computer-mediated collaborative learning on solving ill-
         defined problems. Educational Technology Research and Development, 51(1), 5-19.
Yin, R. K. (1994). Case study research: Design and methods. (2nd ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.

                                                          559                                                CSCL 2007
