    Examining the Dual Function of Computational Technology on the
                               Conception of Mathematical Proof
                                                        Diler Öner
                                                   Boaziçi University
                             Department of Computer Education and Educational Technology
                                              Bebek 34342 Istanbul,Turkey
                                                   diler.oner@boun.edu.tr

        Abstract:    In this paper, I examine how the availability of a certain technology and new ideas about the
        nature  of  learning  operate as  a factor to suggest  a novel  understanding   about     a  crucial mathematical
        concept: mathematical proof.      I characterize the resulting conception for ideal mathematical proof activity
        combining two fundamentally different ways of knowing: a posteriori (or experimental/empirical) and a
        priori (or deductive/propositional).  Obviously, such conception of proving is/will be central in designing
        proof  tasks,  thus  shaping  the mathematical   discourse  around   proof   within classrooms.      Whether  one
        considers participation within such discourse is simply an aid or tantamount to thinking, identifying the
        character of this discourse appears to be essential in order to examine the interrelationships between what is
        social and what is individual.

        Salomon     (1998)  argues that technology  serves  a dual  function  resulting with    a reciprocal  relationship
between technology    and  our  understanding of   human learning.   On   the  one   hand,  the use  (and   the design) of
technologies are informed and guided by the theories of learning.    On the other hand, affordances provided by new
technologies  offer novel   learning experiences,  which in   turn compels   us  to  reconsider   our  conceptions  about
learning. In this paper, I aim to draw attention to yet another mechanism between technology, society, and human
mind within the context of mathematical proof and new computer tools.
        Traditionally, proving activity has often been conceptualized along one dimension: Providing a deductive
argument.  That is, students are either presented or asked to write rigorous logical arguments to establish the truth of
the mathematical theorems. This represents a priori (Kant, trans. 1998) way of knowing, since one reaches a true
conclusion by starting with a set of axioms, the building blocks of any mathematical structure, and applying the
rules of logic to those axioms.   Empirical or a posteriori (ibid.) ways of knowings are almost always left out within
proving activity. I argue that the interaction between two major forces challenges such conception of proving.
        One   of  the  forces  to challenge  the  conception  of   students' proving   activity   as a merely    deductive
experience is the   recent mathematics   education reform   movement   led   by  the NCTM    (1989,    2000).   In NCTM
documents, "`[k]nowing' mathematics is `doing' mathematics.      A person gathers, discovers, or creates knowledge in
the course of some activity having a purpose" (NCTM, 1989, p. 7).      This process and meaning-centered perspective
has led researchers to think about what makes proof meaningful and thus to reexamine the nature of mathematicians'
proving activity.
        As a result, there is a growing emphasis on the role of empirical explorations in mathematics education
(Hoyles, 1997).   While earlier conceptions of proof excluded empirical ways of knowing within proving activity,
new ideas  about   the nature  of  learning have   proposed the  opposite.    Researchers   have    come  to  believe that
exploration/experimentation of mathematical ideas is an important ingredient of proving, for it reflects the work of
expert mathematicians, gives students the opportunity to work from their own intuitions and investigations, and thus
potentially makes proving more meaningful and accessible (Boero, 1999; Edwards, 1997; Reiss & Renkl, 2002).
        The realization of the aforementioned vision of proving has been enabled by the immediate availability of a
very powerful set of computer tools, namely dynamic geometry software (DGS), in classrooms.            DGS materializes
the vision described above, due to its most defining feature: dragging.   That is, when the elements of a drawing are
moved, this feature allows the construction to respond dynamically to the altered conditions (Goldenberg & Cuoco,
1998) by maintaining the invariant.   This aspect of DGS facilitates conjecturing and more inductive approaches to
geometric  knowledge,   as  students can  reason about the  generality of  their hypotheses  for    several  cases (Kaput,
1992).

                                                          560                                                    CSCL 2007
         However, as much as DGS attracts great interest, concerns have been raised that students using DGS could
be misconceptualizing the nature of mathematical truth; that is, coming to believe that a confirmation of a conjecture
for several cases would secure its truth (Allen, 1996; Chazan, 1993b).         As conviction can be obtained easily by
dragging, DGS     environments    may  prevent  students from    understanding  the  need and   function of proof  (Hadas,
Hershkowitz, & Schwarz, 2000).
         Despite these concerns, however, other researchers have maintained their position arguing that there is no
tension between proof and empirical exploration (de Villiers, 1997, 1998; Hoyles & Jones, 1998).         Researchers view
working with DGS as an opportunity to emphasize the explanation function of proof (that is, providing insight into
why the theorem is true) as a viable alternative to the notion of proof whose function has been chiefly verification,
as in the traditional teaching approach (de Villiers, 2003; Hanna, 2000). Further attempts also have been made to
show with empirical studies that DGS could be a useful tool to teach proof (Hadas et al., 2000; Healy & Hoyles,
2001; Jones, 2000; Mariotti, 2000, 2001; Marrades & Gutierrez, 2000).
         This interaction between the ideas of reform and the immediate availability of computational technology in
classrooms   leads us    to a  notion of  proof that encompasses      both empirical  and   deductive   ways   of  knowing.
Moreover,    they are  considered  complementary    and  reinforcing  each   other.  However this does not suggest that
exploration  and   formal   proof are  separate  activities  and  mediated   by different   tools.   Research  shows   that
computational technology also problematizes the discrete positioning of the two different ways of knowing.         In other
words, there is evidence to think against the idea that one can only make exploration phase efficient with DGS and
students turn to paper and pencil in order to give deductive arguments for their conjectures.
         In mathematics education research, there is a growing recognition of the "reorganizer" (Pea, 1985) nature
of DGS.     That  is, several  authors point out   that DGS    is not simply   making   the task   more efficient, rather it
fundamentally changes the task (Healy & Hoyles, 2001; Jones, 2000; Lerman, 2001).               Within the DGS learning
environment, "[t]he computer is more than a mediating bridge, as its function cannot be simply reduced to a learning
aid ­ to be discarded after the concepts and procedures have been acquired" (Holzl, 2001, p. 81).            According to
Scher (1999), DGS is also exerting its influence on the proving activity. He criticizes the body of work that limits
DGS use to only explorations.     For him, the boundary between deductive reasoning and dynamic geometry becomes
increasingly blurred.
         Referencing Salomon (1998), in this paper, my purpose was to highlight how the dialectic between two
forces has resulted with a new conception for mathematical proof.       It appears that the way educators understand and
think about proof has a new meaning, resulting from a mutual relationship between the ideas of reform and the
availability of   computational   technology.    Both   deductive/propositional     and empirical/experimental     ways   of
knowings are equally incorporated in this revised conception.      Moreover, computational technology also compels us
to rethink about the distinction between exploration and deductive proof.       This conception does and will shape the
mathematical discourse within which students are expected to participate. And the emerging notion of mathematical
proof discussed in this paper proposes a layer of understanding regarding the mathematical discourse around proof.

References
         Allen, F. B. (1996). A program for raising the level of student achievement in secondary level mathematics.
Retrieved 10 July, 2005, from http://mathematicallycorrect.com/allen.htm.
         Boero, P. (1999). Argumentation and mathematical proof: A complex, productive, unavoidable relationship
in mathematics and mathematics education. International Newsletter on the Teaching and Learning of Mathematical
Proof, 7/8.
         Chazan,   D.    (1993). Instructional  implications   of  students' understanding   of  the differences   between
empirical verification and mathematical proof. In J. L. Schwartz, M. Yerushalmy & B. Wilson (Eds.), The geometric
supposer: What is it a case of? Hillsdale, N.J: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
         de  Villiers,   M. (1997).   The role  of proof  in investigative,  computer-based   geometry:     Some   personal
reflections. In R. J. King & D. Schattschneider (Eds.), Geometry turned on: Dynamic software in learning, teaching,
and research: The Mathematical Association of America.
         de Villiers, M. (1998). An alternative approach to proof in dynamic geometry. In R. Lehrer & D. Chazan
(Eds.), Designing     learning environments    for developing    understanding  of  geometry  and    space. Mahwah:     NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum.
         Edwards,     L. D.  (1997).  Exploring the  territory   before proof: Students'  generalizations   in a   computer
microworld for transformation geometry. International Journal of Computers for Mathematical Learning, 2, 187-
215.

                                                             561                                                   CSCL 2007
          Goldenberg, E. P., & Cuoco, A. A. (1998). What is dynamic geometry? In R. Lehrer & D. Chazan (Eds.),
Designing  learning    environments  for developing  understanding   of  geometry  and  space. Mahwah:    NJ: Lawrance
Erlbaum.
          Hadas, N., Hershkowitz, R., & Schwarz, B. (2000). The role of contradiction and uncertainty in promoting
the need to prove in dynamic geometry environments. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 44, 127-150.
          Hanna, G. (2000). Proof, explanation and exploration: An overview. Educational Studies in Mathematics,
44, 5-23.
          Healy, L.,   & Hoyles,  C. (2001).  Software tools   for geometric   problem  solving: Potentials  and  pitfalls.
International Journal of Computers for Mathematical Learning, 6, 235-256.
          Holzl, R. (2001). Using dynamic geometry software to add contrast to geometric situations-a case study.
International Journal of Computers for Mathematical Learning, 6, 63-86.
          Hoyles,   C. (1997).  The  curricular  shaping   of  students' approaches   to proof.  For  the    Learning of
Mathematics, 17(1).
          Hoyles, C., & Jones, K. (1998). Proof in dynamic geometry contexts. In C. Mammana & V. Villani (Eds.),
Perspectives on the teaching of geometry for the 21st century (pp. 121-128). Dordrecht: Kluwer.
          Jones, K.  (2000). Providing   a foundation  for deductive  reasoning:  Students' interpretations  when  using
dynamic geometry software and their evolving mathematical explanations. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 44,
55-85.
          Kant, I. (trans. 1998). Critique of pure reason (P. Guyer & A. Wood, Trans.). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.
          Kaput, J. J. (1992). Technology and mathematics education. In D. A. Grouws (Ed.), Handbook of research
on mathematics teaching and learning (pp. 515-556). New York: Macmillan.
          Laborde, C. (2000). Dynamic geometry environments as a source of rich learning contexts for the complex
activity of proving. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 44, 151-161.
          Lerman, S. (2001). Cultural, discursive psychology: A sociocultural approach to studying the teaching and
learning of mathematics. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 46, 87-113.
          Mariotti, M.   A.  (2000). Introduction  to  proof:  The  mediation   of a   dynamic   software   environment.
Educational Studies in Mathematics, 44, 25-53.
          Mariotti, M.   A.  (2001). Justifying  and  proving   in  the  cabri environment.    International Journal  of
Computers for Mathematical Learning, 6, 257-281.
          Marrades, R., & Gutierrez, A. (2000). Proofs produced by secondary school students learning geometry in a
dynamic computer environment. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 44, 87-125.
          National  Council  of Teachers   of Mathematics.  (1989).  Curriculum   and  evaluation standards   for school
mathematics. Reston, VA.
          National Council of Teachers of Mathematics. (2000). Principles and standards for school mathematics.
Reston, VA.
          Pea, R. (1985). Beyond amplification: Using the computer to reorganize mental functioning. Educational
Psychologist, 20(4), 167-182.
          Reiss, K., & Renkl, A. (2002). Learning to prove: The idea of heuristic examples. Zentralblatt für Didaktik
der Mathematik (ZDM), 34(1), 29-35.
          Salomon,   G.  (Winter, 1998).   Technology's  promises   and  dangers   in a psychological and    educational
context. Theory into Practice, 37(1), 4-10.
          Scher, D. (1999). Problem solving and proof in the age of dynamic geometry. Micromath, 15(1), 24-30.

                                                           562                                                 CSCL 2007
