                            Complex Network Theory Approach to
             the Assessment on Collective Knowledge Advancement
                             through Scientific Discourse in CSCL

            Jun Oshima, Ritsuko Oshima, Shizuoka Univ., 3-5-1 Johoku Hmamatsu-shi JAPAN 432-8011
                                joshima@inf.shizuoka.ac.jp, roshima@inf.shizuoka.ac.jp
                         Knowledge Forum® Japan Research Group, kfjp@inf.shizuoka.ac.jp

         Abstract:    This study discusses the possibility of the integrated analytic approach to discourse
         in  CSCL   by  the  combination    of macro   network    analysis and  micro analysis   of argument    on
         students' written discourse.     Although studies have established fine-grained analytic approaches
         to discourse or argumentation in CSCL environments, we still have difficulty with evaluating
         collective   knowledge   advancement.      The   Complex    Network    Theory  would    be a  promising
         approach to challenging this difficulty.      We can visualize a variety of network structures with
         identifying  ideas  as nodes,   and   co-presence  of words    as links.  Several indices numerically
         inform us how a target network is structured.        In this paper, we report our attempt to describe
         how the network of ideas represented in discourse is structured in CSCL environments and its
         relation to the network structure analysis.

Background and Research Purposes
             Although the development of argument analysis in the learning sciences provides us with fine-grained
information on cognitive activity by individual learners (e.g., Kelly, & Takao, 2002; Sandoval, & Millwood, 2005),
we still do not have tools to evaluate learners' collective knowledge advancement.             The assessment of collective
knowledge advancement is crucial with two reasons.            One comes from the perspective of summative assessment
that the combination of discourse analysis at the individual learner's level and collective or structural analysis of
ideas  gives  us richer interpretation   of  individual   learner's cognitive   performance.   The  analysis  of how   each
individual  learner contributes   to collective knowledge     advancement    is an  important   measure of the   knowledge
advancement     through  collaborative    learning.    Another    reason   comes   from    the perspective of   informative
assessment.   If we   figure out  how  each    learner is contributing  to the  collective knowledge   advancement    in the
community such as a classroom, we can suggest each learner what ideas they should know or contribute to in their
next stage of learning.

             We  propose    an  analytic  approach     to achieving  the   dynamic    assessment   on  students'   collective
knowledge advancement, the network structure analysis based on the complex network theory (Barabási, Albert, &
Jeong,  1999; Watts,   1999;  Watts,   &  Strogatz, 1998).     The  complex  network   theory   is an  analytic approach  to
describing a variety of network structures developed based on statistical physics, and several important features of
the network structures around us were discovered (i.e., the Small World, the Scale-Free, etc.).            Some of recent
studies  were focused   on  the issue  of whether   the   same  principles  could  be applied   to the development   of  the
computer-network communication.          For   instance,  one study  by  a Japanese   research  group  (Tagawa,    Yasutake,
Yamakawa,    &   Inoue, 2006)   attempted   to describe   remarkable  features  of computer-mediated    communication    by
university students with WebCT.        Although the network structure analysis would give us important resources to
evaluate students' collective knowledge advancement, we have not yet known how we can utilize the indices from
the network structure analysis in evaluating students' knowledge advancement in collective situation.           In this study,
we  attempt  to  find answer   to this research  question   by  comparing   results from   both  fine-grained   and network
structure analysis on the same students' discourse in a CSCL context.

Methodology
Target Group of Students
             Forty-one fifth grade students (21 females, and 20 males) at a Japanese elementary school were engaged
in their collaborative  learning   on  genetically  modified   foods   by  using   Knowledge    Forum®.    They    discussed
whether they should develop GM crops or not and why based on their understanding of GM foods (Oshima, et al.,
2005).   We analyzed their written discourse in the final phase of learning through the two approaches.

                                                              563                                                  CSCL 2007
Individual Analysis of Written Discourse
              Written discourse in each report was analyzed from the perspective of the argument structure and the
epistemic  operation    (Oshima,  Oshima,  &   Knowledge      Forum®   Japan   Research   Group,  2006).   In the argument
structure analysis, we referred to the simplified framework of Toulmin's (1958) argument structure such as Data,
Reasoning, Claim, and Rebuttal.       Each written discourse was evaluated with whether each argument component
was  present.    In further  analysis of epistemic    operations   in written  discourse,  the cognitive  levels of the   two
components (i.e., Data, and Reasoning) were evaluated by referring to the rubric developed in other studies (e.g.,
Sandoval,    &   Millwood,  2005).  Two   trained  undergraduate      students independently   involved   in the  evaluation
procedure.    The inter-rater agreement was over .80.       The disagreement was resolved through discussion with the
first author.

Network Structure Analysis
              Each discourse was decomposed into paragraphs as minimum units of ideas, and each paragraph was
further decomposed into morpheme words through the software application of Japanese language morphological
analysis.    The same procedure was applied to discourse in teaching documents on the genetically modified foods
that we created under a domain expert's supervision.        We depicted nouns that appeared in both corpuses.          Based
on the  list  of noun   words, we  conducted   the complex     network   structure analysis  on  the  both corpuses  by   the
software called Pajek.     Pajek is a network structure analysis application that provides us with basic descriptions of
each node     (word  in this case)   and  statistical indices, clustering  coefficient  and    betweeness  centrality.    The
clustering coefficient is a measure in describing network structures.          We omit its mathematical explanation here.
In short, the coefficient informs us how each node (word in this case) contributes to the development of clustering
structures in the network.     We can describe how the target network is composed of idea clusters and how powerful
the central ideas are in structuring the network.      The betweeness centrality is another measure that manifests how
central each   node  is in the   network structure or    clusters.  With these   two measures,   we   can  describe network
structure of ideas learners reported in their written discourse from the perspectives of how their ideas are linked to
one another as groups, and which word plays important roles to create clusters of ideas.         In this study, we used the
network structure of the document we created as the benchmark of idea network.                 Later, we compared network
structures of students' discourse with the benchmark structure to examine how scientifically appropriate the network
structure of ideas in students' discourse is.

Stepwise Network Structure Analysis
              For examining the relationship between measures from the discourse analysis and the network structure
analysis, we conducted what we call stepwise network structure analysis.          The stepwise network structure analysis
is the procedure that compares the network structure of nodes from total reports with that excluding a target single
report for examining its contribution to the total network structure.      Our assumption was that a network structure
would be significantly changed by excluding cognitively important discourse.               We detected several reports that
produced crucial changes in the two coefficients of ten most important words in the corpus.           Then, we attempted to
characterize  discourses   evaluated  as important    in idea network   structures by  using   their argument  structures  of
written discourse.

Results and Discussion
              First, we conducted the network structure analysis on the two corpuses of discourse by students and
researchers.     The number of nodes was 101.      The mean clustering coefficients across all nodes were 0.769713 for
students' and    0.760392    for researchers'.  The      mean  betweeness     centralities were  0.009211    and  0.007735,
respectively.    If we looked at ten most influential words in structures, only three were appeared in the both lists.
In sum,   the  network  of  ideas  by students' discourse     and   researchers' discourse   were structurally   similar, but
cognitively different.   We further conducted network structure analyses by separating the discourse by positive and
negative opinions. The differences in the structures were remarkable (Figure 1).           The mean clustering coefficients
were 0.811 in positive opinion and 0.811 in negative opinion.          The betweeness centralities were 0.018 in positive
opinion and 0.011 in negative opinion.     Results manifest that network structures of students' discourse at each side
were more different from the researchers' than students' total structure.        Based on results, we think that students'
idea network structure came to be closer to the researchers' as their learning went on, but students focused their
attention to limited range of learning materials.

                                                              564                                                  CSCL 2007
 Figure 1. The Network Structures Based on Students' Discourse with Positive (left) or Negative (right) Opinions.

             Second, we compared students' discourses detected as strongly influential to their idea network structure
with those evaluated as robust in the argument structure analysis.          We found no systematic relation between the
two results of analyses, but concluded that the two analyses provides us with more fine-grained characteristics by
covering different perspectives of students' knowledge advancement in CSCL environments.                 Discourses highly
evaluated by the both analyses are considered to play central roles in their collective knowledge advancement and
have robust argument structure.   Therefore, instructors can use those as benchmarks of how students' knowledge
advancement is evolving.    Discourses highly evaluated by the argument analysis but not by the network structure
analysis were  further divided  into two    categories.  One   category  included  discourse  showing    ideas appeared  in
other notes.  Idea networks in these discourses can be easily replaced by other discourse and they do not influence
the network structure at all.   Instructors should suggest authors to merge their reports in one integrated note and
further think of its relation to other notes.  The other type of discourse was discussing very local ideas so that they
created small clusters in the network and no links to other ideas.       The instructor can suggest students to think of
how their ideas should be related to others' ideas.      Particularly, the benchmark notes that are highly rated by both
analyses would  be  good   for them  to  see.    The   last category was    discourses highly evaluated    by  the  network
analyses but not by the argument analysis.      It may be difficult for other learners to comprehend ideas appeared in
this type of discourse because the argument structure is not clear enough.         If instructor thinks that ideas in the
discourse are valuable to further develop in collaboration with other learners, s/he has to help authors create more
robust structures of arguments.

Endnotes
(1) Knowledge   Forum®     Japan Research     Group   in conducting    this study consisted  of the   following  members:
   Shigenori   Inagaki, Isao   Murayama,      Makiko    Takenaka,   Etsuji  Yamaguchi,  Hayashi    Nakayama,    Tomokazu
   Yamamoto, Masaji Fujimoto, YukoTakeshita.

References
Barabási, A-L., Albert, R., & Jeong, H. (1999). Meanfield theory for scale-free networks. Physica A, 272, 173-187.
Kelly, G. J., & Takao, A. (2002). Epistemic levels in argument: An analysis of university oceanography students'
    use of evidence in writing. Science Education, 86, 314­342.
Oshima,  J., Oshima,   R., &   Knowledge      Forum®   Japan  Research   Group.   (2006).  Scientific argument   in written
    discourse with task requirements triggering different epistemic agency. Paper presented at the annual meeting
    of the American Educational Research Association, San Francisco, CA.
Oshima,  J., Oshima,   R., Murayama,     I.,  Horino,   R., Inagaki, S.,   Yamamoto,   T., Takeshita,  Y., Fujimoto,    M.,
    Takenaka,   M.,    Yamaguchi,    E., Nakayama,      H.,  &   Sakamoto,   M.   (2005).  Progressive   Refinement   of  a
    CSCL-Based     Lesson   Plan for  Improving    Student    Learning   as Knowledge     Building in  the Period   for the
    Integrated Study. Proceedings of CSCL2005.
Pajek Program for Large Network Analysis.        http://vlado.fmf.uni-lj.si/pub/networks/pajek/.
Sandoval,  W.  A., &   Millwood,  K.     A.   (2005). The   quality of students'  use  of  evidence   in written   scientific
    explanations. Cognition and Instruction, 23(1), 23-55.
Tagawa, T., Yasutake, K., Yamakawa, O., & Inoue, H. (2006). An analysis of a communication network structure in
    an e-learning course. Proceedings of the Fourth User Conference on WebCT, Japan. (in Japanese with English
    abstract)
Toulmin, S. (1958). The uses of argument. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Wattz, D. (1999). Networks, dynamics, and the small world phenomenon. American Journal of Sociology, 105(2),
    493-527.
Wattz, D., & Strogatz, S. (1998). Collective dynamics of small-world networks. Nature, 393, 440-442.

                                                             565                                                  CSCL 2007
