 Appropriation of a Graphical Shared Workspace: The Learner-Tool
                                                Connection

      Maarten Overdijk, Wouter Van Diggelen, Research Centre Learning in Interaction, Utrecht University,
                              Heidelberglaan 1, 3584 CS, Utrecht, The Netherlands
                                Email: m.overdijk@uu.nl, w.vandiggelen@uu.nl

        Abstract: The influence that a CSCL tool has on a group of learners depends on how the tool is
        appropriated. Different ways of appropriating a tool may lead to different effects on the way
        learners interact and carry out their task. To study the process of tool appropriation we apply an
        analytical distinction between interaction with the tool and interaction via the tool.

Introduction
        CSCL   tools are designed   on basis of expectations   about how  collaboration      within a dyad  or  a  group
proceeds, and how  this  collaboration could be enhanced     through use of  technology.     However,    learners do not
necessarily use a tool in accordance with the expectations of the designers. When learners are presented with a new
tool they have to appropriate it. Learners appropriate a tool by `adapting' it in a goal-directed activity. Hereto the
learners have to make sense of the properties of the tool, and find `a way of doing' to carry out their task. Group
members have to explore its possibilities and monitor the consequences of their actions. In the case of collaboration,
group members have to coordinate this effort. The group has to arrive at some kind of agreement on how to operate
the tool. For example, they have to attain a shared understanding of the symbols that are displayed in the user-
interface. And they have to find a common strategy to manipulate the user-interface to achieve an outcome. The
affordances of tools are appropriated in sometimes unexpected ways (Dwyer & Suthers, 2005). Different ways of
appropriating a tool may lead to different effects on the way learners interact and carry out their task (Overdijk &
Van Diggelen, 2007).

Tool-mediated interaction
        Scholars within the CSCL community have argued that tools reflect information about their use and effect
through the way they interface with the user. The user-interface makes affordances available that provide certain
opportunities for action. The notion of `affordance' has been proposed as an instrument to analyse the `effects' and
`constraints' of a technology (e.g. Suthers, 2006). The theory of affordances (Gibson, 1979) adopts a relational
approach towards the connection between the learner and the tool. The concept of `affordance' proclaims that
learner and tool are mutually constitutive and inseparable (Gibson, 1979). This makes a conceptualization of the
effects and constraints of a technological tool problematic, because the phenomenon of tool-mediated interaction can
not be attributed to the learner or to the tool. To overcome the inseparability between learner and tool we propose
the application of an analytical distinction between interaction of learners with the tool and interaction of learners
with each other via the tool. The interaction of a learner with the tool can result in a number of tool-shaped actions.
These tool-shaped  actions can  lead to tool-mediated interaction    between learners      via the tool. This  analytical
distinction helps to analyze (1) how interaction with the features of the tool shapes the learners' actions, and (2) how
this interaction gives rise to specific patterns of interaction between the learners.

A graphical, shared workspace
        To illustrate our concept we present a brief example of an analysis of tool appropriation. The example
focuses on one group of learners (N=3), and is taken from a case-study about a specific type of CSCL tool: a
graphical, shared workspace. This tool was deployed to support an argumentative discussion within the group (For a
full report on this study, see: Overdijk & Van Diggelen, 2007). Basically, the shared workspace tool consists of a
drawing space  and a  graphical notation  system that supports   specific kinds       of communicative   acts. The   user
interface of the tool "prompts" a specific set of contribution cards and makes these contributions salient to the users.
Learners can choose a contribution card from the notation system, and add a textual message to it. They can use a
comment window to give a more detailed account of their ideas or thoughts. Once the contribution is placed in the
drawing space, it can be moved through the drawing space and related to other contributions through the use of
links. Learners can contribute to the workspace simultaneously. In this way, learners can collaboratively construct
argumentation in form of a diagram.

                                                         566                                                    CSCL 2007
Method
        The content and structure of the contribution cards in the drawing space changes continuously over the
course of the interaction process. All possible manipulations ­ like changing the location of a card, or adding of a
link ­ have to be taken into account. The replay function of the tool allows us to reconstruct the interaction process.
It captures all `basic actions' that take place in the tool, resulting in a frame-by-frame representation of actions. The
replay is transcribed into a spreadsheet that includes the time-line, all basic actions, the students responsible for the
action, and the textual content of the contribution. This enables us to provide a detailed account of the interaction
process. To describe the interaction process we apply an analytical distinction between the interaction with the tool
and the interaction via the tool. The analytical distinction leads us to distinguish two levels of analysis. First we
address the learners' interactions with the tool, then we attend to the interactions between learners via the tool.

Interacting with the tool
        In order to submit a contribution to the drawing space, multiple interactions with the tool are required. A
contribution is composed of several `basic actions'. First, one has to select a notation card. The card can be placed in
the drawing space by clicking on a location of choice. The selected card appears and can be further manipulated. A
text can be written in the title space of the card by clicking on it. When the card is double-clicked, a separate
comment  window           appears.        In this  window          a more     elaborated      textual    statement       can    be     added    to      the card.
Furthermore, the card can be resized, a link can be added between two cards, and the card can be moved through the
drawing space.

        We calculated the relative frequency of each basic action for our example group. The basic actions that
occurred most frequently were adding a card to the workspace (15%), adding a title (15%) and link (23%), and
moving  the     card      through   the      workspace       (42%).        We used     the    software       Sigmaplot®        to generate       a      graphical
representation of the frequency and distribution of each basic action over a time-line. Figure 1 shows that of our
example group. Three basic actions are displayed: adding a title to a card, moving a card, and adding a link between
two cards (Figure 1).

     Add title

   Move card

     Add link

                   12:14   12:16    12:18   12:20    12:22   12:24   12:26    12:28   12:30    12:32   12:34    12:36   12:38    12:40   12:42    12:44
                                                                                                                                                        Time

                                                       Figure 1. Basic actions in the tool.

        By looking at the basic actions in the tool we can start to describe the interaction process. For example, we
learn that the members of the group submitted 7 contributions before they started to move their cards through the
drawing space.    We       can    also    see     that the   group    members        performed        a lot   of moving        actions    throughout         their
discussion, and that near the end of the discussion, they performed quite some moving and a lot of linking actions.

Interacting via the tool
        In order to examine the interaction process in further detail we now turn to the level of interaction via the
tool. We analyzed the contributions in the drawing area by unravelling them into separate `discussion lines'. A
discussion line is a string of contributions that are placed in adjacency by one or more learners. The learners made
use of two principles to place contributions in adjacency in the drawing space: linking and spatially grouping of

                                                                              567                                                                       CSCL 2007
contributions. By moving cards through the drawing space, students could change the position of a card and spatially
group cards. The application of these two principles was used to distil separate discussion lines from the diagram in
the drawing space. Some of the diagrams display a number of floating contributions that are not clearly associated to
any other contribution in the diagram. These were left out of this part of the analysis.

       The figure below depicts the contribution cards of our example group organized in discussion lines, and
represented horizontally in temporal order (Figure 2). The straight horizontal lines represent a demarcation of two
separate discussion lines. Our example group constructed four discussion lines (1.1, 1.2, 1.3 and 1.4). Each group
member is represented with a shape: a circle, a triangle or a square. The connecting lines between the contribution
cards of a particular group member indicate that member's `jumps' between discussion lines, i.e. spatial behavior in
the drawing space.

                    Figure 2. Discussion lines and spatial behaviour in the drawing space.

       One   can   see that  all members   of this group  submitted  an opening  statement    at the beginning  of  the
discussion, and that eventually each of these statements evolved into a discussion line. Figure 2 also indicates that
the members in this group participated in multiple discussion lines. For example, student C places a contribution in
line 1.1, then moves to line 1.2 and subsequently to 1.3. Finally, this part of the analysis reveals that the learners
interacted with each other at a high-pace, resulting in a complex pattern of spatial behavior in the drawing space.

Discussion
       The distinction between interaction with the tool and interaction via the tool provides valuable information
about the process of tool-appropriation. Micro-level analysis of basic actions in the tool reveals phenomena that
would otherwise remain unnoticed. These phenomena contribute to an explanation of the tool-mediated interactions
between learners. For example, in their interaction with the tool learners make certain choices that influence the
interaction via the tool (Overdijk & Van Diggelen, 2007). The mechanism of tool appropriation can be described as
a result of interdependent tool-shaped actions and tool-mediated interaction. To unravel this mechanism, one has to
study both levels.

References
Dwyer, N.   & D.D.     Suthers   (2005). A  Study  of the Foundations   of Artifact-Mediated     Collaboration. In:  T.
       Koschmann, D. Suthers, & T.W. Chan (Eds.), Computer Supported Collaborative Learning 2005: The Next
       Ten Years! Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Gibson, J.J. (1979). The Ecological Approach to Visual Perception. New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Overdijk, M.  &    Diggelen, W.   van.   (2007). Appropriation  of a graphical shared     workspace: The  student-tool
       connection. (Manuscript submitted for publication).
Suthers, D. D. (2006) Technology affordances for intersubjective meaning making: A research agenda for CSCL.
       International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning (ijCSCL) 1 (3), 315-337.

                                                           568                                                 CSCL 2007
