            Epistemological perturbations: Using material artifacts to
                cultivate a knowledge building culture in classrooms

     John Ow, Townsville Primary School, 3 Ang Mo Kio Avenue 10, Singapore, john_ow_eu_gene@mac.com

Katerine Bielaczyc, Learning Sciences Laboratory, NIE, 1 Nanyang Walk, Singapore 637616, kateb369@gmail.com

         Abstract:    The  realization  of the    pedagogic  affordances  of  many  CSCL     tools   require a social
         infrastructure    quite different from    that  found in  traditional  classrooms   using   "instructionist"
         teaching and learning practices.       We are interested in ways to support teachers and students in
         making the necessary shift in cultural beliefs and classroom practices in order to integrate such
         CSCL tools --- a change trajectory that we term the "implementation path" (Bielaczyc & Collins,
         2006).    In the  present  paper  we   discuss  a research   project focused   on integrating   Knowledge
         Forum (Scardamalia, 2004) into the science curriculum of nine Primary 3 and 4 classrooms in a
         Singaporean school.      We investigate the use of material artifacts and offline practices in providing
         a transition mechanism from traditional classrooms toward creating a knowledge building culture.
         We   are  particularly   interested   in how    such  artifacts and  practices lead   to  "epistemological
         perturbations" in teacher's conceptions of teaching and learning.

Schools in Transition
         The  education    system   in Singapore   is entering a  period  of  change. These  changes   have    their genesis in
education policies that seek to develop a nation and its schools for a 21st century economy (www.moe.gov.sg). The
goal is to foster in students the skills to learn and adapt in a rapidly changing world.          But this requires a radical
change   in teaching  practice,  in order  to  deemphasize    the value  that knowledge   is needed   for examination    while
emphasizing the value of knowledge for solving problems

         We   believe   that learning   in a   Knowledge     Building  community   supported   by    Knowledge    Forum    will
support the desired changes in education. Knowledge Forum was first introduced in Singapore in 2001 (Ibrahim &
Tan,  2004;   Tan, Hung,    & So,   2005).  Since   then,  there  have   been numerous   pockets   of  pedagogic     innovation
exploring   the  integration of   Knowledge     Forum    into Singaporean     classrooms.  However,    a  scalable   model   of
Knowledge Building communities in classrooms has yet to be developed. Creating such a model is one of the goals
of the newly-established Learning Sciences Laboratory in Singapore.

         In the present paper we discuss a research project designed to foster learning in a Knowledge Building
community as part of the science curriculum of nine Primary 3 and 4 classrooms in a Singaporean school. Unlike
other efforts to create  knowledge     building   classrooms  with Knowledge    Forum   (e.g., Bielaczyc,    2001;   Caswell &
Bielaczyc, 2002; Hewitt, 2002; Ow, Low & Tan, 2004; Reeve & Lamon, 1998), the project did not involve using
Knowledge Forum in the first half of the school year.         Instead, transition mechanisms were developed in order to
scaffold both   teachers'   and  students'  entry   into the  CSCL    environment   through    first engaging    in  an offline
collaborative learning environment.     The offline learning environment involved material artifacts that were meant to
provide tangible "tools-to-think-with" in transitioning to a knowledge building pedagogy that challenged the more
traditional Singaporean pedagogy.       Hence,    we  were  designing  a  new  implementation   path  (Bielaczyc     &  Collins,
2006) for introducing teachers and students to a sophisticated CSCL tool.

         The project has just completed its first year of implementation.      This paper provides an opportunity to share
our work with transition mechanisms, specifically our use of material artifacts and the "epistemic perturbations" in
teachers' conceptions of teaching and learning generated by their introduction.           Here we focus on one particular
transition mechanism, a material artifact called the "Think Card."

Supporting Changes in Cultural Beliefs and Classroom Practices
         Our    project is entitled "Ideas  First."  As  the  name  suggests,  our approach    places work    on ideas  by  the
individual and community as its foremost design consideration.            The transition mechanisms that we designed for
Ideas First  are meant   to  help   transition teachers  and  students   from working   with  "ideas  in  physical   forms"  to

                                                              579                                                     CSCL 2007
working with ideas in the software of Knowledge Forum. Knowledge Forum is a technology-based tool developed
by Marlene Scardamalia and Carl Bereiter (1991; 1994; Scardamalia, 2004). Knowledge Forum allows learners to
construct a communal multimedia knowledge base. The objective is to engage students in progressive knowledge
building,  where   they  continually   develop     their understanding    through problem    identification,  research,  and
community discourse.     The vision of Knowledge Forum is for students to build collective knowledge with "fidelity
to the ways work with ideas is carried out in the real world" (Scardamalia, 2002, p. 6). This vision represents a shift
from traditional views of education to "idea-centered education" where problems are found in authentic attempts to
understand the world and ideas are viewed as objects of inquiry that can be combined with other knowledge objects,
and improved upon (Scardamalia, 2002; Scardamalia, Bereiter & Lamon, 1994).

          The Ideas First approach is characterized by four interdependent phases to support students in working with
ideas: idea generation, idea connection, experimentation, and pull-together. Embedded in the phases are Knowledge
Building principles that guide the community's work with ideas (Scardamalia, 2002). The Think Card was designed
as  a way   to physically   reify the  ideas  and   theories  generated   by children  while   they work    on problems   of
understanding.

          A "Think card" is a 5x7 card that is divided into two halves. The top half of the card is yellow and has the
scaffold "My idea is..." The bottom half of the card is green and uses the scaffold "Something I wonder about ..."
These scaffolds are intended to help students generate ideas and questions of wonderment which are then shared
using  the physical   classroom walls  to   create a shared,  public  space.  Students  post up their  Think   Cards  on this
community space, enabling all children to access the ideas of the class community.

          The parallels between notes and views in the Knowledge Forum environment and the "Think cards" and
the physical   communal   space   of the Ideas  First classroom   were  intentional design   features. Notes  in Knowledge
Forum and Think Cards are both conceptual artifacts (Bereiter, 2002). These artifacts support learners developing
objectified theories and ideas residing in World 3 (Popper, 1972). The objectification of ideas affords learners the
opportunity to carry out knowledge work such as generating, comparing, testing, and synthesising ideas. Without the
objectification of ideas, these ideas would reside in the mind of individuals impervious to the attention of others in
the community. Views in Knowledge Forum and the physical communal space of the classroom walls provide a
place  in  the community    for making    ideas public.    The  physical  communal    space  affords   the community     with
opportunities to make connections, improve ideas and even "rise-above" existing ideas.

          Teachers saw Think Cards as a means of accessing student ideas in ways that had not occurred in their
classes in the  past. Through   interviews  and    interactions over  the course of the  year, teachers  described   how  the
Think Cards were a ".... more `concrete' way to present ideas and to communicate."           According to the teachers, the
Think Cards allowed children ".... to `voice' out their ideas" which enabled the teachers to ".... see their knowledge
as a whole immediately." Further, teachers noted that, in contrast to the ways they had been teaching science in the
past, children were now able to ".... see what their friends were writing or thinking about."

          Although teachers described the positive value of using the Think Cards, as researchers we also saw that
the Think  Cards   posed  a real  challenge  to the   ways   teachers  viewed teaching   and  learning.  We    refer to these
disturbances in beliefs about knowledge and learning as "epistemological perturbations."         The teachers in the Ideas
First classrooms were used to teaching according to an "instructionist," or transmission model, in which children are
presented with the sanctioned knowledge they are meant to acquire.           The ideas that teachers present to students in
such classrooms are viewed as the "right" ideas.      However, using the Think Cards made visible the diversity among
children's ideas.  This  idea diversity  posed  fundamental     challenges to teachers'  ontology   of "right" and   "wrong"
knowledge. First, posting the Think Cards on the classroom walls served to recognize a diverse set of students' ideas
as contributions to the community. Thus, the teachers were faced with "wrong ideas" being made available in the
public arena.   Second, beyond ideas that were "wrong," the diversity of ideas surfaced many types of "right" ideas
beyond    the  teacher's sanctioned   perspective    due   to the  multiple  perspectives  and  emerging     understandings
expressed. The existence of emerging understandings or ideas in transition indicates the improvable nature of ideas,
in contrast to the notion of ideas as either right or wrong.

          Technology-based tools often require a shift in the epistemology and practices of education compared to
what students and teachers are used to, making it critical that the implementation paths of technology-based tools be
understood    and supported   more    fully (Bielaczyc    &   Collins, 2006).  We   feel that  the  construct  of  epistemic

                                                              580                                                  CSCL 2007
perturbations can  help deepen  our understanding  of the types of issues that need  to be   considered in     supporting
teachers along such implementation paths. A deeper understanding of the trajectory of implementation also serves to
legitimate the struggles that teachers may face. For example, when faced with such disequilibrium, teachers will
often move off the change trajectory and revert to traditional teaching practices. In fact, one of the teachers in the
Ideas First classrooms spoke of how she handled the wide range of student ideas by working "to reel them back and
get them back into the main content."    We believe that analyzing the types of epistemological perturbations that
surface can be the starting point for the design of more robust support structures for teachers in transition.

References
Bielaczyc, K. (2001). Designing social infrastructure: The challenge of building computer-supported learning
       communities, in the Proceedings of the EURO-CSCL 2001 Conference.
Bielaczyc, K.  &    Collins, A.  (2006). Implementation    paths:  Supporting  the  trajectory  teachers   traverse   in
       implementing     technology-based  learning  environments   in classroom    practice. Journal of  Educational
       Technology, 46 (2), 8-14.
Bereiter, C. Education and Mind in the Knowledge Age. New Jersey. Lawrence Erbaum, 2002.
Caswell, B. & Bielaczyc, K. (2001). Knowledge Forum: altering the relationship between students and scientific
       knowledge. Education, Communication & Information, 1 (3), 281-305.
Hewitt, J. (2002). From a focus on tasks to a focus on understanding: The cultural transformation of a Toronto
       classroom. In T. Koschmann, R. Hall & N. Miyake (Eds.), CSCL2: Carrying forward the conversation
       (pp.11-42). Mahwah NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Ibrahim, A., & Tan, S.C. (2004). Computer-Supported Collaborative Problem Solving and Anchored Instruction in a
       Mathematics Classroom. International Journal of Learning Technology, 1 (1), 16-39.
Ow, E.G.J., Low, A., & Tan, S.C. (2004). Learning to be scientists through social collaborative discourse ­ A case
       study in a primary school. Paper presented at the International Association for the Study in Cooperative
       Education Conference 2004, 21 June to 25 June, Singapore .
Popper, K. R. (1972). Objective knowledge: An evolutionary approach. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Reeve, R. & Lamon, M. (1998). Factors to be considered: overlapping communities of inquiry in     a knowledge-
       building classroom. Paper Presented at the Meeting of the American Educational Research Association, San
       Diego, April 1998.
Scardamalia, M. (2002). Collective cognitive responsibility for the advancement of knowledge. In B. Smith (Ed.)
       Liberal education in the knowledge society. (pp. 67-98). Chicago: Open Court.
Scardamalia, M. (2004). CSILE/Knowledge Forum®. In Education and technology: An encyclopedia. (pp. 183-192)
       Santa Barbara: ABC-CLIO.
Scardamalia, M. & Bereiter, C (1991). Higher levels of agency for children in knowledge building:    A challenge for
       the design of new knowledge media.    Journal of the Learning Sciences, 1(1), 37-68.
Scardamalia,  M.   & Bereiter, C (1994). Computer   support   for knowledge-building    communities. Journal      of the
       Learning Sciences, 3(3), 265-283.
Scardamalia, M., Bereiter, C., & Lamon, M. (1994). CSILE: Trying to bring students in world 3. In K. McGilley
       (Ed.) Classroom lessons: Integrating cognitive theory and classroom practice (pp. 201-228). Cambridge
       MA: MIT Press.
Tan, S. C., Hung, D., & So, K.L. (2005). Fostering Scientific Inquiry in Schools through Science Research Course
       and Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning (CSCL). International Journal of Learning Technology, 1
       (3), 273-292.

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank the Ideas First Team --- both the researchers and teachers who made this work possible.

                                                         581                                                    CSCL 2007
