                                            Online but off-topic:
            Establishing common ground in small learning groups

Trena M. Paulus, University of Tennessee, A515 Claxton Complex, Knoxville, TN 37996-3452, tpaulus@utk.edu

         Abstract:

         There is not yet a great deal of research in formal online learning environments focusing on the "off task"
         conversations that small groups engage in. This study explores how participants establish common ground
         in distance learning environments. The e-mail, discussion forum, and chat transcripts of ten small online
         groups   were investigated   using computer-mediated     discourse  analysis. Participants    established  common
         ground   by focusing   mostly  on  logistics,  followed  by  social and  then  technical   moves.    The   types  of
         functional  moves   exchanged  revealed   that  groups   were actively  engaged    with   each other    to establish
         common ground, balancing individual focus with a group focus.

Introduction
         Computer-mediated     communication     (CMC)    tools  are  frequently  used in   educational  environments      to
support collaboration between learners. In fully distance courses they are the primary, if not sole, means by which
students talk and work together. While collaboration is desirable for many reasons in educational contexts, research
in the area of online discussions has tended to focus on how deep and substantial the conversations are from the
standpoint of the instructor or researcher, with an emphasis on cognitive over other types of engagement (Gilbert &
Dabbagh,    2005; Wallace,   2003; Zhu,   2006).  A  sense  of   disappointment   permeates    the literature in    this area,
questioning  whether   online discussions   are  really relevant  to meaningful   learning. In  any    collaborative  effort,
however, trust and shared understandings must be in place. Part of establishing trust includes creating group norms
and  effective ways  of  being. Establishing     common   ground   is one   framework   for understanding     this   process.
Grounding requires effort, and less attention has been paid to how groups collaborate on this part of their online
experience (Baker, Hansen, Joiner & Traum, 1999).
         There is not yet a great deal of research in formal online learning environments focusing on the seemingly
"off task" conversations that small groups engage in as they complete learning tasks together. Most studies have
focused on the "on-task" elements of the conversation from a cognitive engagement, deep learning perspective (Zhu,
2006). Cognitive   presence   frameworks    have  analyzed the   quality of  the conversations,    but the social   presence
elements have been explored less thoroughly. Knowing that common ground must first be established for groups to
effectively collaborate, how  groups   do   this when   separated by   time  and space  is  of great   interest. This    study
addresses the following questions:
1.   What are participants talking about when not discussing the concepts to be learned?
2.   How are participants establishing common ground when completing tasks at a distance?

Method
         The study took place during a twelve-week graduate level education course at a large midwestern American
university. The course was taught entirely at a distance. During two week units students were assigned to small
groups to   complete learning  tasks  which  were  designed  according    to recommendations     by  Hathorn     and Ingram
(2002a). Groups   could  use  e-mail, asynchronous     discussion forums  or  synchronous   chat.  All  tasks required    the
group to create and submit a final document to the instructor. Each student also wrote a reflection about the learning
experience. Sixteen of the twenty-one students enrolled in the course consented to participate in the study; thus a
total of ten groups were analyzed.Chat and forum transcripts were automatically archived by the course management
system and downloaded into word processing and spreadsheet files for analysis after the course had ended. All e-
mail correspondence was sent to the researchers at the end of the course. Individual reflection papers were also
downloaded at the end of the course for analysis. A computer-mediated discourse analysis approach was taken to
investigate the research question (Herring, 2004; Paulus, 2004). First, messages were unitized into functional moves,
similar to speech acts or what Henri and Rigault (1996) define as a speech segment: "the smallest unit of delivery,
linked to a single theme, directed at the same interlocutor, identified by a single type, having a single function" (p.
62). Functional   moves  were   then  coded  as  conceptual  (related  to the  course  objectives),    logistics (related  to
completion of the task), technical (related to the communication tools being used), or social (e.g. small talk) issues.
The moves which were not conceptual were analyzed further for the purposes of this study as "off-task" components

                                                            582                                                     CSCL 2007
of establishing common     ground.   Two   researchers, neither  of whom    were instructors  for the  course, coded   the
functional moves. Transcripts from one group (representing 20% of the entire data set) was used to establish inter-
rater reliability, with the goal of reaching 80% agreement (Bauer, 2000). Inter-rater reliability of 83% was reached.

Findings
         A   total of 1,563  non-conceptual  functional  moves   were   exchanged   by the   ten groups. Logistic  (1,003
moves) accounted for 64% of the total non-conceptual moves. Social moves (441 moves) were 28% and technology-
related moves (119 moves) were 8%. The subcategories of the three main types of moves (technical, social and
logistics) reveal that groups were actively engaged with each other to establish common ground through eliciting
and providing responses and feedback to each other. They also balanced an individual focus with a group focus.
These subcategories are described next.

         Technical moves concerned the functionality and use of the communication tools, such as reporting slow
server connections or use of  the "track changes" feature of Microsoft Word. The groups reached common ground in
terms of the technology with the following functional moves: managing use of the tools (61%), supporting each
other's attempts to use the technology (23%) and expressing emotions (17%).

         The most common functional moves related to technology use were those managing the use of the tools
(61%). For example, Trish and Trevor discussed the chat feature of Courseline:
         Trish:             This is my first chat session using Courseline.
         Trevor:            This is my second chat in courseline. Although I generally don't like it as well as [the
                            previously used tool], this isn't as bad?
         Trish:             Not as bad...but there are somethings [sic] missing on courseline that [the previously used
                            tool] has...
Michael in Group Orange asked his group: "Should we create a posting for each question, then we could each post
or reply within    the question's sub-file?"  This  reveals a   concern  with   effective use  of  how   best  to use  the
communication tools, and use of questioning to bring all members into the conversation.

         There  were   three broad   categories of social functional   moves:  demonstrating     politeness (49%),  group
cohesion (38%) and socialize/play (13%). Polite behaviors were the most frequent type of social move, accounting
for 49% of all social moves. Closing moves, included at the end of messages, were coded as politeness rather than
group cohesion, however, elements of group cohesion were often evident in closing moves, as evidenced by these
excerpts from Group Tangerine members as they began their work together:
         Arthur: I'm looking forward to this assignment!
         Libby: I look forward to working with you all and getting to know you more.
         Ron: I look forward to a smooth and enjoyable unit.
         Lola: . . . looking forward to start our team project.

         Logistic moves were the most common and fell into six broad categories: take action (31%), report/manage
the task (19%), initiate (17%), provide response (16%), elicit response (13%) and direct others to act (4%). These
categories reveal that the participants were highly engaged in establishing common ground about how to accomplish
their goals.

         The  take  action  category had   31%  of the  functional  moves   in the logistics category. By     stating their
intended action,   group members   communicated     what  their  individual contributions  to the  group task  would   be.
Group members stated their availability for working on the task. For example, as this was a summer course several
of the group members had vacations, family visits, holiday plans and other obligations to fulfill. This is illustrated in
Gregory's post in Group Grape:
         Just wanted to let you know that I'm running a little behind, but I should get the readings done by Saturday.
         Next week is pretty open for me. I went home to San Antonio for a visit last week, and that cost me some
         study time. Food was great, though :)
         As far as chat times (if we decide we need them), I'm home by 4 PM each day, and off all day Thurs-Sat of
         next week. I generally go to bed at 10 PM (early riser), but anytime before that is fine.

                                                           583                                                   CSCL 2007
          Groups tended to state rather than offer to act, emphasizing quick, efficient decisions and actions, as seen in
these posts by Michael in Group Plum:
          7/13/2002 11:10:38 AM
          I have the document. I will post when I finish. I am not sure how long it will take.
          7/13/2002 2:17:05 PM
          This is taking some time. It is 2:27. I will keep it about another hour and then post it. I will let someone else
          work on it for awhile. I plan on picking it up again later this evening.

          The   three broad   categories   of initiate,  provide    response and  elicit   response  illustrate the process    of
exchanging ideas and information among the group members. Through initiating moves, group members expressed
their opinions, made suggestions or further explained their points of view, particularly about how to approach the
task. These functional moves went hand in hand with eliciting and providing feedback from other group members,
showing an awareness that they were indeed operating as members of a team rather than taking it on individually.
We see this type of exchange during Group Plum's chat.
          Tonya:              How    about   this? I'll post  my   lesson  plan. I'll read  through     everybody's colloquium
                              summaries and try to put them into the right boxes and you guys add the ML/Schema
                              stuff?
          Tonya:              Sound like a plan?
          Trish:              sounds like a GREAT plan!
          Michael:OKay [sic]

Discussion
          Even when the groups were not talking about the course content, they were explicitly collaborating together
to establish a  common    ground     for the task  at   hand. They  negotiated   the  logistics of  completing  the  task. They
engaged in social interaction and focused somewhat, but not much, on dealing with the technology. While Kirschner
et al. (2004) identify that different CMC modes have different technological, social and educational affordances, the
groups in this study did not differ much in how they used the various tools to perform communicative tasks. In all of
the discourse,   participants were   interactively   negotiating   with each  other   to establish  immediacy   and  iteratively
moving between a focus on the individual and a focus on the group.
          Early  studies examining    how    groups   work   together identified similar    functional  moves   as those in this
study, but they were not yet theoretically grounded. For example, Curtis and Lawson (2001) noted that groups spent
time planning, contributing, seeking input, monitoring and using social strategies. Stacey(1999) found that groups
spent time clarifying ideas; obtaining feedback; sharing perspectives, resources and advice; seeking group solutions;
negotiating meaning; practicing new language; providing emotional and technical support; conveying commitment
to the group; changing roles as needed and managing group activities.          All of these moves are consistent with those
found  in  this study. Establishing   common       ground could    perhaps   integrate   these and  other frameworks     used  to
understand online discussions, such as the idea of presence (Lombard & Ditton, 1997; Garrison et al. 2000; Russo &
Campbell, 2004), sense of community (Brown, 2001; Haythornthwaite et al. 2000; Hill et al. 2002; Wegerif, 1998)
and group norming (Graham, 2003). There is overlap between the findings of this study, for example, and those of
Hill et al. (2002) who identify infrastructure and interaction strategies as two keys to building community online.
          The frequency of eliciting and providing responses to each other (nearly 30% of all logistics moves) shows
an emphasis on engagement and communication among group members, reflecting the negotiation process often
evident in establishing common ground. Taken together the moves exchanged by the groups in this study fit the
communicative functions for explicitly establishing common ground: conveying that he/she is willing and able to 1)
continue the interaction, 2) perceive the message, 3) understand the message, and 3) react and respond, accept or
reject the message    (Baker  et al,  1999).  O'Sullivan   et  al.  (2004) explain    that in order to  create  immediacy   at a
distance, a language of approachability and regard should be used. The moves used by groups in this study reflect
approachability and regard.
          Makitalo et al. (2002) found that groups engaged in deeper level discussions used both social and cognitive
cues   to encourage    participation. These   included    strategies  of  questioning,     negotiation, providing   evidence   of
understanding, a positive willingness to continue the conversation, and supportive feedback. However, agreeing too
soon without negotiation kept discussions at a more surface level. This illustrates the importance of examining both
the off-task  and  on-task  conversations     for  a comprehensive    understanding      of what   happens  in  online learning
groups.

                                                                584                                                   CSCL 2007
References
Baker, M., Hansen, T., Joiner, R. & Traum, D. (1999) The role of grounding in collaborative learning tasks. In P.
       Dillenbourg (Ed) Collaborative learning: Cognitive and Computational Approaches (pp. 31-63) Oxford:
       Pergamon.
Bauer, M. (2000). Classical content analysis: a review. In M. Bauer & G. Gaskell (Eds.), Qualitative researching
       with text, image and sound (pp. 131-151). London: Sage.
Brown, R.E. (2001). The process of community-building in distance learning classes. Journal of Asynchronous
       Learning Networks, 5(2). Available at http://www.aln.org/alnweb/journal/Vol5_issue2/Brown/Brown.htm.
Curtis, D., & Lawson, M. (2001). Exploring collaborative online learning. Journal of Asynchronous Learning
       Networks, 5(1).
Garrison, D. R., Anderson, T., & Archer, W. (2000). Critical inquiry in a text-based environment: Computer
       conferencing in higher education. The Internet and Higher Education, 2(2-3), 1-19.
Gilbert, P.K. & Dabbagh, N. (2005). How to structure online discussions for meaningful discourse: A case study.
       British Journal of Educational Technology, 36(1), 5-18.
Graham, C. R. (2003). A model of norm development for computer-mediated teamwork. Small Group Research,
       34(3), 322-352.
Hathorn, L. G., & Ingram, A. L. (2002a). Online collaboration: Making it work. Educational Technology, 42(1), 33-
       40.
Haythornthwaite, C., Kazmer, M.M., Robins, J. & Shoemaker, S. (2000). Community development among distance
       learners: Temporal and  technological dimensions.     Journal of Computer-mediated   Communication,         6(1),
       Available at: http://www.asusc.org/jcmc/vol6/issue1/haythornthwaite.html.
Henri, F., & Rigault, C. (1996). Collaborative distance education and computer conferencing. In T. T. Liao (Ed.),
       Advanced   educational technology:  Research issues     and future potential (pp. 45-76). Berlin: Springer-
       Verlag.
Herring, S. C. (2004). Computer-Mediated Discourse Analysis: An Approach to Researching Online Behavior. In
       Barab, S.A. & R. Kling & J. H. Gray (Eds.), Designing for virtual communities in the service of learning.
       New York: Cambridge University Press.
Hill, J., Raven, A., & Han, S. (2002). Connections in Web-based learning environments: a research-based model for
       community building. The Quarterly Review of Distance Education, 3 (4), 383­393.
Kirschner, P., Strijbos, J. W., Kreijns, K., & Beers, P. J. (2004). Designing electronic collaborative learning
       environments. Educational Technology Research & Development, 52(3), 47-66.
Lombard, M., & Ditton, T. (1997). At the heart of it all: The concept of presence. Journal of Computer Mediated
       Communication, 3. Available on-line: http://www.ascusc.org/jcmc/vol3/issue2/lombard.html.
Mäkitalo, K., Häkkinen, P., Leinonen, P. & Järvelä, S. (2002). Mechanisms of common ground in case-based web
       discussions in teacher education. Internet and Higher education, 5, 247-256.
McLoughlin, C. (2002). Computer supported teamwork: An integrative approach to evaluating cooperative learning
       in an online environment. Australian Journal of Educational Technology, 18(2), 227-254.
O'Sullivan, P.B., Hunt, S.K. & Lippert, L.R. (2004). Mediated immediacy: A language of affiliation in a
       technological age. Journal of Language and Social Interaction 23 (4), 464-490.
Paulus, T.M. (2004). Collaboration or cooperation? Small group interactions in a synchronous educational
       environment. In T.S. Roberts (Ed.) Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning in Higher Education (pp.
       100-124). Hershey, PA: Idea Group, Inc.
Russo, T.C. & Campbell, S. (2004). Perceptions of mediated presence in an asynchronous online course: interplay of
       communication behaviors and medium. Distance Education 25 (2), 215-232.
Stacey, E. (1999). Collaborative learning in an online environment. Journal of Distance Education, 14(2), 14-33.
Wallace, R. M. (2003). Online Learning in Higher Education: a review of research on interactions among teachers
       and students. Education, Communication & Information, 3 (2) pp. 241-278.
Wegerif, R. (1998). The social dimension of asynchronous learning networks. Journal of Asynchronous Learning
       Networks, 2(1), 34­49.
Zhu, E. (2006). Interaction and cognitive engagement: An analysis of four asynchronous online discussions.
       Instructional Science 34, 451-480.

                                                         585                                               CSCL 2007
