                         Collaboration, Computation, and Creativity:
                         Media Arts Practices in Urban Youth Culture

                                         Kylie A. Peppler & Yasmin B. Kafai
             UCLA Graduate School of Education and Information Studies, 2128 Moore Hall, Box 951521
                                         Los Angeles, California 90095-6293
                                      kpeppler@ucla.edu, kafai@gseis.ucla.edu

         Abstract:    The focus of this paper is to turn our attention to the arts as an understudied area within
         the computer-supported collaborative learning community and examine how studying the learning
         of arts and programming can open new avenues of research. We analyze urban youths' media arts
         practices within the context of the design studio, particularly by focusing on how collaboration,
         computation, and creativity play out within this context. We utilize a mixed methods design that
         draws upon three approaches: (1) participant observations; (2) media arts object analyses; and (3)
         comparative in-depth case studies. Aspects of new literacy studies, social theories of literacy, and
         situated learning guide the methodology and interpretation in this study. Media arts projects like
         these are not well understood in the research literature but have the potential to teach us about
         learning and literacy in the age of multimedia.

Introduction
         Researchers interested in computer-supported collaborative learning have paid little attention to the field of
arts and design education as the more prominent focus has been on science, mathematics and to a lesser degree,
social studies and language arts. Among a number of reasons that can explain this absence of interest is the lack of
new technologies in the arts education curriculum. Recently, the Arts Education Partnership (AEP) issued a call for
research to   further investigate  `New  Technologies   and     Arts Learning,' noting that  "[n]ew   technologies...are
changing the nature of arts education" (AEP, 2004). The intersection of arts and technology (called "media arts"
here) is a relatively new field that has implications for both the arts and computer sciences, and more generally, the
role of digital media. The focus of this paper is to turn our attention to the understudied area of media arts and
examine how media arts practices, collaborative support, and creative expression evolve within an inner-city design
studio.

         A   design   studio found at a  Computer    Clubhouse    in  South  Central Los  Angeles   offers a  promising
opportunity   to explore the   ways  in which  youth   culture   is  already making  use  of new    media  as  tools  for
communication and expression, particularly capitalizing on software that allows designers to use computation or
computer programming. Youth in the Clubhouse engage in applications that encourage skills beyond typing and
general computer familiarity, allowing participants to use various forms of media art as tools for expression. "Media
art" is used here to encompass all forms of creative practice involving or referring to art that makes use of electronic
equipment,   computation,    and new  communication    technologies   (Muchnic,  2005;   Poissant, 2005).  The    personal
access points, appropriation of digital media for personal and creative expression, and the role of social support in
the making of media art projects like these are not well understood in the research literature. However, they offer
promising opportunities for how youths' media culture and media arts practices can be used to support expanded
views of literacy, learning and expression, which are more open to new technologies, respond to new media, and
extend the typical classroom.

         The focus of this study is to document, describe, and analyze urban youths' media arts practices within the
context of the design studio, particularly by focusing on how collaboration, computation, and creativity play out
within  this context. We  define  "media arts practices" as the   means  by   which  one engages   in media  art  and the
reasons and motivations for doing so. To investigate the aforementioned goals, we are utilizing a mixed-methods
design that draws upon three primary approaches: (1) participant observations, (2) media arts project analyses, and
(3) comparative in-depth and longitudinal case studies. For the purposes of this paper, we focus on findings from
one of our case studies. Our methodology and interpretation in this study are guided by social theories of literacy
(Barton & Hamilton, 2000), new literacy studies (Buckingham, 2003; Gee, 2003; Lankshear & Knobel, 2003), and
discipline-specific theories of situated learning.

                                                            586                                                CSCL 2007
Defining Media Arts Practices
          Today,  literacy can   be broadly    defined  as  including  any  type of  communicative       interaction involving
speaking, reading,   listening, and  writing   with  text in print  and non-print   forms  (Hagood,   Stevens,  &    Reinking,
2002). Those interested in looking at expanded notions of literacy within youth cultures have found it useful to apply
a social theory of literacy (Barton & Hamilton, 2000; Moje, 2000). Commonly, this group of scholars posits that
literacy is best understood as a set of social practices, which can be inferred from events and mediated by written,
visual, and other types of texts (Barton & Hamilton, 2000). Hence, the basic unit of a social theory of literacy is that
of literacy practices, defined as the general cultural ways of utilizing language (Barton & Hamilton, 2000). Although
practices are not   observable    units of   behavior,  since  they  also  involve  values,   attitudes, feelings, and   social
relationships, one can observe "literacy events" being mediated by texts (Barton & Hamilton, 2000). By introducing
media  arts practices,  we   are  trying  to   broaden  our  view   of literacy  practices to  describe   the ways   in  which
individuals use literacy and learn to be literate within the specific context of new media.

          As the title of our paper suggests, we are focusing on three aspects that we feel are particularly important to
media arts practices: computation, collaboration, and creativity. Computation draws our attention to the role that
technology and computer programming plays in the media arts practices. Programming in this context is less about
code and more about creativity or personal expression. While case studies of work in the design studio give us only
a partial understanding of the larger design culture, they do provide us with an understanding of how individuals are
able to repurpose the design environment for personal expression. Collaboration within this context takes on many
forms. The design studio environment emphasizes the social context of media arts practices, which sets the stage for
peer to peer and member to mentor types of collaborations.

Case Vignettes: Brandy
          Brandy is a nine-year-old, African-American girl that is a regular member of the Computer Clubhouse,
attending 2-3 times    per week   over    a four-year  period.  At  school, Brandy    self-reports that  she  was  nicknamed
"special ed" by her friends and often talks about how she's teased frequently by others in class. She struggles in
school, especially in core subject areas such as reading and mathematics. As Brandy enters the fourth grade, she is
unable to read more than a handful of words, which include her name and at times, Brandy is unable to recognize
simple three  letter words   like   "you".   Consequently,   we    would   characterize Brandy    as being    pre-literate in a
traditional sense. At home, Brandy has a supportive, large extended family consisting of many cousins.               Although
not a representative example of Clubhouse youth, Brandy's case presents an opportunity to take a closer look at
literacy and learning.

          The first literacy event important to tracking Brandy's development occurred when Brandy chose to open
computer-programming software for the first time in October 2004. This took place through her work with a mentor
as a more expert computer resource, standing in opposition to Brandy's unwillingness at the time to work with other
members. In Brandy's first exposure to computer programming, she was drawn to the cat that appears as the first
Sprite at the start of any new project. Brandy created a storyline about this character that evolved into her first
project. Drawing on her knowledge of Tom & Jerry cartoons, she added a mouse for the cat to chase and a house for
the mouse to safely hide.    Notably during this first session, Brandy had very little interest in programming. Instead
she was satisfied to move the characters as she was talking, somewhat akin to older forms of media like the Color
Forms or moveable stickers that were popular toys in the 1980s.

          Nearly  a year   and  a half  later, Brandy   has  become    known    for computer   programming     projects,   even
developing a particular style. In April 2006, Brandy designed a birthday card for the Clubhouse Coordinator along
with one  of  her peers  (as well   as  a mentor).   In this project,  Brandy   took  the  lead, programming    three   Sprites
including a  cookie,   milk, and   some     stars. She  programmed     the three objects   to spin and   change    color   using
programming concepts like loops and conditionals. Although she didn't explain why she's doing what she's doing to
the others, she  did make    an   attempt   to teach  them   by a  visual  demonstration.   Despite  Brandy's   ability  to do
sophisticated work on the computer (and was now in many ways technologically fluent), Brandy was still unable to
read at grade level and had very much stayed at the same level in both reading and writing.

                                                               587                                                   CSCL 2007
Discussion
          In our discussion, we come back to the three central themes of the paper: Collaboration, computation, and
creativity in media arts practices of urban youth. From the case study, we learned that computer programming or
computation could be embedded and used in many ways. Brandy's case illustrates that computation can be used as a
way to tell stories or to create personally meaningful artwork in the case of the birthday card. Computation is also a
learned skill that becomes   useful  as youth, even   those like Brandy     that are unable   to  read, can  use  for creative
production. Although further study is needed, Brandy seemed to have navigated the programming environment by
memorizing a subset of commands to find them visually on the screen. In this case, having more than one semiotic
system at play can be useful. Brandy seemed to use shape, color, text, and trial and error to memorize and recall the
commands   that  she  needed   for her  projects. Collaboration  seemed   to be   a  critical component   in  the media   arts
practices at this design studio. Youth not only learned about computer programming from their social participation
but they also became motivated by collaborating with peers and mentors to create and share work. As many other
researchers have noted, having an audience for the media artwork is key to production. In this case study, we see
that collaboration is an indicator of more advanced membership in the community. Brandy only moves to production
and computer programming because of the suggestion made by the mentor. Brandy in turn, as she became a more
expert  programmer    takes the lead   to introduce   and teach others   to program.  This    highlights  the importance   of
collaborative exploration   in informal   learning environments   as it  augments    Brandy's    role at the  Clubhouse   and
deepens her knowledge of computer programming. Creativity in this context can take on a variety of forms. Most
importantly we feel that youth were able to creatively insert themselves and their interests into their media artwork.
In the case of Brandy's artwork, her personal style and the inspiration for the work reflected Brandy's interest in
cartoons and her personal connection to the Clubhouse mentor. Opportunities such as the ones presented in this
paper, are particularly important for urban youth who are often seen as pushing new adaptations and transformations
of media but are also perceived as standing on the sidelines of technology development and production.

References
AEP   (2004).    The Arts  and  Education:   New    Opportunities    for Research.    Washington,       DC:  Arts Education
          Partnership (AEP).
Barton, D., & Hamilton, M. (2000). Literacy Practices. In D. Barton, M. Hamilton & R. Ivanic (Eds.), Situated
          Literacies: Reading and Writing in Context (pp. 7-15). London: Routledge.
Buckingham, D. (2003). Media Education: Literacy, learning and contemporary culture. Cambridge, UK: Polity
          Press.
Gee, J. P. (2003).   What   Video   Games   Have   to Teach  Us  About    Learning   and  Literacy.     New  York:    Palgrave
          Macmillan.
Hagood,   M.  C.,  Stevens, L.  P., &   Reinking,   D.  (2002).  What    do THEY     Have     to Teach   US?  Talkin'  'Cross
          Generations! In D. E. Alvermann (Ed.), Adolescents and Literacies in a Digital World. New York: Peter
          Lang Publishing.
Lankshear, C., & Knobel, M. (2003). New Literacies: Changing Knowledge and Classroom Learning. Berkshire:
          Open University Press.
Moje, E. B. (2000). "To Be Part of the Story": The Literacy Practices of Gangsta Adolescents. Teachers College
          Record, 102(3), 651-690.
Muchnic, S. (2005, April 24, 2005). Art on the move. Los Angeles Times, pp. E1, E34-36.
Peppler, K.A. (in progress). Creative Bytes: Literacy and Learning in the Media Arts Practices of Urban Youth.
          Unpublished dissertation. UCLA: Los Angeles.
Poissant,  L.  (2005).  New     Media     Dictionary.     Retrieved   July   17,  2005,  from      http://mitpress.mit.edu/e-
          journals/LEA/NMD/nmdhome.html

Acknowledgments
A dissertation fellowship from the Spencer Foundation to the first author supported the work reported in this paper.
This work was also supported by a grant of the National Science Foundation (NSF-0325828) to the second author
and conducted in collaboration with Mitchel Resnick's research group at the MIT Media Lab. The views expressed
are those of  the  authors  and do  not   necessarily represent  the views   of  the supporting    funding   agencies  or the
University of California, Los Angeles.

                                                            588                                                    CSCL 2007
