                                         Student Competition in
                       Computer-Mediated Conferencing Courses
         Vanessa L. Peters, Jim Hewitt, OISE University of Toronto, 252 Bloor St. W. Toronto ON, Canada
                                   vpeters@oise.utoronto.ca, jhewitt@oise.utoronto.ca

         Abstract:     The current   study  explores  student  perspectives on   competition   in asynchronous
         computer conferencing courses. A survey was distributed to 57 students enrolled in graduate-level
         distance education    programs. Nine   of these  students  participated in extensive   interviews. The
         findings indicate that students experience subtle forms of competition while participating in their
         online courses. Most manifestations of competition appear to have few educational benefits.        It is
         posited that marking schemes that focus on individual accomplishments may increase feelings of
         competition and undermine efforts to foster collaborative practices.    To reduce the negative effects
         of competition, course instructors may need to develop assessment strategies that reward group,
         rather than individual, accomplishments.

Introduction
         Recent   studies of  computer-mediated    conferencing   (CMC)   courses have   begun  to  uncover  some  of  the
complex social and cultural factors that influence online interaction. The purpose of this investigation is to research
the role that competition plays in students' online exchanges. The topic of competition, although studied extensively
in face-to-face classrooms (especially at the elementary and secondary level) has received relatively little attention
in CMC contexts.    Yet   there is good  reason to believe  that  even in the  most well designed   courses, competitive
pressures for grades can have an effect on how students interact with their peers. The goal of the current study is to
examine   student experiences   of competition,   and to  explore   how these  experiences    shape learner attitudes  and
behaviors.

Theoretical Framework
         Few studies have investigated the role of competition in asynchronous CMC. This may be due, in part, to
an assumption that competition is not an important factor.     There is currently no concrete evidence suggesting that
students perceive their online courses to be less competitive than face-to-face ones. However, there are reasons to
believe that online contexts eliminate at least some of the competitive pressures that students experience in regular
classrooms. The pressure to perform is one such example.       Regular classroom discussion is constrained by time and
by social conventions such as turn taking, which regulates how many people can speak at once (Tannen, 1989).
Online environments, on the other hand, are more equalizing in the sense that everyone can participate whenever
they wish. There is no competition for the floor (Harasim, 1990; Althaus, 1997) and interruptions are impossible
(Althaus,  1997). Even    the pressures of  impromptu  contributions   are  eliminated  (Wegerig,   1998)  because  CMC
allows people time to reflect before committing their ideas to the public space (Mason & Kaye, 1990; Jaffee, 1997).
Thus, the   very  design  of  CMC    environments  is thought    to reduce  competition    in favor  of more  egalitarian
participation patterns and collaborative peer engagement (Eastmond, 1992).

         Despite  the  aforementioned    advantages   of  computer   conferencing,   it is  plausible that  students   still
experience  a sense    of competition    in CMC    environments.    Unlike  face-to-face   discussions,  which    have no
permanence,   the interactions  that take   place  online are  preserved   for long periods   of  time.   Each    student's
contribution to the class discussion is highly visible and remains available to the instructor for assessment purposes.
Most CMC students are aware that the quality of their online submissions can easily be compared against those of
their classmates. This arguably places more pressure on students to perform at a level that meets or exceeds the
performance   of their peers. Online  competition  may    also be produced  by   course marking   schemes.   English and
Yazadani (1999) point out that it is fundamentally inconsistent for an instructor to encourage students to collaborate,
but to grade students individually--especially if people feel that final marks are based upon relative measures.     Such
a situation can   promote    competitive pressures   that increase  learner anxieties   and   undermine  the instructor's
collaborative goals. Consequently, the purpose of this research is to explore the role that competition plays in online
courses.  Do many students experience a sense of competition?          How does it manifest itself?     How do students
respond to the competitive situations they encounter?     By exploring these questions it is hoped that we can develop a
deeper understanding of the social processes that promote and interfere with online collaborative learning.

                                                           589                                                  CSCL 2007
Methods and Data Sources
          Fifty-seven distance education students were recruited to take part in the study in the fall of 2004. At the
time, all participants were  enrolled                in  graduate-level   distance education  courses  at the University  of Toronto. A
questionnaire was distributed to identify some of the more widely held online practices shared by the participants.
Follow-up interviews with nine of the participants provided the researchers with in-depth perspectives of learners'
perceptions of competition in their online courses.

Results
          Data analyses revealed that many students perceive their online courses to be competitive environments.
Competition was evident in students' participation habits, and manifested in how they submitted discussion notes.

Participating Early
          In their interviews,                  students frequently  commented     on    the importance   of  participating early in the
discussion forum. Early participation, it was felt, enabled them to gain the floor and influence the direction of the
discussion. One student, Dave, remarked how staying up late allowed him early access into the online discussions.
His strategy was as follows: "At 12:01 after the instructor had posted something I was the first person to respond,
and that influenced the discussion. It was an experiment, and it demonstrated to me that this was in fact, the correct
way to go." Natalie explained that early participation provided increased chances of posting "correct" responses. She
explains: "As soon as an assignment or a question is posted by the instructor, if you're early to answer it, then you're
more likely to get it right because there are really only 1 or 2 possible right answers."

Volume of Posts
          Competition also seemed to affect the number of discussion messages that students contributed. In their
questionnaire responses, 82.5% of participants responded that they felt pressured to contribute a certain number of
notes to  the conference  (see                  Figure   1). This is not  surprising, since   many   online  courses award   a grade for
participation. When gauging their performance, many students felt it was necessarily to compare their participation
levels against those of their classmates. As Katherine explains:

          I leave no stone unturned and that's probably irritating to some people who don't have the time.
          [Other students] can be very annoyed when they think that somebody's postings have said it all or
          raised the bar for the week, or left them scrambling to come up with additional brilliant comments
          for the professor. I have sympathy for that. If I were working 9 to 5 and I came home on Friday
          nights to do my postings and the folders were absolutely chock-full, what am I going to say?

                                                                                      50.9%

                                                                                               31.6%

                                                                            10.5%
                                                                    5.3%
                                                           1.8%

   Figure 1. "I feel pressured to regularly contribute a certain number of notes to the class discussions." (N=57)

Quality of Posts
          In their interview responses,                  many    participates   reported feeling concerned   about   the quality of their
discussion messages. In their survey responses, 86% of participants admitted feeling pressured to make significant

                                                                            590                                                 CSCL 2007
                             Number of Students
intellectual advances that pushed discussions to a deeper level. More often than not, this pressure was associated to
the grade awarded for online discussions. Deidre described a practical aspect of her online participation:

         If you're getting marked on things, then you're going to do a bang-up job but if there's no mark,
         you're just kind of reading through things. That's the reality of university; it's based on marks.
         You   want   to do   what your professor  says   so you  can  get  the marks   and  pass, especially  when
         you're paying $900 for the course.

         Competition     also affected writing  style. To  some   students, notes   were like "mini   essays", messages    that
reflect a student's work and effort in the course. To impress the instructor, many students felt it was necessary to
include references to course readings in their notes in order to distinguish themselves. As Jennifer explains, "most
people yardstick or measure themselves against other people's postings; they see how the professor may perceive
them in relation to other people. You know, the difference online is that it's like you're submitting essays all the
time."

Student Attitudes towards Competition
         In their interviews,   many   students  described   how  they felt about   competition   in their online courses.  In
many   cases, students   felt that feelings of competition   led  students  to show  off when   participating   online. In the
words of one student, competition "pits individual learners against one another; it raises the risk level." Laurie, a
part time student, commented that competition was detrimental to student learning. In her own words:

         I don't see [online courses] as a place where you actually construct new knowledge or perhaps
         synthesize ideas.    It's like someone will post something and people do their best to better or one-
         up them by inserting some kind of article link or something.

Conclusions and Educational Significance
         This paper describes a variety of ways in which students perceive competition to be occurring within their
CMC course. The findings support Lipponin's (2002) observation that peer collaborative learning is not always free
of conflict and competition. Some forms of competition may be educationally beneficial.           For example, a situation in
which students compete to produce high-quality, incisive messages may be educationally advantageous for the entire
class. However, most manifestations of competition have few educational benefits. Marking schemes that focus on
individual  accomplishments     (e.g., the  number     of messages    posted,   the quality  of individual    messages)  may
exacerbate feelings of competition and undermine efforts to foster collaborative practices. In order to reduce the
negative  effects of   competition,    course  instructors   may   need to   develop    assessment    strategies that   reward
collaborative, rather than individual, accomplishments.

References
Althaus, S.   (1997). Computer-mediated      communication    in  the  university   classroom:  An   experiment   with  online
         discussion. Communication Education, 46, 158-174
Eastmond, D. V. (1992). Effective facilitation of computer conferencing. Higher Education Review, 56(1/2), 23-34.
English, S.   & Yadani,   M.   (1999).  Computer-supported     cooperative     learning in a  virtual university. Journal   of
         Computer Assisted Learning, 15, 2-15.
Harasim, L. M. (1990). Online education: An environment for collaboration and intellectual amplification. In L. M.
         Harasim (Ed.), Online education: Perspectives on a new environment (pp. 39-64). NY: Praeger.
Jaffee, D. (1997).    Asynchronous     learning: Technology    and  pedagogical     strategy in a  distance   learning course.
         Teaching Sociology, 25, 262-277.
Lipponin,  L.   (2002).  Exploring   foundations  for   computer-supported      collaborative learning.    In G.  Stahl (Ed.),
         Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of Computer Support for Collaborative Learning 2002 (pp. 72-81).
Mason, R., & Kaye, T. (1990).        Toward a new paradigm for distance education. In L. M. Harasim (Ed.), Online
         Education: Perspectives on a New Environment (pp. 15-38). New York: Praeger.
Tannen,  D.   (1989). Talking   voices: Repetition,    dialogue,  and  imagery  in  conversational    discourse.  Cambridge:
         University Press.
Wegerig, R. (1998). The social dimension of asynchronous learning networks.              Journal of Asynchronous Learning
         Networks, 2(1), 34-49.

                                                              591                                                    CSCL 2007
