    Wiki design for teacher interventions in collaborative production

                    Ingvill Rasmussen, Andreas Lund, Ole Smørdal, InterMedia, University of Oslo,
                                      P.O.Box 1161 Blindern, N-0318 Oslo, Norway
      ingvill.rasmussen@intermedia.uio.no, andreas.lund@intermedia.uio.no, ole.smordal@intermedia.uio.no

           Abstract: In this poster we report on a process of re-designing a wiki. From previous research we
           have found that while this type of software is conducive to collective knowledge advancement, it
           needs to be further developed. Socially we develop a teacher mode where the teacher can trace and
           directly support learners' activities. Technologically we develop prompts, reminders and guides for
           subject specific development.    We   aim    to contribute  to   developing   CSCL    related  classroom
           practices by developing the XWiki application for such purposes.

Aims
           In this poster we describe an ongoing redesign of a wiki. A wiki can be described as a collective, networked
resource   where   in principle,  anyone   can  contribute,  revise,  and   delete   and  where  contributors'  changes  are
immediately accessible on the web. It rests on principles of mutuality and transparency. Contributors do not need to
learn complicated    mark-up  or  programming   languages.   From    previous   research  (Lund, 2006;   Lund,  forthcoming;
Lund  &    Smørdal,   2006) we    have found  that   while this  type of  software   is conducive  to  collective knowledge
advancement, it needs to be developed in order to afford more support for CSCL practices. Thus, our aim is to re-
design a particular wiki (Xwiki) with such supporting features.

           We argue that this type of software holds genuine collaborative potential. This potential is partly found in
the wiki's   architecture; partly in  the activities it affords. We   present   wiki design   principles that balance learner
exploration with more collaborative and goal directed efforts.

           Several studies focusing on learning and ICT show that specific elements in the software are conducive to
learning,  mainly   categories,   technological "prompts"     or  "reminders"    (Scardemalia    &  Bereiter,  1996;  Future
Learning Environments, 2006). For example, an application can remind the user about vital categories in a school
subject. At the same time, we see that teachers struggle to participate in learner activities that are enacted offline as
well as online. Often, teachers resort to working offline, leaving the online activities to learners alone.

           Wiki activities seem to shift the epistemological position of its users from private ownership of information
entities to collectively produced networks of information (Lund, 2006; Lund & Smørdal, 2006). However, not only
studies of   wiki  environments    have   informed   this  design.   The  re-design   can  also be  described   as  a further
development of previous CSCL design efforts where categories, prompts and reminders have been vital. Findings
from studies of these environments in schools emphasize that we need to develop more advanced learning resources
as part of the institutional development of schools (Wasson and Ludvigsen, 2003). It is the aim of the present design
effort to support conceptualization of specific phenomena in a knowledge domain (Ludvigsen & Mørch, 2003). The
overall goal is to bring the knowledge domain more to the front in collaborative applications. The purpose of the
activities and   the  connection   between   different   activities  have often   been   left implicit   (Rasmussen,  2005).
Consequently, the students are left to author much of the task as part of their collaborative work. These findings
have informed the current stage of the design process.

Methodology
           Our design reflects an ongoing, longitudinal intervention study at a Norwegian Upper Secondary School. It
rests on principles of design-based research where interventions are iterative, theory-informed and aim to capture the
ecology   of the learning  situation. Thus, we  see   the  development   of wiki  design  as  intimately  connected with the
activities in which the wiki is appropriated, with the types of tasks it lends itself to, the types of assessment that can
be developed and learners' access to social and material resources.

           We draw on previous analyses on classroom interactions and discourse and with a particular view to the
relationships between   verbal    and non-verbal,    object-oriented  activity. Together  with  log files  and  questionnaire

                                                              592                                                   CSCL 2007
responses  from   participants we  accumulate    a thick description   of  classroom   use of  wikis that  inform   our design
work.

         We have chosen the XWiki <www.xwiki.org/> to implement new designs. XWiki is chosen due to its rich
feature set and its basis of open source middleware and many powerful programming interfaces. The XWiki affords
a shared production resource dedicated to a school class jointly developing content over time.

         Our  design   builds  on   `Knowledge     forum'   and  the  first and    second  generation  of  `Future   Learning
Environments' where prompts and categories inscribed in the leaning environments provide teachers and students
with tools to think and to scaffold their collaborative efforts (Scardemalia & Bereiter 1996; Wasson and Ludvigsen,
2003; Ludvigsen and Mørch, 2003).

Implications for educational design
         As  for  learner and  teacher  activities in wikis, there are  so  far few   studies. The ones   we have   conducted
show that teachers only to little extent see a place for themselves in a wiki. Thus, we have found that careful analysis
and development of technological prompts and meta level features needs to be aligned with a perspective of both
teacher and student participation. Design interventions that are only directed toward scaffolding student production
seem not to be sufficient (Rasmussen et.al. 2003). Thus, in our design both teachers' and students' production are a
direct concern. We suggest the following design features:

         We develop the relationship between automated prompts and the teacher/learner participation by means of
meta-level functions in the wiki. One example of automated prompts in wikis is the different text mark-up colors to
indicate the  direction   of   the work   in  progress.  Colors    may    denote   argument,    counter-argument,    example,
questioning, conclusion etc.

   ·     We develop teacher support for teacher monitoring and participating in student activity in order to initiate
         and sustain the work also in the online setting. We develop "activity maps" to trace who is working with
         what,  what   collaboration   patterns emerge,  what   is the  status  of the collective  object, how  are  the texts
         structured etc.

   ·     Teachers may want to directly engage in the student activity by providing questions, comments, directions,
         critique etc. This  requires   that the XWiki   affords   a teacher's  space  or  mode   that is  flexible and easily
         accessible.

   ·     Learners  have   spaces   for individual  creation of  content to  show   the relationship  between   individual and
         collective content production.

         The wiki challenges our notions of ownership and individual approaches to knowledge construction and
this has implications for theoretical understandings as well as for educational design.

         Theoretically we aim to contribute to an understanding of collective knowledge advancement and how this
involves new CSCL practices emerging amidst the historical and institutional ones. The epistemological shift from
individual to collective  production    can  be  seen as an  example    of  sociogenesis;  how   we  come   to understanding
through social interaction mediated by cultural tools.

         As   for educational  design   we   see  the need   to prepare   teachers  and learners   for collective   knowledge
advancement.   To  the best  of  our   knowledge,  teacher   education  (at least  in Norway)   does   not address   collective
approaches in a principled and theory-informed manner. Consequently we see a great need to develop CSCL related
classroom  practices   and   didactics  that  embrace    individual  as   well  as  collective  and  networked      knowledge
construction.

         Our perspective can be crystallized in efforts to co-develop technology and learning practices conducive to
collective knowledge advancement.

                                                             593                                                     CSCL 2007
References
Future Learning Environments (2006). Accessed March 18, 2006 from http://fle3.uiah.fi/
Ludvigsen, S., & Mørch, A. (2003). Categorisation in Knowledge Building: Task specific argumentation in a co-
        located CSCL   environment. In     B.   Wasson  (Ed.),    Designing  for  Change    in Networked    Learning
        Environments (pp. 67-77): Kluwer Academic Pub.
Lund, A. (2006). WIKI i klasserommet: individuelle og kollektive praksiser [WIKI in the classroom: individual and
        collective practices]. Norsk pedagogisk tidsskrift, 90(4), 274-288.
Lund, A. (forthcoming). Wikis: a collective approach to language production. ReCALL.
Lund, A., &  Smørdal, O. (2006). Is There     a  Space for   the Teacher  in  a Wiki? In   Proceedings of   the 2006
        International Symposium on Wikis (WikiSym '06) (pp. 37-46). Odense, Denmark: ACM Press.
Rasmussen, I. (2005). Project work  and     ICT. A  study    of learning as  trajectories of participation. Doctoral
        Dissertation, University of Oslo.
Scardemalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (1996). Computer support for knowledge-building communities. In T. Koschmann
(Ed.), CSCL: Theory and practice of an emerging paradigm (pp. 249-268). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Wasson, B. & Ludvigsen, S. (2003). Designing for Knowledge Building. Oslo: Unipub.

                                                         594                                                CSCL 2007
