                          Scaffolding Preservice Teachers Online:
                     The Roles of Interest and Mathematical Beliefs

                                            Lillian S. Ray, K. Ann Renninger,
                          Swarthmore College, 500 College Avenue, Swarthmore, PA, 19081
                                Email: lsray1@gmail.com, krennin1@swarthmore.edu

          Abstract:  Discourse  analysis  and   grounded   theory  were  used   to study the responses   of   12 preservice
          teachers  (PTs)  to  scaffolding: 6   received content-informed    scaffolding    and   6 received  performance
          feedback. PTs receiving content-informed scaffolding varied in the content and form of their scaffolding
          from PTs receiving performance feedback.      Readiness to learn from scaffolding appears to be influenced by
          interest for mathematics and problem-oriented mathematical beliefs.

Introduction
          Preservice teachers (PTs) often have limited knowledge of mathematics and this then impacts their work
with mathematics and the way in which they are then prepared to work with their own students (RAND Study Panel,
2002). The Math Forum's Online Mentoring Guide (OMG, mathforum.org) was developed to support PTs to learn
how  to  scaffold  the mathematical    thinking of   elementary  pupils  working   with  nonroutine   challenge  problems.
Embedded in the task is the need to work with and practice work with mathematical thinking. Studies of the OMG
indicate  that without    mathematical content  knowledge,      PTs  are not in  a  position to   effectively facilitate the
development of elementary students' mathematical thinking, nor are they in a position to further develop their own
mathematical thinking independently (Renninger, Ray, Luft, & Newton, 2006a).            These studies indicated a need for
PTs to receive content-informed scaffolding themselves--scaffolding that is based in mathematics and enables the
learners to make connections to, develop strategies, self-regulate, and be emotionally supported; findings from this
work suggest that PTs can benefit from content-informed scaffolding that helps them to focus on mathematics, and
the experience   of  receiving feedback  that   is then faded   over time  (Renninger,   Luft,  Ray,  &  Newton,   2006b).
Unanswered in this work is the question of how the content and format of content-informed scaffolding differs from
the content  and  format  of  performance   feedback,  and how   PTs    respond to Mentor's  suggestions    based on these
differences.   Moreover, consistent with the NRC (2001) suggestion that a key strand in mathematical proficiency is
productive disposition, the roles of PT interest and mathematical belief about mathematics were further investigated
using discourse analysis (Gee, 1999) and grounded theory (Strauss & Corbin, 1990).

Background on the OMG
          The  OMG     is an  asynchronous  collaborative   tool for supporting    PTs  to  learn   how to  provide online
scaffolding to learners working with nonroutine challenge problems.        Lessons in the OMG each include a 4-phase
process of doing, reflecting/discussing, interacting with an experienced mentor, and synthesizing the experience of
the previous   three phases.   After completing    the  lessons in  the OMG,    PTs  in the  present  study were  assigned
elementary   student submissions  (threads)  to the  Math  Forum's   Fundamental    Problem    of the Week    (FunPoW)    to
scaffold.  PTs drafted a response to the solution, which was read over by a Mentor who either sends it back to the PT
suggesting needed revisions or sends it on to the elementary student.

Methods
          Briefly, discourse analytic methods and grounded theory were employed to study the work of 12 PTs, 6 of
whom received content-informed scaffolding and 6 of whom received performance feedback, 3 in each group were
identified as   having    more-developed    interest and  3 were     identified as  having   less-developed    interest  for
mathematics.   All exchanges between the Mentors and the PTs were archived. Analyses of these data addressed: (a)
whether PTs were more likely to make effective use of mentor suggestions if they were content-informed, and (b)
the role of PT interest and mathematical beliefs on readiness to work with mentor scaffolding. Analyses addressed
both content and form (see Fig. 1).

          PT Response:
               Hello Student 1!
          Thank you for submitting your solution to this problem. You did a good job mathematically

                                                            595                                                   CSCL 2007
       applying your strategy and finding the correct solution. Congrats!
       There are only a few minor suggestions I could make to improve your solution's clarity.
       I really enjoyed how clear your chart was, but there are some units missing. You remembered to
       label the total "miles" on the walking section of the chart, but there are no similar units for the
       miles that Zach rode the horse. Also, make sure you leave a space when writing fractions
       otherwise, 3 and 1/2 looks like 31/2.
       Always try to reflect on your work and check it for accuracy. I look forward to reading your
       revision.
             ~PT 1

       Coded Mentor Feedback:
       The biggest suggestion I have is that instead of asking the student to give a reflection, try to
       encourage them to do so with questions.
       Sometimes I ask questions like: Was this problem hard or easy for you? Why? Did you do
       anything to double-check your answer was correct? Did this answer surprise you?   Did you think it
       would take longer or shorter to walk and ride 50 miles?
       (Content: Model Reflection [Math Pedagogy] Form: Telling, Specific, No Explanation)

       PT's Revision [due to space, only additions are noted]
       Also, I liked that you added your mileage from both walking and riding together to see how many
       miles Zachary had traveled. What made you decide to do this? Could you explain this process to
       me and how it relates to the total miles Zach had to travel?
       Now that you've done such a good job in answering the problem and explaining your solution,
       could you show me how you checked your answer to make sure it was right? What did you think
       of this problem? What was the hardest part? What made you decide to use your graph to help you
       explain?
       (PT UNDERSTOOD Mentor's suggestion to Model Reflection. Evidence: Added own examples
       of reflective questions)

                                Figure 1. Sample, Coded PT and Mentor Exchange

Results
How do the content and format of content-informed scaffolding differ from the content and format of performance
feedback, and how do PTs respond to suggestions based on these differences?
PTs who received content-informed scaffolding had different patterns of response to their Mentor's suggestions than
those who received performance feedback. Findings indicate that:
   a)  Mentors using content-informed scaffolding, encouraged PTs to:
          focus more on mathematics and math-specific pedagogy than mentors giving performance feedback,
           and mentors giving content-informed scaffolding were more varied in the content of the feedback they
           gave.
          vary the types of sentences they use, mixing statements, open-ended, and leading questions.
          focus on whether and how the elementary student was evidencing mathematical thinking to generate
           questions that would model reflection and encourage the elementary student to reflect in the process of
           answering questions.
       Mentors using performance feedback were likely to lead PTs to:
          tell the elementary students what to do, and did not encourage PTs to ask leading questions.
          led PTs to use only statements.
          led PTs to comment on the inadequacies of elementary student work, suggesting that the students were
           cheating or not doing their work.
          told elementary student to reflect without providing a model.
   b)  How did the PTs respond to the different forms of mentoring?
       PTs in both groups were predominantly told what to do and were likely to parrot the suggestions of the
       Mentor.   However, PTs receiving content-informed feedback were also likely to understand what they were
       told to do and were able to rephrase the Mentor's suggestions as their own words when responding to the
       elementary  students, whereas the PTs   who received   performance  feedback  were not.  PTs        who received

                                                        596                                                    CSCL 2007
         content-informed feedback responded differently to being told what to do and receiving information about
         what to do in the form of a question.           They   were  less likely   to parrot  the information   provided   by   the
         Mentor, but they also were more likely to make mistakes.

What  is the  impact  of  PTs'   interest and     problem-oriented   mathematical      beliefs on  their readiness   to  work    with
scaffolded feedback?
     PTs' readiness to learn from content-informed scaffolding was mediated by both their interest for mathematics
     and their problem-oriented mathematical beliefs. Interestingly, however, while some PTs had higher interest for
     math and were more likely to be problem-oriented in their mathematical beliefs, interest and belief were not
     correlated. PTs  abilities  to work    with   Mentor   feedback  appears    to be  impacted   by  interest and  mathematical
     beliefs.  Together   with   content-informed        scaffolding,    PTs  who      had    interest  and/or  problem-oriented
     mathematical beliefs supported PTs to work with Mentor suggestions. Problem-oriented mathematical beliefs
     also appeared to support PTs to work with performance feedback.

Discussion
         Content-informed scaffolding is scaffolding that encourages reflection, identifies and stretches a learner's
thinking, and considers the content of the mentoring to be mathematical problem solving rather than the problem at
hand. Mentors who provided performance feedback, in contrast, gave task specific directions in one of two ways.
They either told students this is an area of weakness: fix it, or they told students you can make your performance
better in this area by doing the following (e.g., reflect).     Regardless of the type of mentoring PTs received, PTs were
inclined to   provide  performance     feedback     to the  elementary   students.   As   evidence  from   prior  study   suggests,
because  the  PTs'  classroom    feedback     was   performance    feedback, the    PTs   did  not have  a model    or  a vision  of
content-informed scaffolding other than that provided by the online Mentors and the few examples in the OMG.
This discrepancy    may     account   for what     appears  to  be   the likelihood    of  PTs'  ignoring  or   misunderstanding
suggestions that were content-informed scaffolding. However, three trends emerge from these data suggesting the
the possibility  that PTs   such as   these   can  be  supported  through  content-informed      scaffolding to  provide   content-
informed scaffolding: First, PTs in the content-informed scaffolding group demonstrated understanding of Mentor
suggestions   regardless  of  interest or     problem-oriented    mathematical    beliefs  more    frequently   than those    in the
performance-feedback group.      Second, among PTs receiving content-informed scaffolding, higher interest PTs were
more  likely  to make    use of  Mentor    suggestions   than   lower   interest PTs.    Third, all PTs with problem-oriented
mathematical    beliefs  were   more   likely   to  make   use  of Mentor    suggestions   than    those with   accuracy-oriented
mathematical    beliefs. It  appears  that    productive   disposition   conceptualized    as  including   interest  and  problem-
oriented mathematical beliefs do impact readiness for scaffolding.

References
Gee, J.P. (1999). An introduction to discourse analysis: Theory and method. London: Routledge.
National Research     Council   (NRC)   (2001).    Adding   it up: Helping   children   learn  mathematics.     Washington, DC:
         National Academy Press.
RAND Mathematics Study Panel. (2002). Mathematical proficiency for all students: Toward a strategic research
         and development program in mathematics education. Santa Monica, CA: RAND.
Renninger,    K.A., Ray,  L.,   Luft, I., &   Newton,    E. (2006a).   A  comprehension       tool for mathematics?:      The Math
         Forum@Drexel's       Online   Mentoring      Project. In  S.A.  Barab,  K.E.   Hay,   & D.T.   Hickey  (Eds.),   Making   a
         difference:   Proceedings    of  the   7th International    Conference     of the Learning    Sciences.     Mahwah,     NJ:
         Lawrence Erlbaum.
Renninger,    K.A., Ray,  L.S.,  Luft,    I., &   Newton,   E.L.  (2006b).  Coding     online  content-informed     scaffolding   of
         mathematical thinking. New Ideas in Psychology 23(2005): 152-156.
Strauss, A.L.,   &  Corbin,  J. (1990).   Basics    of qualitative research:  Grounded      theory  procedures   and    techniques.
         Newbury Park, CA: Sage Publications.

Acknowledgements
We appreciate the assistance of Claire Meade and Annie Fetter of the Math Forum@Drexel and the participating
PTs and their professors. This study was supported by the National Science Foundation (NSF Grant #9618223). Any
opinions, findings, and conclusions are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the NSF.

                                                                 597                                                      CSCL 2007
